  Chapter X. – Of Plurality Of Causes, And Of The Intermixture Of

                                        Effects.

 

 

              § 1. In the preceding exposition of the four methods of observation

and experiment, by which we contrive to distinguish among a mass of co-

existent phenomena the particular effect due to a given cause, or the

particular cause which gave birth to a given effect, it has been necessary to

suppose, in the first instance, for the sake of simplification, that this

analytical operation is encumbered by no other difficulties than what are

essentially inherent in its nature; and to represent to ourselves, therefore,

every effect, on the one hand as connected exclusively with a single cause,

and on the other hand as incapable of being mixed and confounded with any

other co-existent effect. We have regarded a b c d e , the aggregate of the

phenomena existing at any moment, as consisting of dissimilar facts, a , b , c

, d , and e , for each of which one, and only one, cause needs be sought; the

difficulty being only that of singling out this one cause from the multitude of

antecedent circumstances, A, B, C, D, and E. The cause indeed may not be

simple; it may consist of an assemblage of conditions; but we have supposed

that there was only one possible assemblage of conditions from which the

given effect could result.

              If such were the fact, it would be comparatively an easy task to

investigate the laws of nature. But the supposition does not hold in either of

its parts. In the first place, it is not true that the same phenomenon is always

produced by the same cause: the effect a may sometimes arise from A,

sometimes from B. And, secondly, the effects of different causes are often

not dissimilar, but homogeneous, and marked out by no assignable

boundaries from one another: A and B may produce not a and b , but

different portions of an effect a . The obscurity and difficulty of the

investigation of the laws of phenomena is singularly increased by the

necessity of adverting to these two circumstances: Intermixture of Effects,

and Plurality of Causes. To the latter, being the simpler of the two

considerations, we shall first direct our attention.

              It is not true, then, that one effect must be connected with only onecause, or assemblage of conditions; that each phenomenon can be produced

only in one way. There are often several independent modes in which the

same phenomenon could have originated. One fact may be the consequent in

several invariable sequences; it may follow, with equal uniformity, any one

of several antecedents, or collections of antecedents. Many causes may

produce mechanical motion; many causes may produce some kinds of

sensation; many causes may produce death. A given effect may really be

produced by a certain cause, and yet be perfectly capable of being produced

without it.

              § 2. One of the principal consequences of this fact of Plurality of

Causes is, to render the first of the inductive methods, that of Agreement,

uncertain. To illustrate that method, we supposed two instances, A B C

followed by a b c , and A D E followed by a d e . From these instances it

might apparently be concluded that A is an invariable antecedent of a , and

even that it is the unconditional invariable antecedent, or cause, if we could

be sure that there is no other antecedent common to the two cases. That this

difficulty may not stand in the way, let us suppose the two cases positively

ascertained to have no antecedent in common except A. The moment,

however, that we let in the possibility of a plurality of causes, the conclusion

fails. For it involves a tacit supposition, that a must have been produced in

both instances by the same cause. If there can possibly have been two causes,

those two may, for example, be C and E: the one may have been the cause of

a in the former of the instances, the other in the latter, A having no influence

in either case.

              Suppose, for example, that two great artists or great philosophers,

that two extremely selfish or extremely generous characters, were compared

together as to the circumstances of their education and history, and the two

cases were found to agree only in one circumstance: would it follow that this

one circumstance was the cause of the quality which characterized both those

individuals? Not at all; for the causes which may produce any type of

character are very numerous; and the two persons might equally have agreed

in their character, though there had been no manner of resemblance in their

previous history.

              This, therefore, is a characteristic imperfection of the Method of

Agreement, from which imperfection the Method of Difference is free. For if

we have two instances, A B C and B C, of which B C gives b c , and A beingadded converts it into a b c , it is certain that in this instance at least, A was

either the cause of a , or an indispensable portion of its cause, even though

the cause which produces it in other instances may be altogether different.

Plurality of Causes, therefore, not only does not diminish the reliance due to

the Method of Difference, but does not even render a greater number of

observations or experiments necessary: two instances, the one positive and

the other negative, are still sufficient for the most complete and rigorous

induction. Not so, however, with the Method of Agreement. The conclusions

which that yields, when the number of instances compared is small, are of no

real value, except as, in the character of suggestions, they may lead either to

experiments bringing them to the test of the Method of Difference, or to

reasonings which may explain and verify them deductively.

              It is only when the instances, being indefinitely multiplied and

varied, continue to suggest the same result, that this result acquires any high

degree of independent value. If there are but two instances, A B C and A D E,

though these instances have no antecedent in common except A, yet as the

effect may possibly have been produced in the two cases by different causes,

the result is at most only a slight probability in favor of A; there may be

causation, but it is almost equally probable that there was only a coincidence.

But the oftener we repeat the observation, varying the circumstances, the

more we advance toward a solution of this doubt. For if we try A F G, A H K,

etc., all unlike one another except in containing the circumstance A, and if we

find the effect a entering into the result in all these cases, we must suppose

one of two things, either that it is caused by A, or that it has as many different

causes as there are instances. With each addition, therefore, to the number of

instances, the presumption is strengthened in favor of A. The inquirer, of

course, will not neglect, if an opportunity present itself, to exclude A from

some one of these combinations, from A H K for instance, and by trying H K

separately, appeal to the Method of Difference in aid of the Method of

Agreement. By the Method of Difference alone can it be ascertained that A is

the cause of a ; but that it is either the cause, or another effect of the same

cause, may be placed beyond any reasonable doubt by the Method of

Agreement, provided the instances are very numerous as well as sufficiently

various.

              After how great a multiplication, then, of varied instances, all

agreeing in no other antecedent except A, is the supposition of a plurality ofcauses sufficiently rebutted, and the conclusion that a is connected with A

divested of the characteristic imperfection, and reduced to a virtual certainty?

This is a question which we can not be exempted from answering: but the

consideration of it belongs to what is called the Theory of Probability, which

will form the subject of a chapter hereafter. It is seen, however, at once, that

the conclusion does amount to a practical certainty after a sufficient number

of instances, and that the method, therefore, is not radically vitiated by the

characteristic imperfection. The result of these considerations is only, in the

first place, to point out a new source of inferiority in the Method of

Agreement as compared with other modes of investigation, and new reasons

for never resting contented with the results obtained by it, without attempting

to confirm them either by the Method of Difference, or by connecting them

deductively with some law or laws already ascertained by that superior

method. And, in the second place, we learn from this the true theory of the

value of mere number of instances in inductive inquiry. The Plurality of

Causes is the only reason why mere number is of any importance. The

tendency of unscientific inquirers is to rely too much on number, without

analyzing the instances; without looking closely enough into their nature to

ascertain what circumstances are or are not eliminated by means of them.

Most people hold their conclusions with a degree of assurance proportioned

to the mere mass of the experience on which they appear to rest; not

considering that by the addition of instances to instances, all of the same

kind, that is, differing from one another only in points already recognized as

immaterial, nothing whatever is added to the evidence of the conclusion. A

single instance eliminating some antecedent which existed in all the other

cases, is of more value than the greatest multitude of instances which are

reckoned by their number alone. It is necessary, no doubt, to assure

ourselves, by repetition of the observation or experiment, that no error has

been committed concerning the individual facts observed; and until we have

assured ourselves of this, instead of varying the circumstances, we can not

too scrupulously repeat the same experiment or observation without any

change. But when once this assurance has been obtained, the multiplication

of instances which do not exclude any more circumstances is entirely useless,

provided there have been already enough to exclude the supposition of

Plurality of Causes.

              It is of importance to remark, that the peculiar modification of the

Method of Agreement, which, as partaking in some degree of the nature ofthe Method of Difference, I have called the Joint Method of Agreement and

Difference, is not affected by the characteristic imperfection now pointed out.

For, in the joint method, it is supposed not only that the instances in which a

is, agree only in containing A, but also that the instances in which a is not,

agree only in not containing A. Now, if this be so, A must be not only the

cause of a , but the only possible cause: for if there were another, as for

example B, then in the instances in which a is not, B must have been absent

as well as A, and it would not be true that these instances agree only in not

containing A. This, therefore, constitutes an immense advantage of the joint

method over the simple Method of Agreement. It may seem, indeed, that the

advantage does not belong so much to the joint method, as to one of its two

premises (if they may be so called), the negative premise. The Method of

Agreement, when applied to negative instances, or those in which a

phenomenon does not take place, is certainly free from the characteristic

imperfection which affects it in the affirmative case. The negative premise, it

might therefore be supposed, could be worked as a simple case of the Method

of Agreement, without requiring an affirmative premise to be joined with it.

But though this is true in principle, it is generally altogether impossible to

work the Method of Agreement by negative instances without positive ones;

it is so much more difficult to exhaust the field of negation than that of

affirmation. For instance, let the question be what is the cause of the

transparency of bodies; with what prospect of success could we set ourselves

to inquire directly in what the multifarious substances which are not

transparent agree? But we might hope much sooner to seize some point of

resemblance among the comparatively few and definite species of objects

which are transparent; and this being attained, we should quite naturally be

put upon examining whether the absence of this one circumstance be not

precisely the point in which all opaque substances will be found to resemble.

              The Joint Method of Agreement and Difference, therefore, or as I

have otherwise called it, the Indirect Method of Difference (because, like the

Method of Difference properly so-called, it proceeds by ascertaining how and

in what the cases where the phenomenon is present differ from those in which

it is absent) is, after the Direct Method of Difference, the most powerful of

the remaining instruments of inductive investigation; and in the sciences

which depend on pure observation, with little or no aid from experiment, this

method, so well exemplified in the speculation on the cause of dew, is the

primary resource, so far as direct appeals to experience are concerned.              § 3. We have thus far treated Plurality of Causes only as a possible

supposition, which, until removed, renders our inductions uncertain; and have

only considered by what means, where the plurality does not really exist, we

may be enabled to disprove it. But we must also consider it as a case actually

occurring in nature, and which, as often as it does occur, our methods of

induction ought to be capable of ascertaining and establishing. For this,

however, there is required no peculiar method. When an effect is really

producible by two or more causes, the process for detecting them is in no way

different from that by which we discover single causes. They may (first) be

discovered as separate sequences, by separate sets of instances. One set of

observations or experiments shows that the sun is a cause of heat, another

that friction is a source of it, another that percussion, another that electricity,

another that chemical action is such a source. Or (secondly) the plurality may

come to light in the course of collating a number of instances, when we

attempt to find some circumstance in which they all agree, and fail in doing

so. We find it impossible to trace, in all the cases in which the effect is met

with, any common circumstance. We find that we can eliminate all the

antecedents; that no one of them is present in all the instances, no one of

them indispensable to the effect. On closer scrutiny, however, it appears that

though no one is always present, one or other of several always is. If, on

further analysis, we can detect in these any common element, we may be able

to ascend from them to some one cause which is the really operative

circumstance in them all. Thus it is now thought that in the production of heat

by friction, percussion, chemical action, etc., the ultimate source is one and

the same. But if (as continually happens) we can not take this ulterior step,

the different antecedents must be set down provisionally as distinct causes,

each sufficient of itself to produce the effect.

              We here close our remarks on the Plurality of Causes, and proceed to

the still more peculiar and more complex case of the Intermixture of Effects,

and the interference of causes with one another: a case constituting the

principal part of the complication and difficulty of the study of nature; and

with which the four only possible methods of directly inductive investigation

by observation and experiment, are, for the most part, as will appear

presently, quite unequal to cope. The instrument of Deduction alone is

adequate to unravel the complexities proceeding from this source; and the

four methods have little more in their power than to supply premises for, and

a verification of, our deductions.              § 4. A concurrence of two or more causes, not separately producing

each its own effect, but interfering with or modifying the effects of one

another, takes place, as has already been explained in two different ways. In

the one, which is exemplified by the joint operation of different forces in

mechanics, the separate effects of all the causes continue to be produced, but

are compounded with one another, and disappear in one total. In the other,

illustrated by the case of chemical action, the separate effects cease entirely,

and are succeeded by phenomena altogether different, and governed by

different laws.

              Of these cases the former is by far the more frequent, and this case it

is which, for the most part, eludes the grasp of our experimental methods.

The other and exceptional case is essentially amenable to them. When the

laws of the original agents cease entirely, and a phenomenon makes its

appearance, which, with reference to those laws, is quite heterogeneous;

when, for example, two gaseous substances, hydrogen and oxygen, on being

brought together, throw off their peculiar properties, and produce the

substance called water; in such cases the new fact may be subjected to

experimental inquiry, like any other phenomenon; and the elements which are

said to compose it may be considered as the mere agents of its production —

the conditions on which it depends, the facts which make up its cause.

              The effects of the new phenomenon, the properties of water, for

instance, are as easily found by experiment as the effects of any other cause.

But to discover the cause of it, that is, the particular conjunction of agents

from which it results, is often difficult enough. In the first place, the origin

and actual production of the phenomenon are most frequently inaccessible to

our observation. If we could not have learned the composition of water until

we found instances in which it was actually produced from oxygen and

hydrogen, we should have been forced to wait until the casual thought struck

some one of passing an electric spark through a mixture of the two gases, or

inserting a lighted taper into it, merely to try what would happen. Besides,

many substances, though they can be analyzed, can not by any known

artificial means be recompounded. Further, even if we could have

ascertained, by the Method of Agreement, that oxygen and hydrogen were

both present when water is produced, no experimentation on oxygen and

hydrogen separately, no knowledge of their laws, could have enabled us

deductively to infer that they would produce water. We require a specificexperiment on the two combined.

              Under these difficulties, we should generally have been indebted for

our knowledge of the causes of this class of effects, not to any inquiry

directed specifically toward that end, but either to accident, or to the gradual

progress of experimentation on the different combinations of which the

producing agents are susceptible; if it were not for a peculiarity belonging to

effects of this description, that they often, under some particular combination

of circumstances, reproduce their causes. If water results from the

juxtaposition of hydrogen and oxygen whenever this can be made sufficiently

close and intimate, so, on the other hand, if water itself be placed in certain

situations, hydrogen and oxygen are reproduced from it: an abrupt

termination is put to the new laws, and the agents re-appear separately with

their own properties as at first. What is called chemical analysis is the process

of searching for the causes of a phenomenon among its effects, or rather

among the effects produced by the action of some other causes upon it.

              Lavoisier, by heating mercury to a high temperature in a close vessel

containing air, found that the mercury increased in weight, and became what

was then called red precipitate, while the air, on being examined after the

experiment, proved to have lost weight, and to have become incapable of

supporting life or combustion. When red precipitate was exposed to a still

greater heat, it became mercury again, and gave off a gas which did support

life and flame. Thus the agents which by their combination produced red

precipitate, namely, the mercury and the gas, reappear as effects resulting

from that precipitate when acted upon by heat. So, if we decompose water by

means of iron filings, we produce two effects, rust and hydrogen. Now rust is

already known, by experiments upon the component substances, to be an

effect of the union of iron and oxygen: the iron we ourselves supplied, but the

oxygen must have been produced from the water. The result, therefore, is that

water has disappeared, and hydrogen and oxygen have appeared in its stead;

or, in other words, the original laws of these gaseous agents, which had been

suspended by the superinduction of the new laws called the properties of

water, have again started into existence, and the causes of water are found

among its effects.

              Where two phenomena, between the laws or properties of which,

considered in themselves, no connection can be traced, are thus reciprocally

cause and effect, each capable in its turn of being produced from the other,and each, when it produces the other, ceasing itself to exist (as water is

produced from oxygen and hydrogen, and oxygen and hydrogen are

reproduced from water); this causation of the two phenomena by one another,

each being generated by the other’s destruction, is properly transformation.

The idea of chemical composition is an idea of transformation, but of a

transformation which is incomplete; since we consider the oxygen and

hydrogen to be present in the water as oxygen and hydrogen, and capable of

being discovered in it if our senses were sufficiently keen: a supposition (for

it is no more) grounded solely on the fact that the weight of the water is the

sum of the separate weights of the two ingredients. If there had not been this

exception to the entire disappearance, in the compound, of the laws of the

separate ingredients; if the combined agents had not, in this one particular of

weight, preserved their own laws, and produced a joint result equal to the

sum of their separate results; we should never, probably, have had the notion

now implied by the words chemical composition; and, in the facts of water

produced from hydrogen and oxygen, and hydrogen and oxygen produced

from water, as the transformation would have been complete, we should have

seen only a transformation.

              In these cases, where the heteropathic effect (as we called it in a
                147
former chapter) is but a transformation of its cause, or in other words,

where the effect and its cause are reciprocally such, and mutually convertible

into each other; the problem of finding the cause resolves itself into the far

easier one of finding an effect, which is the kind of inquiry that admits of

being prosecuted by direct experiment. But there are other cases of

heteropathic effects to which this mode of investigation is not applicable.

Take, for instance, the heteropathic laws of mind; that portion of the

phenomena of our mental nature which are analogous to chemical rather than

to dynamical phenomena; as when a complex passion is formed by the

coalition of several elementary impulses, or a complex emotion by several

simple pleasures or pains, of which it is the result without being the

aggregate, or in any respect homogeneous with them. The product, in these

cases, is generated by its various factors; but the factors can not be

reproduced from the product; just as a youth can grow into an old man, but an

old man can not grow into a youth. We can not ascertain from what simple

feelings any of our complex states of mind are generated, as we ascertain the

ingredients of a chemical compound, by making it, in its turn, generate them.

We can only, therefore, discover these laws by the slow process of studyingthe simple feelings themselves, and ascertaining synthetically, by

experimenting on the various combinations of which they are susceptible,

what they, by their mutual action upon one another, are capable of

generating.

              § 5. It might have been supposed that the other, and apparently

simpler variety of the mutual interference of causes, where each cause

continues to produce its own proper effect according to the same laws to

which it conforms in its separate state, would have presented fewer

difficulties to the inductive inquirer than that of which we have just finished

the consideration. It presents, however, so far as direct induction apart from

deduction is concerned, infinitely greater difficulties. When a concurrence of

causes gives rise to a new effect, bearing no relation to the separate effects of

those causes, the resulting phenomenon stands forth undisguised, inviting

attention to its peculiarity, and presenting no obstacle to our recognizing its

presence or absence among any number of surrounding phenomena. It

admits, therefore, of being easily brought under the canons of Induction,

provided instances can be obtained such as those canons require; and the non-

occurrence of such instances, or the want of means to produce them

artificially, is the real and only difficulty in such investigations; a difficulty

not logical but in some sort physical. It is otherwise with cases of what, in a

preceding chapter, has been denominated the Composition of Causes. There,

the effects of the separate causes do not terminate and give place to others,

thereby ceasing to form any part of the phenomenon to be investigated; on

the contrary, they still take place, but are intermingled with, and disguised by,

the homogeneous and closely allied effects of other causes. They are no

longer a , b , c , d , e , existing side by side, and continuing to be separately

discernible; they are +a , — a , ½b , -b , 2b , etc.; some of which cancel one

another, while many others do not appear distinguishably, but merge in one

sum; forming altogether a result, between which and the causes whereby it

was produced there is often an insurmountable difficulty in tracing by

observation any fixed relation whatever.

              The general idea of the Composition of Causes has been seen to be,

that though two or more laws interfere with one another, and apparently

frustrate or modify one another’s operation, yet in reality all are fulfilled, the

collective effect being the exact sum of the effects of the causes taken

separately. A familiar instance is that of a body kept in equilibrium by twoequal and contrary forces. One of the forces if acting alone would carry the

body in a given time a certain distance to the west, the other if acting alone

would carry it exactly as far toward the east; and the result is the same as if it

had been first carried to the west as far as the one force would carry it, and

then back toward the east as far as the other would carry it — that is,

precisely the same distance; being ultimately left where it was found at first.

              All laws of causation are liable to be in this manner counteracted,

and seemingly frustrated, by coming into conflict with other laws, the

separate result of which is opposite to theirs, or more or less inconsistent with

it. And hence, with almost every law, many instances in which it really is

entirely fulfilled, do not, at first sight, appear to be cases of its operation at

all. It is so in the example just adduced: a force in mechanics means neither

more nor less than a cause of motion, yet the sum of the effects of two causes

of motion may be rest. Again, a body solicited by two forces in directions

making an angle with one another, moves in the diagonal; and it seems a

paradox to say that motion in the diagonal is the sum of two motions in two

other lines. Motion, however, is but change of place, and at every instant the

body is in the exact place it would have been in if the forces had acted during

alternate instants instead of acting in the same instant (saving that if we

suppose two forces to act successively which are in truth simultaneous we

must of course allow them double the time). It is evident, therefore, that each

force has had, during each instant, all the effect which belonged to it; and that

the modifying influence which one of two concurrent causes is said to

exercise with respect to the other may be considered as exerted not over the

action of the cause itself, but over the effect after it is completed. For all

purposes of predicting, calculating, or explaining their joint result, causes

which compound their effects may be treated as if they produced

simultaneously each of them its own effect, and all these effects co-existed

visibly.

              Since the laws of causes are as really fulfilled when the causes are

said to be counteracted by opposing causes, as when they are left to their own

undisturbed action, we must be cautious not to express the laws in such terms

as would render the assertion of their being fulfilled in those cases a

contradiction. If, for instance, it were stated as a law of nature that a body to

which a force is applied moves in the direction of the force, with a velocity

proportioned to the force directly, and to its own mass inversely; when inpoint of fact some bodies to which a force is applied do not move at all, and

those which do move (at least in the region of our earth) are, from the very

first, retarded by the action of gravity and other resisting forces, and at last

stopped altogether; it is clear that the general proposition, though it would be

true under a certain hypothesis, would not express the facts as they actually

occur. To accommodate the expression of the law to the real phenomena, we

must say, not that the object moves, but that it tends to move, in the direction

and with the velocity specified. We might, indeed, guard our expression in a

different mode, by saying that the body moves in that manner unless

prevented, or except in so far as prevented, by some counteracting cause. But

the body does not only move in that manner unless counteracted; it tends to

move in that manner even when counteracted; it still exerts, in the original

direction, the same energy of movement as if its first impulse had been

undisturbed, and produces, by that energy, an exactly equivalent quantity of

effect. This is true even when the force leaves the body as it found it, in a

state of absolute rest; as when we attempt to raise a body of three tons’

weight with a force equal to one ton. For if, while we are applying this force,

wind or water or any other agent supplies an additional force just exceeding

two tons, the body will be raised; thus proving that the force we applied

exerted its full effect, by neutralizing an equivalent portion of the weight

which it was insufficient altogether to overcome. And if, while we are

exerting this force of one ton upon the object in a direction contrary to that of

gravity, it be put into a scale and weighed, it will be found to have lost a ton

of its weight, or, in other words, to press downward with a force only equal to

the difference of the two forces.

              These facts are correctly indicated by the expression tendency . All

laws of causation, in consequence of their liability to be counteracted, require

to be stated in words affirmative of tendencies only, and not of actual results.

In those sciences of causation which have an accurate nomenclature, there are

special words which signify a tendency to the particular effect with which the

science is conversant; thus pressure , in mechanics, is synonymous with

tendency to motion, and forces are not reasoned on as causing actual motion,

but as exerting pressure. A similar improvement in terminology would be

very salutary in many other branches of science.

              The habit of neglecting this necessary element in the precise

expression of the laws of nature, has given birth to the popular prejudice thatall general truths have exceptions; and much unmerited distrust has thence

accrued to the conclusions of science, when they have been submitted to the

judgment of minds insufficiently disciplined and cultivated. The rough

generalizations suggested by common observation usually have exceptions;

but principles of science, or, in other words, laws of causation, have not.

“What is thought to be an exception to a principle” (to quote words used on a

different occasion), “is always some other and distinct principle cutting into
                                                    148
the former; some other force which impinges against the first force, and

deflects it from its direction. There are not a law and an exception to that law,

the law acting in ninety-nine cases, and the exception in one. There are two

laws, each possibly acting in the whole hundred cases, and bringing about a

common effect by their conjunct operation. If the force which, being the less

conspicuous of the two, is called the disturbing force, prevails sufficiently

over the other force in some one case, to constitute that case what is

commonly called an exception, the same disturbing force probably acts as a

modifying cause in many other cases which no one will call exceptions.

              “Thus if it were stated to be a law of nature that all heavy bodies fall

to the ground, it would probably be said that the resistance of the atmosphere,

which prevents a balloon from falling, constitutes the balloon an exception to

that pretended law of nature. But the real law is, that all heavy bodies tend to

fall; and to this there is no exception, not even the sun and moon; for even

they, as every astronomer knows, tend toward the earth, with a force exactly

equal to that with which the earth tends toward them. The resistance of the

atmosphere might, in the particular case of the balloon, from a

misapprehension of what the law of gravitation is, be said to prevail over the

law; but its disturbing effect is quite as real in every other case, since though

it does not prevent, it retards the fall of all bodies whatever. The rule, and the

so-called exception, do not divide the cases between them; each of them is a

comprehensive rule extending to all cases. To call one of these concurrent

principles an exception to the other, is superficial, and contrary to the correct

principles of nomenclature and arrangement. An effect of precisely the same

kind, and arising from the same cause, ought not to be placed in two different

categories, merely as there does or does not exist another cause
                          149
preponderating over it.”

              § 6. We have now to consider according to what method these

complex effects, compounded of the effects of many causes, are to bestudied; how we are enabled to trace each effect to the concurrence of causes

in which it originated, and ascertain the conditions of its recurrence — the

circumstances in which it may be expected again to occur. The conditions of

a phenomenon which arises from a composition of causes, may be

investigated either deductively or experimentally.

              The case, it is evident, is naturally susceptible of the deductive mode

of investigation. The law of an effect of this description is a result of the laws

of the separate causes on the combination of which it depends, and is,

therefore, in itself capable of being deduced from these laws. This is called

the method a priori . The other, or a posteriori method, professes to proceed

according to the canons of experimental inquiry. Considering the whole

assemblage of concurrent causes which produced the phenomenon, as one

single cause, it attempts to ascertain the cause in the ordinary manner, by a

comparison of instances. This second method subdivides itself into two

different varieties. If it merely collates instances of the effect, it is a method

of pure observation. If it operates upon the causes, and tries different

combinations of them, in hopes of ultimately hitting the precise combination

which will produce the given total effect, it is a method of experiment.

              In order more completely to clear up the nature of each of these three

methods, and determine which of them deserves the preference, it will be

expedient (conformably to a favorite maxim of Lord Chancellor Eldon, to

which, though it has often incurred philosophical ridicule, a deeper

philosophy will not refuse its sanction) to “clothe them in circumstances.”

We shall select for this purpose a case which as yet furnishes no very brilliant

example of the success of any of the three methods, but which is all the more

suited to illustrate the difficulties inherent in them. Let the subject of inquiry

be, the conditions of health and disease in the human body; or (for greater

simplicity) the conditions of recovery from a given disease; and in order to

narrow the question still more, let it be limited, in the first instance, to this

one inquiry: Is, or is not, some particular medicament (mercury, for instance)

a remedy for the given disease.

              Now, the deductive method would set out from known properties of

mercury, and known laws of the human body, and by reasoning from these,

would attempt to discover whether mercury will act upon the body when in

the morbid condition supposed, in such a manner as would tend to restore

health. The experimental method would simply administer mercury in asmany cases as possible, noting the age, sex, temperament, and other

peculiarities of bodily constitution, the particular form or variety of the

disease, the particular stage of its progress, etc., remarking in which of these

cases it was attended with a salutary effect, and with what circumstances it

was on those occasions combined. The method of simple observation would

compare instances of recovery, to find whether they agreed in having been

preceded by the administration of mercury; or would compare instances of

recovery with instances of failure, to find cases which, agreeing in all other

respects, differed only in the fact that mercury had been administered, or that

it had not.

              § 7. That the last of these three modes of investigation is applicable

to the case, no one has ever seriously contended. No conclusions of value on

a subject of such intricacy ever were obtained in that way. The utmost that

could result would be a vague general impression for or against the efficacy

of mercury, of no avail for guidance unless confirmed by one of the other two

methods. Not that the results, which this method strives to obtain, would not

be of the utmost possible value if they could be obtained. If all the cases of

recovery which presented themselves, in an examination extending to a great

number of instances, were cases in which mercury had been administered, we

might generalize with confidence from this experience, and should have

obtained a conclusion of real value. But no such basis for generalization can

we, in a case of this description, hope to obtain. The reason is that which we

have spoken of as constituting the characteristic imperfection of the Method

of Agreement, Plurality of Causes. Supposing even that mercury does tend to

cure the disease, so many other causes, both natural and artificial, also tend to

cure it, that there are sure to be abundant instances of recovery in which

mercury has not been administered, unless, indeed, the practice be to

administer it in all cases; on which supposition it will equally be found in the

cases of failure.

              When an effect results from the union of many causes, the share

which each has in the determination of the effect can not in general be great,

and the effect is not likely, even in its presence or absence, still less in its

variations, to follow, even approximately, any one of the causes. Recovery

from a disease is an event to which, in every case, many influences must

concur. Mercury may be one such influence; but from the very fact that there

are many other such, it will necessarily happen that although mercury isadministered, the patient, for want of other concurring influences, will often

not recover, and that he often will recover when it is not administered, the

other favorable influences being sufficiently powerful without it. Neither,

therefore, will the instances of recovery agree in the administration of

mercury, nor will the instances of failure agree in its non-administration. It is

much if, by multiplied and accurate returns from hospitals and the like, we

can collect that there are rather more recoveries and rather fewer failures

when mercury is administered than when it is not; a result of very secondary

value even as a guide to practice, and almost worthless as a contribution to
                            150
the theory of the subject.

              § 8. The inapplicability of the method of simple observation to

ascertain the conditions of effects dependent on many concurring causes,

being thus recognized, we shall next inquire whether any greater benefit can

be expected from the other branch of the a posteriori method, that which

proceeds by directly trying different combinations of causes, either artificially

produced or found in nature, and taking notice what is their effect; as, for

example, by actually trying the effect of mercury in as many different

circumstances as possible. This method differs from the one which we have

just examined in turning our attention directly to the causes or agents, instead

of turning it to the effect, recovery from the disease. And since, as a general

rule, the effects of causes are far more accessible to our study than the causes

of effects, it is natural to think that this method has a much better chance of

proving successful than the former.

              The method now under consideration is called the Empirical

Method; and in order to estimate it fairly, we must suppose it to be

completely, not incompletely, empirical. We must exclude from it every thing

which partakes of the nature not of an experimental but of a deductive

operation. If, for instance, we try experiments with mercury upon a person in

health, in order to ascertain the general laws of its action upon the human

body, and then reason from these laws to determine how it will act upon

persons affected with a particular disease, this may be a really effectual

method; but this is deduction. The experimental method does not derive the

law of a complex case from the simpler laws which conspire to produce it,

but makes its experiments directly upon the complex case. We must make

entire abstraction of all knowledge of the simpler tendencies, the modi

operandi of mercury in detail. Our experimentation must aim at obtaining adirect answer to the specific question, Does or does not mercury tend to cure

the particular disease?

              Let us see, therefore, how far the case admits of the observance of

those rules of experimentation which it is found necessary to observe in other

cases. When we devise an experiment to ascertain the effect of a given agent,

there are certain precautions which we never, if we can help it, omit. In the

first place, we introduce the agent into the midst of a set of circumstances

which we have exactly ascertained. It needs hardly be remarked how far this

condition is from being realized in any case connected with the phenomena

of life; how far we are from knowing what are all the circumstances which

pre-exist in any instance in which mercury is administered to a living being.

This difficulty, however, though insuperable in most cases, may not be so in

all; there are sometimes concurrences of many causes, in which we yet know

accurately what the causes are. Moreover, the difficulty may be attenuated by

sufficient multiplication of experiments, in circumstances rendering it

improbable that any of the unknown causes should exist in them all. But

when we have got clear of this obstacle, we encounter another still more

serious. In other cases, when we intend to try an experiment, we do not

reckon it enough that there be no circumstance in the case the presence of

which is unknown to us. We require, also, that none of the circumstances

which we do know shall have effects susceptible of being confounded with

those of the agents whose properties we wish to study. We take the utmost

pains to exclude all causes capable of composition with the given cause; or, if

forced to let in any such causes, we take care to make them such that we can

compute and allow for their influence, so that the effect of the given cause

may, after the subduction of those other effects, be apparent as a residual

phenomenon.

              These precautions are inapplicable to such cases as we are now

considering. The mercury of our experiment being tried with an unknown

multitude (or even let it be a known multitude) of other influencing

circumstances, the mere fact of their being influencing circumstances implies

that they disguise the effect of the mercury, and preclude us from knowing

whether it has any effect or not. Unless we already knew what and how much

is owing to every other circumstance (that is, unless we suppose the very

problem solved which we are considering the means of solving), we can not

tell that those other circumstances may not have produced the whole of theeffect, independently or even in spite of the mercury. The Method of

Difference, in the ordinary mode of its use, namely, by comparing the state of

things following the experiment with the state which preceded it, is thus, in

the case of intermixture of effects, entirely unavailing; because other causes

than that whose effect we are seeking to determine have been operating

during the transition. As for the other mode of employing the Method of

Difference, namely, by comparing, not the same case at two different periods,

but different cases, this in the present instance is quite chimerical. In

phenomena so complicated it is questionable if two cases, similar in all

respects but one, ever occurred; and were they to occur, we could not

possibly know that they were so exactly similar.

              Any thing like a scientific use of the method of experiment, in these

complicated cases, is therefore out of the question. We can generally, even in

the most favorable cases, only discover by a succession of trials, that a certain

cause is very often followed by a certain effect. For, in one of these conjunct

effects, the portion which is determined by any one of the influencing agents,

is usually, as we before remarked, but small; and it must be a more potent

cause than most, if even the tendency which it really exerts is not thwarted by

other tendencies in nearly as many cases as it is fulfilled. Some causes indeed

there are which are more potent than any counteracting causes to which they

are commonly exposed; and accordingly there are some truths in medicine

which are sufficiently proved by direct experiment. Of these the most familiar

are those that relate to the efficacy of the substances known as Specifics for
                                                                              151
particular diseases, “quinine, colchicum, lime-juice, cod-liver oil,” and a

few others. Even these are not invariably followed by success; but they

succeed in so large a proportion of cases, and against such powerful

obstacles, that their tendency to restore health in the disorders for which they
                                                                  152
are prescribed may be regarded as an experimental truth.

              If so little can be done by the experimental method to determine the

conditions of an effect of many combined causes, in the case of medical

science; still less is this method applicable to a class of phenomena more

complicated than even those of physiology, the phenomena of politics and

history. There, Plurality of Causes exists in almost boundless excess, and

effects are, for the most part, inextricably interwoven with one another. To

add to the embarrassment, most of the inquiries in political science relate to

the production of effects of a most comprehensive description, such as thepublic wealth, public security, public morality, and the like: results liable to

be affected directly or indirectly either in plus or in minus by nearly every

fact which exists, or event which occurs, in human society. The vulgar

notion, that the safe methods on political subjects are those of Baconian

induction — that the true guide is not general reasoning, but specific

experience — will one day be quoted as among the most unequivocal marks

of a low state of the speculative faculties in any age in which it is accredited.

Nothing can be more ludicrous than the sort of parodies on experimental

reasoning which one is accustomed to meet with, not in popular discussion

only, but in grave treatises, when the affairs of nations are the theme. “How,”

it is asked, “can an institution be bad, when the country has prospered under

it?” “How can such or such causes have contributed to the prosperity of one

country, when another has prospered without them?” Whoever makes use of

an argument of this kind, not intending to deceive, should be sent back to

learn the elements of some one of the more easy physical sciences. Such

reasoners ignore the fact of Plurality of Causes in the very case which affords

the most signal example of it. So little could be concluded, in such a case,

from any possible collation of individual instances, that even the

impossibility, in social phenomena, of making artificial experiments, a

circumstance otherwise so prejudicial to directly inductive inquiry, hardly

affords, in this case, additional reason of regret. For even if we could try

experiments upon a nation or upon the human race, with as little scruple as

M. Magendie tried them on dogs and rabbits, we should never succeed in

making two instances identical in every respect except the presence or

absence of some one definite circumstance. The nearest approach to an

experiment in the philosophical sense, which takes place in politics, is the

introduction of a new operative element into national affairs by some special

and assignable measure of government, such as the enactment or repeal of a

particular law. But where there are so many influences at work, it requires

some time for the influence of any new cause upon national phenomena to

become apparent; and as the causes operating in so extensive a sphere are not

only infinitely numerous, but in a state of perpetual alteration, it is always

certain that before the effect of the new cause becomes conspicuous enough

to be a subject of induction, so many of the other influencing circumstances
                                                      153
will have changed as to vitiate the experiment.

              Two, therefore, of the three possible methods for the study of

phenomena resulting from the composition of many causes, being, from thevery nature of the case, inefficient and illusory, there remains only the third

— that which considers the causes separately, and infers the effect from the

balance of the different tendencies which produce it: in short, the deductive,

or a priori method. The more particular consideration of this intellectual

process requires a chapter to itself.

 

 

                     Chapter XI. – Of The Deductive Method.

 

 

              § 1. The mode of investigation which, from the proved

inapplicability of direct methods of observation and experiment, remains to

us as the main source of the knowledge we possess or can acquire respecting

the conditions and laws of recurrence, of the more complex phenomena, is

called, in its most general expression, the Deductive Method; and consists of

three operations: the first, one of direct induction; the second, of

ratiocination; the third, of verification.

              I call the first step in the process an inductive operation, because

there must be a direct induction as the basis of the whole; though in many

particular investigations the place of the induction may be supplied by a prior

deduction; but the premises of this prior deduction must have been derived

from induction.

              The problem of the Deductive Method is, to find the law of an effect,

from the laws of the different tendencies of which it is the joint result. The

first requisite, therefore, is to know the laws of those tendencies; the law of

each of the concurrent causes: and this supposes a previous process of

observation or experiment upon each cause separately; or else a previous

deduction, which also must depend for its ultimate premises on observation

or experiment. Thus, if the subject be social or historical phenomena, the

premises of the Deductive Method must be the laws of the causes which

determine that class of phenomena; and those causes are human actions,

together with the general outward circumstances under the influence of which

mankind are placed, and which constitute man’s position on the earth. The

Deductive Method, applied to social phenomena, must begin, therefore, by

investigating, or must suppose to have been already investigated, the laws of

human action, and those properties of outward things by which the actions of

human beings in society are determined. Some of these general truths will

naturally be obtained by observation and experiment, others by deduction: the

more complex laws of human action, for example, may be deduced from the

simpler ones; but the simple or elementary laws will always, and necessarily,

have been obtained by a directly inductive process.              To ascertain, then, the laws of each separate cause which takes a

share in producing the effect, is the first desideratum of the Deductive

Method. To know what the causes are which must be subjected to this

process of study, may or may not be difficult. In the case last mentioned, this

first condition is of easy fulfillment. That social phenomena depend on the

acts and mental impressions of human beings, never could have been a matter

of any doubt, however imperfectly it may have been known either by what

laws those impressions and actions are governed, or to what social

consequences their laws naturally lead. Neither, again, after physical science

had attained a certain development, could there be any real doubt where to

look for the laws on which the phenomena of life depend, since they must be

the mechanical and chemical laws of the solid and fluid substances

composing the organized body and the medium in which it subsists, together

with the peculiar vital laws of the different tissues constituting the organic

structure. In other cases, really far more simple than these, it was much less

obvious in what quarter the causes were to be looked for: as in the case of the

celestial phenomena. Until, by combining the laws of certain causes, it was

found that those laws explained all the facts which experience had proved

concerning the heavenly motions, and led to predictions which it always

verified, mankind never knew that those were the causes. But whether we are

able to put the question before, or not until after, we have become capable of

answering it, in either case it must be answered; the laws of the different

causes must be ascertained, before we can proceed to deduce from them the

conditions of the effect.

              The mode of ascertaining those laws neither is, nor can be any other

than the fourfold method of experimental inquiry, already discussed. A few

remarks on the application of that method to cases of the Composition of

Causes are all that is requisite.

              It is obvious that we can not expect to find the law of a tendency by

an induction from cases in which the tendency is counteracted. The laws of

motion could never have been brought to light from the observation of bodies

kept at rest by the equilibrium of opposing forces. Even where the tendency

is not, in the ordinary sense of the word, counteracted, but only modified, by

having its effects compounded with the effects arising from some other

tendency or tendencies, we are still in an unfavorable position for tracing, by

means of such cases, the law of the tendency itself. It would have beenscarcely possible to discover the law that every body in motion tends to

continue moving in a straight line, by an induction from instances in which

the motion is deflected into a curve, by being compounded with the effect of

an accelerating force. Notwithstanding the resources afforded in this

description of cases by the Method of Concomitant Variations, the principles

of a judicious experimentation prescribe that the law of each of the tendencies

should be studied, if possible, in cases in which that tendency operates alone,

or in combination with no agencies but those of which the effect can, from

previous knowledge, be calculated and allowed for.

              Accordingly, in the cases, unfortunately very numerous and

important, in which the causes do not suffer themselves to be separated and

observed apart, there is much difficulty in laying down with due certainty the

inductive foundation necessary to support the deductive method. This

difficulty is most of all conspicuous in the case of physiological phenomena;

it being seldom possible to separate the different agencies which collectively

compose an organized body, without destroying the very phenomena which it

is our object to investigate:

              —— following life, in creatures we dissect,

We lose it, in the moment we detect.

              And for this reason I am inclined to the opinion that physiology

(greatly and rapidly progressive as it now is) is embarrassed by greater

natural difficulties, and is probably susceptible of a less degree of ultimate

perfection, than even the social science; inasmuch as it is possible to study

the laws and operations of one human mind apart from other minds, much

less imperfectly than we can study the laws of one organ or tissue of the

human body apart from the other organs or tissues.

              It has been judiciously remarked that pathological facts, or, to speak

in common language, diseases in their different forms and degrees afford in

the case of physiological investigation the most valuable equivalent to

experimentation properly so called; inasmuch as they often exhibit to us a

definite disturbance in some one organ or organic function, the remaining

organs and functions being, in the first instance at least, unaffected. It is true

that from the perpetual actions and reactions which are going on among all

parts of the organic economy, there can be no prolonged disturbance in any

one function without ultimately involving many of the others; and when onceit has done so, the experiment for the most part loses its scientific value. All

depends on observing the early stages of the derangement; which,

unfortunately, are of necessity the least marked. If, however, the organs and

functions not disturbed in the first instance become affected in a fixed order

of succession, some light is thereby thrown upon the action which one organ

exercises over another: and we occasionally obtain a series of effects which

we can refer with some confidence to the original local derangement; but for

this it is necessary that we should know that the original derangement was

local. If it was what is termed constitutional; that is, if we do not know in

what part of the animal economy it took its rise, or the precise nature of the

disturbance which took place in that part, we are unable to determine which

of the various derangements was cause and which effect; which of them were

produced by one another, and which by the direct, though perhaps tardy,

action of the original cause.

              Besides natural pathological facts, we can produce pathological facts

artificially: we can try experiments, even in the popular sense of the term, by

subjecting the living being to some external agent, such as the mercury of our

former example, or the section of a nerve to ascertain the functions of

different parts of the nervous system. As this experimentation is not intended

to obtain a direct solution of any practical question, but to discover general

laws, from which afterward the conditions of any particular effect may be

obtained by deduction, the best cases to select are those of which the

circumstances can be best ascertained: and such are generally not those in

which there is any practical object in view. The experiments are best tried,

not in a state of disease, which is essentially a changeable state, but in the

condition of health, comparatively a fixed state. In the one, unusual agencies

are at work, the results of which we have no means of predicting: in the other,

the course of the accustomed physiological phenomena would, it may

generally be presumed, remain undisturbed, were it not for the disturbing

cause which we introduce.

              Such, with the occasional aid of the Method of Concomitant

Variations (the latter not less encumbered than the more elementary methods

by the peculiar difficulties of the subject), are our inductive resources for

ascertaining the laws of the causes considered separately, when we have it

not in our power to make trial of them in a state of actual separation. The

insufficiency of these resources is so glaring, that no one can be surprised atthe backward state of the science of physiology; in which indeed our

knowledge of causes is so imperfect, that we can neither explain, nor could

without specific experience have predicted, many of the facts which are

certified to us by the most ordinary observation. Fortunately, we are much

better informed as to the empirical laws of the phenomena, that is, the

uniformities respecting which we can not yet decide whether they are cases of

causation, or mere results of it. Not only has the order in which the facts of

organization and life successively manifest themselves, from the first germ of

existence to death, been found to be uniform, and very accurately

ascertainable; but, by a great application of the Method of Concomitant

Variations to the entire facts of comparative anatomy and physiology, the

characteristic organic structure corresponding to each class of functions has

been determined with considerable precision. Whether these organic

conditions are the whole of the conditions, and in many cases whether they

are conditions at all, or mere collateral effects of some common cause, we are

quite ignorant; nor are we ever likely to know, unless we could construct an

organized body and try whether it would live.

              Under such disadvantages do we, in cases of this description,

attempt the initial, or inductive step, in the application of the Deductive

Method to complex phenomena. But such, fortunately, is not the common

case. In general, the laws of the causes on which the effect depends may be

obtained by an induction from comparatively simple instances, or, at the

worst, by deduction from the laws of simpler causes, so obtained. By simple

instances are meant, of course, those in which the action of each cause was

not intermixed or interfered with, or not to any great extent, by other causes

whose laws were unknown. And only when the induction which furnished the

premises to the Deductive method rested on such instances has the

application of such a method to the ascertainment of the laws of a complex

effect, been attended with brilliant results.

              § 2. When the laws of the causes have been ascertained, and the first

stage of the great logical operation now under discussion satisfactorily

accomplished, the second part follows; that of determining from the laws of

the causes what effect any given combination of those causes will produce.

This is a process of calculation, in the wider sense of the term; and very often

involves processes of calculation in the narrowest sense. It is a ratiocination;

and when our knowledge of the causes is so perfect as to extend to the exactnumerical laws which they observe in producing their effects, the

ratiocination may reckon among its premises the theorems of the science of

number, in the whole immense extent of that science. Not only are the most

advanced truths of mathematics often required to enable us to compute an

effect, the numerical law of which we already know; but, even by the aid of

those most advanced truths, we can go but a little way. In so simple a case as

the common problem of three bodies gravitating toward one another, with a

force directly as their mass and inversely as the square of the distance, all the

resources of the calculus have not hitherto sufficed to obtain any general

solution, but an approximate one. In a case a little more complex, but still one

of the simplest which arise in practice, that of the motion of a projectile, the

causes which affect the velocity and range (for example) of a cannon-ball

may be all known and estimated: the force of the gunpowder, the angle of

elevation, the density of the air, the strength and direction of the wind; but it

is one of the most difficult of mathematical problems to combine all these, so

as to determine the effect resulting from their collective action.

              Besides the theorems of number, those of geometry also come in as

premises, where the effects take place in space, and involve motion and

extension, as in mechanics, optics, acoustics, astronomy. But when the

complication increases, and the effects are under the influence of so many

and such shifting causes as to give no room either for fixed numbers, or for

straight lines and regular curves (as in the case of physiological, to say

nothing of mental and social phenomena), the laws of number and extension

are applicable, if at all, only on that large scale on which precision of details

becomes unimportant. Although these laws play a conspicuous part in the

most striking examples of the investigation of nature by the Deductive

Method, as for example in the Newtonian theory of the celestial motions,

they are by no means an indispensable part of every such process. All that is

essential in it is reasoning from a general law to a particular case, that is,

determining by means of the particular circumstances of that case, what result

is required in that instance to fulfill the law. Thus in the Torricellian

experiment, if the fact that air has weight had been previously known, it

would have been easy, without any numerical data, to deduce from the

general law of equilibrium, that the mercury would stand in the tube at such a

height that the column of mercury would exactly balance a column of the

atmosphere of equal diameter; because, otherwise, equilibrium would not

exist.              By such ratiocinations from the separate laws of the causes, we may,

to a certain extent, succeed in answering either of the following questions:

Given a certain combination of causes, what effect will follow? and, What

combination of causes, if it existed, would produce a given effect? In the one

case, we determine the effect to be expected in any complex circumstances of

which the different elements are known: in the other case we learn, according

to what law — under what antecedent conditions — a given complex effect

will occur.

              § 3. But (it may here be asked) are not the same arguments by which

the methods of direct observation and experiment were set aside as illusory

when applied to the laws of complex phenomena, applicable with equal force

against the Method of Deduction? When in every single instance a multitude,

often an unknown multitude, of agencies, are clashing and combining, what

security have we that in our computation a priori we have taken all these into

our reckoning? How many must we not generally be ignorant of? Among

those which we know, how probable that some have been overlooked; and,

even were all included, how vain the pretense of summing up the effects of

many causes, unless we know accurately the numerical law of each — a

condition in most cases not to be fulfilled; and even when it is fulfilled, to

make the calculation transcends, in any but very simple cases, the utmost

power of mathematical science with all its most modern improvements.

              These objections have real weight, and would be altogether

unanswerable, if there were no test by which, when we employ the Deductive

Method, we might judge whether an error of any of the above descriptions

had been committed or not. Such a test, however, there is: and its application

forms, under the name of Verification, the third essential component part of

the Deductive Method; without which all the results it can give have little

other value than that of conjecture. To warrant reliance on the general

conclusions arrived at by deduction, these conclusions must be found, on

careful comparison, to accord with the results of direct observation wherever

it can be had. If, when we have experience to compare with them, this

experience confirms them, we may safely trust to them in other cases of

which our specific experience is yet to come. But if our deductions have led

to the conclusion that from a particular combination of causes a given effect

would result, then in all known cases where that combination can be shown

to have existed, and where the effect has not followed, we must be able toshow (or at least to make a probable surmise) what frustrated it: if we can not,

the theory is imperfect, and not yet to be relied upon. Nor is the verification

complete, unless some of the cases in which the theory is borne out by the

observed result are of at least equal complexity with any other cases in which

its application could be called for.

              If direct observation and collation of instances have furnished us

with any empirical laws of the effect (whether true in all observed cases, or

only true for the most part), the most effectual verification of which the

theory could be susceptible, would be, that it led deductively to those

empirical laws; that the uniformities, whether complete or incomplete, which

were observed to exist among the phenomena, were accounted for by the

laws of the causes — were such as could not but exist if those be really the

causes by which the phenomena are produced. Thus it was very reasonably

deemed an essential requisite of any true theory of the causes of the celestial

motions, that it should lead by deduction to Kepler’s laws; which,

accordingly, the Newtonian theory did.

              In order, therefore, to facilitate the verification of theories obtained

by deduction, it is important that as many as possible of the empirical laws of

the phenomena should be ascertained, by a comparison of instances,

conformably to the Method of Agreement: as well as (it must be added) that

the phenomena themselves should be described, in the most comprehensive

as well as accurate manner possible; by collecting from the observation of

parts, the simplest possible correct expressions for the corresponding wholes:

as when the series of the observed places of a planet was first expressed by a

circle, then by a system of epicycles, and subsequently by an ellipse.

              It is worth remarking, that complex instances which would have

been of no use for the discovery of the simple laws into which we ultimately

analyze their phenomena, nevertheless, when they have served to verify the

analysis, become additional evidence of the laws themselves. Although we

could not have got at the law from complex cases, still when the law, got at

otherwise, is found to be in accordance with the result of a complex case, that

case becomes a new experiment on the law, and helps to confirm what it did

not assist to discover. It is a new trial of the principle in a different set of

circumstances; and occasionally serves to eliminate some circumstance not

previously excluded, and the exclusion of which might require an experiment

impossible to be executed. This was strikingly conspicuous in the exampleformerly quoted, in which the difference between the observed and the

calculated velocity of sound was ascertained to result from the heat extricated

by the condensation which takes place in each sonorous vibration. This was a

trial, in new circumstances, of the law of the development of heat by

compression; and it added materially to the proof of the universality of that

law. Accordingly, any law of nature is deemed to have gained in point of

certainty, by being found to explain some complex case which had not

previously been thought of in connection with it; and this indeed is a

consideration to which it is the habit of scientific inquirers to attach rather too

much value than too little.

              To the Deductive Method, thus characterized in its three constituent

parts, Induction, Ratiocination, and Verification, the human mind is indebted

for its most conspicuous triumphs in the investigation of nature. To it we owe

all the theories by which vast and complicated phenomena are embraced

under a few simple laws, which, considered as the laws of those great

phenomena, could never have been detected by their direct study. We may

form some conception of what the method has done for us from the case of

the celestial motions: one of the simplest among the greater instances of the

Composition of Causes, since (except in a few cases not of primary

importance) each of the heavenly bodies may be considered, without material

inaccuracy, to be never at one time influenced by the attraction of more than

two bodies, the sun and one other planet or satellite; making, with the

reaction of the body itself, and the force generated by the body’s own motion

and acting in the direction of the tangent, only four different agents on the

concurrence of which the motions of that body depend; a much smaller

number, no doubt, than that by which any other of the great phenomena of

nature is determined or modified. Yet how could we ever have ascertained

the combination of forces on which the motions of the earth and planets are

dependent, by merely comparing the orbits or velocities of different planets,

or the different velocities or positions of the same planet? Notwithstanding

the regularity which manifests itself in those motions, in a degree so rare

among the effects of concurrence of causes; and although the periodical

recurrence of exactly the same effect, affords positive proof that all the

combinations of causes which occur at all, recur periodically; we should not

have known what the causes were, if the existence of agencies precisely

similar on our own earth had not, fortunately, brought the causes themselves

within the reach of experimentation under simple circumstances. As we shallhave occasion to analyze, further on, this great example of the Method of

Deduction, we shall not occupy any time with it here, but shall proceed to

that secondary application of the Deductive Method, the result of which is not

to prove laws of phenomena, but to explain them.          Chapter XII. – Of The Explanation Of Laws Of Nature.

 

 

              § 1. The deductive operation by which we derive the law of an effect

from the laws of the causes, the concurrence of which gives rise to it, may be

undertaken either for the purpose of discovering the law, or of explaining a

law already discovered. The word explanation occurs so continually, and

holds so important a place in philosophy, that a little time spent in fixing the

meaning of it will be profitably employed.

              An individual fact is said to be explained, by pointing out its cause,

that is, by stating the law or laws of causation, of which its production is an

instance. Thus, a conflagration is explained, when it is proved to have arisen

from a spark falling into the midst of a heap of combustibles. And in a similar

manner, a law or uniformity in nature is said to be explained, when another

law or laws are pointed out, of which that law itself is but a case, and from

which it could be deduced.

              § 2. There are three distinguishable sets of circumstances in which a

law of causation may be explained from, or, as it also is often expressed,

resolved into, other laws.

              The first is the case already so fully considered; an intermixture of

laws, producing a joint effect equal to the sum of the effects of the causes

taken separately. The law of the complex effect is explained, by being

resolved into the separate laws of the causes which contribute to it. Thus, the

law of the motion of a planet is resolved into the law of the acquired force,

which tends to produce a uniform motion in the tangent, and the law of the

centripetal force, which tends to produce an accelerating motion toward the

sun; the real motion being a compound of the two.

              It is necessary here to remark, that in this resolution of the law of a

complex effect, the laws of which it is compounded are not the only

elements. It is resolved into the laws of the separate causes, together with the

fact of their co-existence. The one is as essential an ingredient as the other;

whether the object be to discover the law of the effect, or only to explain it.

To deduce the laws of the heavenly motions, we require not only to know the

law of a rectilineal and that of a gravitative force, but the existence of boththese forces in the celestial regions, and even their relative amount. The

complex laws of causation are thus resolved into two distinct kinds of

elements: the one, simpler laws of causation, the other (in the aptly selected

expression of Dr. Chalmers) collocations; the collocations consisting in the

existence of certain agents or powers, in certain circumstances of place and

time. We shall hereafter have occasion to return to this distinction, and to

dwell on it at such length as dispenses with the necessity of further insisting

on it here. The first mode, then, of the explanation of Laws of Causation, is

when the law of an effect is resolved into the various tendencies of which it is

the result, together with the laws of those tendencies.

              § 3. A second case is when, between what seemed the cause and

what was supposed to be its effect, further observation detects an

intermediate link; a fact caused by the antecedent, and in its turn causing the

consequent; so that the cause at first assigned is but the remote cause,

operating through the intermediate phenomenon. A seemed the cause of C,

but it subsequently appeared that A was only the cause of B, and that it is B

which was the cause of C. For example: mankind were aware that the act of

touching an outward object caused a sensation. It was subsequently

discovered that after we have touched the object, and before we experience

the sensation, some change takes place in a kind of thread called a nerve,

which extends from our outward organs to the brain. Touching the object,

therefore, is only the remote cause of our sensation; that is, not the cause,

properly speaking, but the cause of the cause; the real cause of the sensation

is the change in the state of the nerve. Future experience may not only give us

more knowledge than we now have of the particular nature of this change,

but may also interpolate another link: between the contact (for example) of

the object with our outward organs, and the production of the change of state

in the nerve, there may take place some electric phenomenon, or some

phenomenon of a nature not resembling the effects of any known agency.

Hitherto, however, no such intermediate link has been discovered; and the

touch of the object must be considered, provisionally, as the proximate cause

of the affection of the nerve. The sequence, therefore, of a sensation of touch

on contact with an object is ascertained not to be an ultimate law; it is

resolved, as the phrase is, into two other laws — the law that contact with an

object produces an affection of the nerve, and the law that an affection of the

nerve produces sensation.              To take another example: the more powerful acids corrode or

blacken organic compounds. This is a case of causation, but of remote

causation; and is said to be explained when it is shown that there is an

intermediate link, namely, the separation of some of the chemical elements of

the organic structure from the rest, and their entering into combination with

the acid. The acid causes this separation of the elements, and the separation

of the elements causes the disorganization, and often the charring of the

structure. So, again, chlorine extracts coloring matters (whence its efficacy in

bleaching) and purifies the air from infection. This law is resolved into the

two following laws: Chlorine has a powerful affinity for bases of all kinds,

particularly metallic bases and hydrogen: such bases are essential elements of

coloring matters and contagious compounds, which substances, therefore, are

decomposed and destroyed by chlorine.

              § 4. It is of importance to remark, that when a sequence of

phenomena is thus resolved into other laws, they are always laws more

general than itself. The law that A is followed by C, is less general than either

of the laws which connect B with C and A with B. This will appear from very

simple considerations.

              All laws of causation are liable to be counteracted or frustrated, by

the non-fulfillment of some negative condition; the tendency, therefore, of B

to produce C may be defeated. Now the law that A produces B, is equally

fulfilled whether B is followed by C or not; but the law that A produces C by

means of B, is of course only fulfilled when B is really followed by C, and is,

therefore, less general than the law that A produces B. It is also less general

than the law that B produces C. For B may have other causes besides A; and

as A produces C only by means of B, while B produces C, whether it has

itself been produced by A or by any thing else, the second law embraces a

greater number of instances, covers as it were a greater space of ground, than

the first.

              Thus, in our former example, the law that the contact of an object

causes a change in the state of the nerve, is more general than the law that

contact with an object causes sensation, since, for aught we know, the change

in the nerve may equally take place when, from a counteracting cause, as, for

instance, strong mental excitement, the sensation does not follow; as in a

battle, where wounds are sometimes received without any consciousness of

receiving them. And again, the law that change in the state of a nerveproduces sensation, is more general than the law that contact with an object

produces sensation; since the sensation equally follows the change in the

nerve when not produced by contact with an object, but by some other cause;

as in the well-known case, when a person who has lost a limb feels the same

sensation which he has been accustomed to call a pain in the limb.

              Not only are the laws of more immediate sequence into which the

law of a remote sequence is resolved, laws of greater generality than that law

is, but (as a consequence of, or rather as implied in, their greater generality)

they are more to be relied on; there are fewer chances of their being

ultimately found not to be universally true. From the moment when the

sequence of A and C is shown not to be immediate, but to depend on an

intervening phenomenon, then, however constant and invariable the sequence

of A and C has hitherto been found, possibilities arise of its failure, exceeding

those which can effect either of the more immediate sequences, A, B, and B,

C. The tendency of A to produce C may be defeated by whatever is capable

of defeating either the tendency of A to produce B, or the tendency of B to

produce C; it is, therefore, twice as liable to failure as either of those more

elementary tendencies; and the generalization that A is always followed by C,

is twice as likely to be found erroneous. And so of the converse

generalization, that C is always preceded and caused by A; which will be

erroneous not only if there should happen to be a second immediate mode of

production of C itself, but moreover if there be a second mode of production

of B, the immediate antecedent of C in the sequence.

              The resolution of the one generalization into the other two, not only

shows that there are possible limitations of the former, from which its two

elements are exempt, but shows also where these are to be looked for. As

soon as we know that B intervenes between A and C, we also know that if

there be cases in which the sequence of A and C does not hold, these are most

likely to be found by studying the effects or the conditions of the

phenomenon B.

              It appears, then, that in the second of the three modes in which a law

may be resolved into other laws, the latter are more general, that is, extend to

more cases, and are also less likely to require limitation from subsequent

experience, than the law which they serve to explain. They are more nearly

unconditional; they are defeated by fewer contingencies; they are a nearer

approach to the universal truth of nature. The same observations are stillmore evidently true with regard to the first of the three modes of resolution.

When the law of an effect of combined forces is resolved into the separate

laws of the causes, the nature of the case implies that the law of the effect is

less general than the law of any of the causes, since it only holds when they

are combined; while the law of any one of the causes holds good both then,

and also when that cause acts apart from the rest.

              It is also manifest that the complex law is liable to be oftener

unfulfilled than any one of the simpler laws of which it is the result, since

every contingency which defeats any of the laws prevents so much of the

effect as depends on it, and thereby defeats the complex law. The mere

rusting, for example, of some small part of a great machine, often suffices

entirely to prevent the effect which ought to result from the joint action of all

the parts. The law of the effect of a combination of causes is always subject

to the whole of the negative conditions which attach to the action of all the

causes severally.

              There is another and an equally strong reason why the law of a

complex effect must be less general than the laws of the causes which

conspire to produce it. The same causes, acting according to the same laws,

and differing only in the proportions in which they are combined, often

produce effects which differ not merely in quantity, but in kind. The

combination of a centripetal with a projectile force, in the proportions which

obtain in all the planets and satellites of our solar system, gives rise to an

elliptical motion; but if the ratio of the two forces to each other were slightly

altered, it is demonstrated that the motion produced would be in a circle, or a

parabola, or an hyperbola; and it is thought that in the case of some comets

one of these is probably the fact. Yet the law of the parabolic motion would

be resolvable into the very same simple laws into which that of the elliptical

motion is resolved, namely, the law of the permanence of rectilineal motion,

and the law of gravitation. If, therefore, in the course of ages, some

circumstance were to manifest itself which, without defeating the law of

either of those forces, should merely alter their proportion to one another

(such as the shock of some solid body, or even the accumulating effect of the

resistance of the medium in which astronomers have been led to surmise that

the motions of the heavenly bodies take place), the elliptical motion might be

changed into a motion in some other conic section; and the complex law, that

the planetary motions take place in ellipses, would be deprived of itsuniversality, though the discovery would not at all detract from the

universality of the simpler laws into which that complex law is resolved. The

law, in short, of each of the concurrent causes remains the same, however

their collocations may vary; but the law of their joint effect varies with every

difference in the collocations. There needs no more to show how much more

general the elementary laws must be than any of the complex laws which are

derived from them.

              § 5. Besides the two modes which have been treated of, there is a

third mode in which laws are resolved into one another; and in this it is self-

evident that they are resolved into laws more general than themselves. This

third mode is the subsumption (as it has been called) of one law under

another; or (what comes to the same thing) the gathering up of several laws

into one more general law which includes them all. The most splendid

example of this operation was when terrestrial gravity and the central force of

the solar system were brought together under the general law of gravitation. It

had been proved antecedently that the earth and the other planets tend to the

sun; and it had been known from the earliest times that terrestrial bodies tend

toward the earth. These were similar phenomena; and to enable them both to

be subsumed under one law, it was only necessary to prove that, as the effects

were similar in quality so also they, as to quantity, conform to the same rules.

This was first shown to be true of the moon, which agreed with terrestrial

objects not only in tending to a centre, but in the fact that this centre was the

earth. The tendency of the moon toward the earth being ascertained to vary as

the inverse square of the distance, it was deduced from this, by direct

calculation, that if the moon were as near to the earth as terrestrial objects are,

and the acquired force in the direction of the tangent were suspended, the

moon would fall toward the earth through exactly as many feet in a second as

those objects do by virtue of their weight. Hence the inference was

irresistible, that the moon also tends to the earth by virtue of its weight: and

that the two phenomena, the tendency of the moon to the earth and the

tendency of terrestrial objects to the earth, being not only similar in quality,

but, when in the same circumstances, identical in quantity, are cases of one

and the same law of causation. But the tendency of the moon to the earth, and

the tendency of the earth and planets to the sun, were already known to be

cases of the same law of causation; and thus the law of all these tendencies,

and the law of terrestrial gravity, were recognized as identical, and were

subsumed under one general law, that of gravitation.              In a similar manner, the laws of magnetic phenomena have more

recently been subsumed under known laws of electricity. It is thus that the

most general laws of nature are usually arrived at: we mount to them by

successive steps. For, to arrive by correct induction at laws which hold under

such an immense variety of circumstances, laws so general as to be

independent of any varieties of space or time which we are able to observe,

requires for the most part many distinct sets of experiments or observations,

conducted at different times and by different people. One part of the law is

first ascertained, afterward another part: one set of observations teaches us

that the law holds good under some conditions, another that it holds good

under other conditions, by combining which observations we find that it

holds good under conditions much more general, or even universally. The

general law, in this case, is literally the sum of all the partial ones; it is a

recognition of the same sequence in different sets of instances; and may, in

fact, be regarded as merely one step in the process of elimination. The

tendency of bodies toward one another, which we now call gravity, had at

first been observed only on the earth’s surface, where it manifested itself only

as a tendency of all bodies toward the earth, and might, therefore, be ascribed

to a peculiar property of the earth itself: one of the circumstances, namely,

the proximity of the earth, had not been eliminated. To eliminate this

circumstance required a fresh set of instances in other parts of the universe:

these we could not ourselves create; and though nature had created them for

us, we were placed in very unfavorable circumstances for observing them. To

make these observations, fell naturally to the lot of a different set of persons

from those who studied terrestrial phenomena; and had, indeed, been a matter

of great interest at a time when the idea of explaining celestial facts by

terrestrial laws was looked upon as the confounding of an indefeasible

distinction. When, however, the celestial motions were accurately

ascertained, and the deductive processes performed, from which it appeared

that their laws and those of terrestrial gravity corresponded, those celestial

observations became a set of instances which exactly eliminated the

circumstance of proximity to the earth; and proved that in the original case,

that of terrestrial objects, it was not the earth, as such, that caused the motion

or the pressure, but the circumstance common to that case with the celestial

instances, namely, the presence of some great body within certain limits of

distance.

              § 6. There are, then, three modes of explaining laws of causation, or,which is the same thing, resolving them into other laws. First, when the law

of an effect of combined causes is resolved into the separate laws of the

causes, together with the fact of their combination. Secondly, when the law

which connects any two links, not proximate, in a chain of causation, is

resolved into the laws which connect each with the intermediate links. Both

of these are cases of resolving one law into two or more; in the third, two or

more are resolved into one: when, after the law has been shown to hold good

in several different classes of cases, we decide that what is true in each of

these classes of cases, is true under some more general supposition,

consisting of what all those classes of cases have in common. We may here

remark that this last operation involves none of the uncertainties attendant on

induction by the Method of Agreement, since we need not suppose the result

to be extended by way of inference to any new class of cases different from

those by the comparison of which it was engendered.

              In all these three processes, laws are, as we have seen, resolved into

laws more general than themselves; laws extending to all the cases which the

former extended to, and others besides. In the first two modes they are also

resolved into laws more certain, in other words, more universally true than

themselves; they are, in fact, proved not to be themselves laws of nature, the

character of which is to be universally true, but results of laws of nature,

which may be only true conditionally, and for the most part. No difference of

this sort exists in the third case; since here the partial laws are, in fact, the

very same law as the general one, and any exception to them would be an

exception to it too.

              By all the three processes, the range of deductive science is

extended; since the laws, thus resolved, may be thenceforth deduced

demonstratively from the laws into which they are resolved. As already

remarked, the same deductive process which proves a law or fact of causation

if unknown, serves to explain it when known.

              The word explanation is here used in its philosophical sense. What is

called explaining one law of nature by another, is but substituting one

mystery for another; and does nothing to render the general course of nature

other than mysterious: we can no more assign a why for the more extensive

laws than for the partial ones. The explanation may substitute a mystery

which has become familiar, and has grown to seem not mysterious, for one

which is still strange. And this is the meaning of explanation, in commonparlance. But the process with which we are here concerned often does the

very contrary: it resolves a phenomenon with which we are familiar into one

of which we previously knew little or nothing; as when the common fact of

the fall of heavy bodies was resolved into the tendency of all particles of

matter toward one another. It must be kept constantly in view, therefore, that

in science, those who speak of explaining any phenomenon mean (or should

mean) pointing out not some more familiar, but merely some more general,

phenomenon, of which it is a partial exemplification; or some laws of

causation which produce it by their joint or successive action, and from

which, therefore, its conditions may be determined deductively. Every such

operation brings us a step nearer toward answering the question which was

stated in a previous chapter as comprehending the whole problem of the

investigation of nature, viz.: what are the fewest assumptions, which being

granted, the order of nature as it exists would be the result? What are the

fewest, general propositions from which all the uniformities existing in nature

could be deduced?

              The laws, thus explained or resolved, are sometimes said to be

accounted for ; but the expression is incorrect, if taken to mean any thing

more than what has been already stated. In minds not habituated to accurate

thinking, there is often a confused notion that the general laws are the causes

of the partial ones; that the law of general gravitation, for example, causes the

phenomenon of the fall of bodies to the earth. But to assert this would be a

misuse of the word cause: terrestrial gravity is not an effect of general

gravitation, but a case of it; that is, one kind of the particular instances in

which that general law obtains. To account for a law of nature means, and can

mean, nothing more than to assign other laws more general, together with

collocations, which laws and collocations being supposed, the partial law

follows without any additional supposition.

 

 

 Chapter XIII. – Miscellaneous Examples Of The Explanation Of Laws

                                      Of Nature.

 

 

              § 1. The most striking example which the history of science presents,

of the explanation of laws of causation and other uniformities of sequence

among special phenomena, by resolving them into laws of greater simplicity

and generality, is the great Newtonian generalization; respecting which

typical instance, so much having already been said, it is sufficient to call

attention to the great number and variety of the special observed uniformities,

which are in this case accounted for, either as particular cases, or as

consequences, of one very simple law of universal nature. The simple fact of

a tendency of every particle of matter toward every other particle, varying

inversely as the square of the distance, explains the fall of bodies to the earth,

the revolutions of the planets and satellites, the motions (so far as known) of

comets, and all the various regularities which have been observed in these

special phenomena; such as the elliptical orbits, and the variations from exact

ellipses; the relation between the solar distances of the planets and the

duration of their revolutions; the precession of the equinoxes; the tides, and a

vast number of minor astronomical truths.

              Mention has also been made in the preceding chapter of the

explanation of the phenomena of magnetism from laws of electricity; the

special laws of magnetic agency having been affiliated by deduction to

observed laws of electric action, in which they have ever since been

considered to be included as special cases. An example not so complete in

itself, but even more fertile in consequences, having been the starting-point of

the really scientific study of physiology, is the affiliation, commenced by

Bichat, and carried on by subsequent biologists, of the properties of the

bodily organs, to the elementary properties of the tissues into which they are

anatomically decomposed.

              Another striking instance is afforded by Dalton’s generalization,

commonly known as the atomic theory. It had been known from the very

commencement of accurate chemical observation, that any two bodies

combine chemically with one another in only a certain number ofproportions; but those proportions were in each case expressed by a

percentage — so many parts (by weight) of each ingredient, in 100 of the

compound (say 35 and a fraction of one element, 64 and a fraction of the

other); in which mode of statement no relation was perceived between the

proportion in which a given element combines with one substance, and that in

which it combines with others. The great step made by Dalton consisted in

perceiving that a unit of weight might be established for each substance, such

that by supposing the substance to enter into all its combinations in the ratio

either of that unit, or of some low multiple of that unit, all the different

proportions, previously expressed by percentages, were found to result. Thus

1 being assumed as the unit of hydrogen, if 8 were then taken as that of

oxygen, the combination of one unit of hydrogen with one unit of oxygen

would produce the exact proportion of weight between the two substances

which is known to exist in water; the combination of one unit of hydrogen

with two units of oxygen would produce the proportion which exists in the

other compound of the same two elements, called peroxide of hydrogen; and

the combinations of hydrogen and of oxygen with all other substances, would

correspond with the supposition that those elements enter into combination

by single units, or twos, or threes, of the numbers assigned to them, 1 and 8,

and the other substances by ones or twos or threes of other determinate

numbers proper to each. The result is that a table of the equivalent numbers,

or, as they are called, atomic weights, of all the elementary substances,

comprises in itself, and scientifically explains, all the proportions in which

any substance, elementary or compound, is found capable of entering into

chemical combination with any other substance whatever.

              § 2. Some interesting cases of the explanation of old uniformities by

newly ascertained laws are afforded by the researches of Professor Graham.

That eminent chemist was the first who drew attention to the distinction

which may be made of all substances into two classes, termed by him

crystalloids and colloids; or rather, of all states of matter into the crystalloid

and the colloidal states, for many substances are capable of existing in either.

When in the colloidal state, their sensible properties are very different from

those of the same substance when crystallized, or when in a state easily

susceptible of crystallization. Colloid substances pass with extreme difficulty

and slowness into the crystalline state, and are extremely inert in all the

ordinary chemical relations. Substances in the colloid state are almost always,

when combined with water, more or less viscous or gelatinous. The mostprominent examples of the state are certain animal and vegetable substances,

particularly gelatine, albumen, starch, the gums, caramel, tannin, and some

others. Among substances not of organic origin, the most notable instances

are hydrated silicic acid, and hydrated alumina, with other metallic peroxides

of the aluminous class.

              Now it is found, that while colloidal substances are easily penetrated

by water, and by the solutions of crystalloid substances, they are very little

penetrable by one another: which enabled Professor Graham to introduce a

highly effective process (termed dialysis) for separating the crystalloid

substances contained in any liquid mixture, by passing them through a thin

septum of colloidal matter, which does not suffer any thing colloidal to pass,

or suffers it only in very minute quantity. This property of colloids enabled

Mr. Graham to account for a number of special results of observation, not

previously explained.

              For instance, “while soluble crystalloids are always highly sapid,

soluble colloids are singularly insipid,” as might be expected; for, as the

sentient extremities of the nerves of the palate “are probably protected by a

colloidal membrane,” impermeable to other colloids, a colloid, when tasted,

probably never reaches those nerves. Again, “it has been observed that

vegetable gum is not digested in the stomach; the coats of that organ dialyse

the soluble food, absorbing crystalloids, and rejecting all colloids.” One of

the mysterious processes accompanying digestion, the secretion of free

muriatic acid by the coats of the stomach, obtains a probable hypothetical

explanation through the same law. Finally, much light is thrown upon the

observed phenomena of osmose (the passage of fluids outward and inward

through animal membranes) by the fact that the membranes are colloidal. In

consequence, the water and saline solutions contained in the animal body

pass easily and rapidly through the membranes, while the substances directly
                                                                                      154
applicable to nutrition, which are mostly colloidal, are detained by them.

              The property which salt possesses of preserving animal substances

from putrefaction is resolved by Liebig into two more general laws, the

strong attraction of salt for water, and the necessity of the presence of water

as a condition of putrefaction. The intermediate phenomenon which is

interpolated between the remote cause and the effect, can here be not merely

inferred but seen; for it is a familiar fact, that flesh upon which salt has been

thrown is speedily found swimming in brine.              The second of the two factors (as they may be termed) into which

the preceding law has been resolved, the necessity of water to putrefaction,

itself affords an additional example of the Resolution of Laws. The law itself

is proved by the Method of Difference, since flesh completely dried and kept

in a dry atmosphere does not putrefy; as we see in the case of dried

provisions and human bodies in very dry climates. A deductive explanation

of this same law results from Liebig’s speculations. The putrefaction of

animal and other azotized bodies is a chemical process, by which they are

gradually dissipated in a gaseous form, chiefly in that of carbonic acid and

ammonia; now to convert the carbon of the animal substance into carbonic

acid requires oxygen, and to convert the azote into ammonia requires

hydrogen, which are the elements of water. The extreme rapidity of the

putrefaction of azotized substances, compared with the gradual decay of non-

azotized bodies (such as wood and the like) by the action of oxygen alone, he

explains from the general law that substances are much more easily

decomposed by the action of two different affinities upon two of their

elements than by the action of only one.

              § 3. Among the many important properties of the nervous system

which have either been first discovered or strikingly illustrated by Dr.

Brown-Séquard, I select the reflex influence of the nervous system on

nutrition and secretion. By reflex nervous action is meant, action which one

part of the nervous system exerts over another part, without any intermediate

action on the brain, and consequently without consciousness; or which, if it

does pass through the brain, at least produces its effects independently of the

will. There are many experiments which prove that irritation of a nerve in one

part of the body may in this manner excite powerful action in another part;

for example, food injected into the stomach through a divided œsophagus,

nevertheless produces secretion of saliva; warm water injected into the

bowels, and various other irritations of the lower intestines, have been found

to excite secretion of the gastric juice, and so forth. The reality of the power

being thus proved, its agency explains a great variety of apparently

anomalous phenomena; of which I select the following from Dr. Brown-

Séquard’s Lectures on the Nervous System :

              The production of tears by irritation of the eye, or of the mucous

membrane of the nose;

              The secretions of the eye and nose increased by exposure of otherparts of the body to cold;

              Inflammation of the eye, especially when of traumatic origin, very

frequently excites a similar affection in the other eye, which may be cured by

section of the intervening nerve;

              Loss of sight sometimes produced by neuralgia, and has been known

to be at once cured by the extirpation (for instance) of a carious tooth;

              Even cataract has been produced in a healthy eye by cataract in the

other eye, or by neuralgia, or by a wound of the frontal nerve;

              The well-known phenomenon of a sudden stoppage of the heart’s

action, and consequent death, produced by irritation of some of the nervous

extremities; e.g. , by drinking very cold water, or by a blow on the abdomen,

or other sudden excitation of the abdominal sympathetic nerve, though this

nerve may be irritated to any extent without stopping the heart’s action, if a

section be made of the communicating nerves;

              The extraordinary effects produced on the internal organs by an

extensive burn on the surface of the body, consisting in violent inflammation

of the tissues of the abdomen, chest, or head, which, when death ensues from

this kind of injury, is one of the most frequent causes of it;

              Paralysis and anæsthesia of one part of the body from neuralgia in

another part; and muscular atrophy from neuralgia, even when there is no

paralysis;

              Tetanus produced by the lesion of a nerve. Dr. Brown-Séquard

thinks it highly probable that hydrophobia is a phenomenon of a similar

nature;

              Morbid changes in the nutrition of the brain and spinal cord,

manifesting themselves by epilepsy, chorea, hysteria, and other diseases,

occasioned by lesion of some of the nervous extremities in remote places, as

by worms, calculi, tumors, carious bones, and in some cases even by very

slight irritations of the skin.

              § 4. From the foregoing and similar instances, we may see the

importance, when a law of nature previously unknown has been brought to

light, or when new light has been thrown upon a known law by experiment,

of examining all cases which present the conditions necessary for bringingthat law into action; a process fertile in demonstrations of special laws

previously unsuspected, and explanations of others already empirically

known.

              For instance, Faraday discovered by experiment, that voltaic

electricity could be evolved from a natural magnet, provided a conducting

body were set in motion at right angles to the direction of the magnet; and

this he found to hold not only of small magnets, but of that great magnet, the

earth. The law being thus established experimentally, that electricity is

evolved, by a magnet, and a conductor moving at right angles to the direction

of its poles, we may now look out for fresh instances in which these

conditions meet. Wherever a conductor moves or revolves at right angles to

the direction of the earth’s magnetic poles, there we may expect an evolution

of electricity. In the northern regions, where the polar direction is nearly

perpendicular to the horizon, all horizontal motions of conductors will

produce electricity; horizontal wheels, for example, made of metal; likewise

all running streams will evolve a current of electricity, which will circulate

round them; and the air thus charged with electricity may be one of the

causes of the Aurora Borealis. In the equatorial regions, on the contrary,

upright wheels placed parallel to the equator will originate a voltaic circuit,

and water-falls will naturally become electric.

              For a second example, it has been proved, chiefly by the researches

of Professor Graham, that gases have a strong tendency to permeate animal

membranes, and diffuse themselves through the spaces which such

membranes inclose, notwithstanding the presence of other gases in those

spaces. Proceeding from this general law, and reviewing a variety of cases in

which gases lie contiguous to membranes, we are enabled to demonstrate or

to explain the following more special laws: 1st. The human or animal body,

when surrounded with any gas not already contained within the body, absorbs

it rapidly; such, for instance, as the gases of putrefying matters: which helps

to explain malaria. 2d. The carbonic acid gas of effervescing drinks, evolved

in the stomach, permeates its membranes, and rapidly spreads through the

system. 3d. Alcohol taken into the stomach passes into vapor, and spreads

through the system with great rapidity (which, combined with the high

combustibility of alcohol, or in other words its ready combination with

oxygen, may perhaps help to explain the bodily warmth immediately

consequent on drinking spirituous liquors). 4th. In any state of the body inwhich peculiar gases are formed within it, these will rapidly exhale through

all parts of the body; and hence the rapidity with which, in certain states of

disease, the surrounding atmosphere becomes tainted. 5th. The putrefaction

of the interior parts of a carcass will proceed as rapidly as that of the exterior,

from the ready passage outward of the gaseous products. 6th. The exchange

of oxygen and carbonic acid in the lungs is not prevented, but rather

promoted, by the intervention of the membrane of the lungs and the coats of

the blood-vessels between the blood and the air. It is necessary, however, that

there should be a substance in the blood with which the oxygen of the air may

immediately combine; otherwise, instead of passing into the blood, it would

permeate the whole organism: and it is necessary that the carbonic acid, as it

is formed in the capillaries, should also find a substance in the blood with

which it can combine; otherwise it would leave the body at all points, instead

of being discharged through the lungs.

              § 5. The following is a deduction which confirms, by explaining, the

empirical generalization, that soda powders weaken the human system. These

powders, consisting of a mixture of tartaric acid with bicarbonate of soda,

from which the carbonic acid is set free, must pass into the stomach as

tartrate of soda. Now, neutral tartrates, citrates, and acetates of the alkalis are

found, in their passage through the system, to be changed into carbonates;

and to convert a tartrate into a carbonate requires an additional quantity of

oxygen, the abstraction of which must lessen the oxygen destined for

assimilation with the blood, on the quantity of which the vigorous action of

the human system partly depends.

              The instances of new theories agreeing with and explaining old

empiricisms, are innumerable. All the just remarks made by experienced

persons on human character and conduct, are so many special laws, which the

general laws of the human mind explain and resolve. The empirical

generalizations on which the operations of the arts have usually been

founded, are continually justified and confirmed on the one hand, or

corrected and improved on the other, by the discovery of the simpler

scientific laws on which the efficacy of those operations depends. The effects

of the rotation of crops, of the various manures, and other processes of

improved agriculture, have been for the first time resolved in our own day

into known laws of chemical and organic action, by Davy, Liebig, and others.

The processes of the medical art are even now mostly empirical: theirefficacy is concluded, in each instance, from a special and most precarious

experimental generalization: but as science advances in discovering the

simple laws of chemistry and physiology, progress is made in ascertaining

the intermediate links in the series of phenomena, and the more general laws

on which they depend; and thus, while the old processes are either exploded,

or their efficacy, in so far as real, explained, better processes, founded on the

knowledge of proximate causes, are continually suggested and brought into
  155
use. Many even of the truths of geometry were generalizations from

experience before they were deduced from first principles. The quadrature of

the cycloid is said to have been first effected by measurement, or rather by

weighing a cycloidal card, and comparing its weight with that of a piece of

similar card of known dimensions.

              § 6. To the foregoing examples from physical science, let us add

another from mental. The following is one of the simple laws of mind: Ideas

of a pleasurable or painful character form associations more easily and

strongly than other ideas, that is, they become associated after fewer

repetitions, and the association is more durable. This is an experimental law,

grounded on the Method of Difference. By deduction from this law, many of

the more special laws which experience shows to exist among particular

mental phenomena may be demonstrated and explained: the ease and

rapidity, for instance, with which thoughts connected with our passions or our

more cherished interests are excited, and the firm hold which the facts

relating to them have on our memory; the vivid recollection we retain of

minute circumstances which accompanied any object or event that deeply

interested us, and of the times and places in which we have been very happy

or very miserable; the horror with which we view the accidental instrument of

any occurrence which shocked us, or the locality where it took place and the

pleasure we derive from any memorial of past enjoyment; all these effects

being proportional to the sensibility of the individual mind, and to the

consequent intensity of the pain or pleasure from which the association

originated. It has been suggested by the able writer of a biographical sketch
                                              156
of Dr. Priestley in a monthly periodical, that the same elementary law of

our mental constitution, suitably followed out, would explain a variety of

mental phenomena previously inexplicable, and in particular some of the

fundamental diversities of human character and genius. Associations being of

two sorts, either between synchronous, or between successive impressions;

and the influence of the law which renders associations stronger in proportionto the pleasurable or painful character of the impressions, being felt with

peculiar force in the synchronous class of associations; it is remarked by the

writer referred to, that in minds of strong organic sensibility synchronous

associations will be likely to predominate, producing a tendency to conceive

things in pictures and in the concrete, richly clothed in attributes and

circumstances, a mental habit which is commonly called Imagination, and is

one of the peculiarities of the painter and the poet; while persons of more

moderate susceptibility to pleasure and pain will have a tendency to associate

facts chiefly in the order of their succession, and such persons, if they possess

mental superiority, will addict themselves to history or science rather than to

creative art. This interesting speculation the author of the present work has

endeavored, on another occasion, to pursue further, and to examine how far it
                                                                                      157
will avail toward explaining the peculiarities of the poetical temperament.

It is at least an example which may serve, instead of many others, to show the

extensive scope which exists for deductive investigation in the important and

hitherto so imperfect Science of Mind.

              § 7. The copiousness with which the discovery and explanation of

special laws of phenomena by deduction from simpler and more general ones

has here been exemplified, was prompted by a desire to characterize clearly,

and place in its due position of importance, the Deductive Method; which, in

the present state of knowledge, is destined henceforth irrevocably to

predominate in the course of scientific investigation. A revolution is

peaceably and progressively effecting itself in philosophy, the reverse of that

to which Bacon has attached his name. That great man changed the method

of the sciences from deductive to experimental, and it is now rapidly

reverting from experimental to deductive. But the deductions which Bacon

abolished were from premises hastily snatched up, or arbitrarily assumed.

The principles were neither established by legitimate canons of experimental

inquiry, nor the results tested by that indispensable element of a rational

Deductive Method, verification by specific experience. Between the primitive

method of Deduction and that which I have attempted to characterize, there is

all the difference which exists between the Aristotelian physics and the

Newtonian theory of the heavens.

              It would, however, be a mistake to expect that those great

generalizations, from which the subordinate truths of the more backward

sciences will probably at some future period be deduced by reasoning (as thetruths of astronomy are deduced from the generalities of the Newtonian

theory), will be found in all, or even in most cases, among truths now known

and admitted. We may rest assured, that many of the most general laws of

nature are as yet entirely unthought of; and that many others, destined

hereafter to assume the same character, are known, if at all, only as laws or

properties of some limited class of phenomena; just as electricity, now

recognized as one of the most universal of natural agencies, was once known

only as a curious property which certain substances acquired by friction, of

first attracting and then repelling light bodies. If the theories of heat,

cohesion, crystallization, and chemical action are destined, as there can be

little doubt that they are, to become deductive, the truths which will then be

regarded as the principia of those sciences would probably, if now
                                      158
announced, appear quite as novel as the law of gravitation appeared to the

contemporaries of Newton; possibly even more so, since Newton’s law, after

all, was but an extension of the law of weight — that is, of a generalization

familiar from of old, and which already comprehended a not inconsiderable

body of natural phenomena. The general laws of a similarly commanding

character, which we still look forward to the discovery of, may not always

find so much of their foundations already laid.

              These general truths will doubtless make their first appearance in the

character of hypotheses; not proved, nor even admitting of proof, in the first

instance, but assumed as premises for the purpose of deducing from them the

known laws of concrete phenomena. But this, though their initial, can not be

their final state. To entitle an hypothesis to be received as one of the truths of

nature, and not as a mere technical help to the human faculties, it must be

capable of being tested by the canons of legitimate induction, and must

actually have been submitted to that test. When this shall have been done, and

done successfully, premises will have been obtained from which all the other

propositions of the science will thenceforth be presented as conclusions, and

the science will, by means of a new and unexpected Induction, be rendered

Deductive.

 

 

 Chapter XIV. – Of The Limits To The Explanation Of Laws Of Nature;

                                And Of Hypotheses.

 

 

              § 1. The preceding considerations have led us to recognize a

distinction between two kinds of laws, or observed uniformities in nature:

ultimate laws, and what may be termed derivative laws. Derivative laws are

such as are deducible from, and may, in any of the modes which we have

pointed out, be resolved into, other and more general ones. Ultimate laws are

those which can not. We are not sure that any of the uniformities with which

we are yet acquainted are ultimate laws; but we know that there must be

ultimate laws; and that every resolution of a derivative law into more general

laws brings us nearer to them.

              Since we are continually discovering that uniformities, not

previously known to be other than ultimate, are derivative, and resolvable

into more general laws; since (in other words) we are continually discovering

the explanation of some sequence which was previously known only as a

fact; it becomes an interesting question whether there are any necessary limits

to this philosophical operation, or whether it may proceed until all the

uniform sequences in nature are resolved into some one universal law. For

this seems, at first sight, to be the ultimatum toward which the progress of

induction by the Deductive Method, resting on a basis of observation and

experiment, is tending. Projects of this kind were universal in the infancy of

philosophy; any speculations which held out a less brilliant prospect being in

these early times deemed not worth pursuing. And the idea receives so much

apparent countenance from the nature of the most remarkable achievements

of modern science, that speculators are even now frequently appearing, who

profess either to have solved the problem, or to suggest modes in which it

may one day be solved. Even where pretensions of this magnitude are not

made, the character of the solutions which are given or sought of particular

classes of phenomena, often involves such conceptions of what constitutes

explanation, as would render the notion of explaining all phenomena

whatever by means of some one cause or law, perfectly admissible.

              § 2. It is, therefore, useful to remark that the ultimate Laws of Naturecan not possibly be less numerous than the distinguishable sensations or other

feelings of our nature; those, I mean, which are distinguishable from one

another in quality, and not merely in quantity or degree. For example: since

there is a phenomenon sui generis , called color, which our consciousness

testifies to be not a particular degree of some other phenomenon, as heat or

odor or motion, but intrinsically unlike all others, it follows that there are

ultimate laws of color; that though the facts of color may admit of

explanation, they never can be explained from laws of heat or odor alone, or

of motion alone, but that, however far the explanation may be carried, there

will always remain in it a law of color. I do not mean that it might not

possibly be shown that some other phenomenon, some chemical or

mechanical action, for example, invariably precedes, and is the cause of,

every phenomenon of color. But though this, if proved, would be an

important extension of our knowledge of nature, it would not explain how or

why a motion, or a chemical action, can produce a sensation of color; and,

however diligent might be our scrutiny of the phenomena, whatever number

of hidden links we might detect in the chain of causation terminating in the

color, the last link would still be a law of color, not a law of motion, nor of

any other phenomenon whatever. Nor does this observation apply only to

color, as compared with any other of the great classes of sensations; it applies

to every particular color, as compared with others. White color can in no

manner be explained exclusively by the laws of the production of red color.

In any attempt to explain it, we can not but introduce, as one element of the

explanation, the proposition that some antecedent or other produces the

sensation of white.

              The ideal limit, therefore, of the explanation of natural phenomena

(toward which as toward other ideal limits we are constantly tending, without

the prospect of ever completely attaining it) would be to show that each

distinguishable variety of our sensations, or other states of consciousness, has

only one sort of cause; that, for example, whenever we perceive a white

color, there is some one condition or set of conditions which is always

present, and the presence of which always produces in us that sensation. As

long as there are several known modes of production of a phenomenon

(several different substances, for instance, which have the property of

whiteness, and between which we can not trace any other resemblance) so

long it is not impossible that one of these modes of production may be

resolved into another, or that all of them may be resolved into some moregeneral mode of production not hitherto recognized. But when the modes of

production are reduced to one, we can not, in point of simplification, go any

further. This one may not, after all, be the ultimate mode; there may be other

links to be discovered between the supposed cause and the effect; but we can

only further resolve the known law, by introducing some other law hitherto

unknown, which will not diminish the number of ultimate laws.

              In what cases, accordingly, has science been most successful in

explaining phenomena, by resolving their complex laws into laws of greater

simplicity and generality? Hitherto chiefly in cases of the propagation of

various phenomena through space; and, first and principally, the most

extensive and important of all facts of that description, mechanical motion.

Now this is exactly what might be expected from the principles here laid

down. Not only is motion one of the most universal of all phenomena, it is

also (as might be expected from that circumstance) one of those which,

apparently at least, are produced in the greatest number of ways; but the

phenomenon itself is always, to our sensations, the same in every respect but

degree. Differences of duration or of velocity, are evidently differences in

degree only; and differences of direction in space, which alone has any

semblance of being a distinction in kind, entirely disappear (so far as our

sensations are concerned) by a change in our own position; indeed, the very

same motion appears to us, according to our position, to take place in every

variety of direction, and motions in every different direction to take place in

the same. And again, motion in a straight line and in a curve are no otherwise

distinct than that the one is motion continuing in the same direction, the other

is motion which at each instant changes its direction. There is, therefore,

according to the principles I have stated, no absurdity in supposing that all

motion may be produced in one and the same way, by the same kind of cause.

Accordingly, the greatest achievements in physical science have consisted in

resolving one observed law of the production of motion into the laws of other

known modes of production, or the laws of several such modes into one more

general mode; as when the fall of bodies to the earth, and the motions of the

planets, were brought under the one law of the mutual attraction of all

particles of matter; when the motions said to be produced by magnetism were

shown to be produced by electricity; when the motions of fluids in a lateral

direction, or even contrary to the direction of gravity, were shown to be

produced by gravity; and the like. There is an abundance of distinct causes of

motion still unresolved into one another: gravitation, heat, electricity,chemical action, nervous action, and so forth; but whether the efforts of the

present generation of savants to resolve all these different modes of

production into one are ultimately successful or not, the attempt so to resolve

them is perfectly legitimate. For, though these various causes produce, in

other respects, sensations intrinsically different, and are not, therefore,

capable of being resolved into one another, yet, in so far as they all produce

motion, it is quite possible that the immediate antecedent of the motion may

in all these different cases be the same; nor is it impossible that these various

agencies themselves may, as the new doctrines assert, all of them have for

their own immediate antecedent modes of molecular motion.

              We need not extend our illustration to other cases, as, for instance, to

the propagation of light, sound, heat, electricity, etc., through space, or any of

the other phenomena which have been found susceptible of explanation by

the resolution of their observed laws into more general laws. Enough has

been said to display the difference between the kind of explanation and

resolution of laws which is chimerical, and that of which the accomplishment

is the great aim of science; and to show into what sort of elements the
                                          159
resolution must be effected, if at all.

              § 3. As, however, there is scarcely any one of the principles of a true

method of philosophizing which does not require to be guarded against errors

on both sides, I must enter a caveat against another misapprehension, of a

kind directly contrary to the preceding. M. Comte, among other occasions on

which he has condemned, with some asperity, any attempt to explain

phenomena which are “evidently primordial” (meaning, apparently, no more

than that every peculiar phenomenon must have at least one peculiar and

therefore inexplicable law), has spoken of the attempt to furnish any

explanation of the color belonging to each substance, “la couleur élémentaire

propre à chaque substance,” as essentially illusory. “No one,” says he, “in our

time attempts to explain the particular specific gravity of each substance or of

each structure. Why should it be otherwise as to the specific color, the notion
                                                    160
of which is undoubtedly no less primordial?”

              Now although, as he elsewhere observes, a color must always

remain a different thing from a weight or a sound, varieties of color might

nevertheless follow, or correspond to, given varieties of weight, or sound, or

some other phenomenon as different as these are from color itself. It is one

question what a thing is, and another what it depends on; and though toascertain the conditions of an elementary phenomenon is not to obtain any

new insight into the nature of the phenomenon itself, that is no reason against

attempting to discover the conditions. The interdict against endeavoring to

reduce distinctions of color to any common principle, would have held

equally good against a like attempt on the subject of distinctions of sound;

which nevertheless have been found to be immediately preceded and caused

by distinguishable varieties in the vibrations of elastic bodies; though a

sound, no doubt, is quite as different as a color is from any motion of

particles, vibratory or otherwise. We might add, that, in the case of colors,

there are strong positive indications that they are not ultimate properties of

the different kinds of substances, but depend on conditions capable of being

superinduced upon all substances; since there is no substance which can not,

according to the kind of light thrown upon it, be made to assume almost any

color; and since almost every change in the mode of aggregation of the

particles of the same substance is attended with alterations in its color, and in

its optical properties generally.

              The really weak point in the attempts which have been made to

account for colors by the vibrations of a fluid, is not that the attempt itself is

unphilosophical, but that the existence of the fluid, and the fact of its

vibratory motion, are not proved, but are assumed, on no other ground than

the facility they are supposed to afford of explaining the phenomena. And

this consideration leads to the important question of the proper use of

scientific hypotheses, the connection of which with the subject of the

explanation of the phenomena of nature, and of the necessary limits to that

explanation, need not be pointed out.

              § 4. An hypothesis is any supposition which we make (either without

actual evidence, or on evidence avowedly insufficient) in order to endeavor to

deduce from it conclusions in accordance with facts which are known to be

real; under the idea that if the conclusions to which the hypothesis leads are

known truths, the hypothesis itself either must be, or at least is likely to be,

true. If the hypothesis relates to the cause or mode of production of a

phenomenon, it will serve, if admitted, to explain such facts as are found

capable of being deduced from it. And this explanation is the purpose of

many, if not most hypotheses. Since explaining, in the scientific sense, means

resolving a uniformity which is not a law of causation, into the laws of

causation from which it results, or a complex law of causation into simplerand more general ones from which it is capable of being deductively inferred,

if there do not exist any known laws which fulfill this requirement, we may

feign or imagine some which would fulfill it; and this is making an

hypothesis.

              An hypothesis being a mere supposition, there are no other limits to

hypotheses than those of the human imagination; we may, if we please,

imagine, by way of accounting for an effect, some cause of a kind utterly

unknown, and acting according to a law altogether fictitious. But as

hypotheses of this sort would not have any of the plausibility belonging to

those which ally themselves by analogy with known laws of nature, and

besides would not supply the want which arbitrary hypotheses are generally

invented to satisfy, by enabling the imagination to represent to itself an

obscure phenomenon in a familiar light, there is probably no hypothesis in

the history of science in which both the agent itself and the law of its

operation were fictitious. Either the phenomenon assigned as the cause is

real, but the law according to which it acts merely supposed; or the cause is

fictitious, but is supposed to produce its effects according to laws similar to

those of some known class of phenomena. An instance of the first kind is

afforded by the different suppositions made respecting the law of the

planetary central force, anterior to the discovery of the true law, that the force

varies as the inverse square of the distance; which also suggested itself to

Newton, in the first instance, as an hypothesis, and was verified by proving

that it led deductively to Kepler’s laws. Hypotheses of the second kind are

such as the vortices of Descartes, which were fictitious, but were supposed to

obey the known laws of rotatory motion; or the two rival hypotheses

respecting the nature of light, the one ascribing the phenomena to a fluid

emitted from all luminous bodies, the other (now generally received)

attributing them to vibratory motions among the particles of an ether

pervading all space. Of the existence of either fluid there is no evidence, save

the explanation they are calculated to afford of some of the phenomena; but

they are supposed to produce their effects according to known laws: the

ordinary laws of continued locomotion in the one case, and in the other those

of the propagation of undulatory movements among the particles of an elastic

fluid.

              According to the foregoing remarks, hypotheses are invented to
                                                                                  161
enable the Deductive Method to be earlier applied to phenomena. But inorder to discover the cause of any phenomenon by the Deductive Method, the

process must consist of three parts: induction, ratiocination, and verification.

Induction (the place of which, however, may be supplied by a prior

deduction), to ascertain the laws of the causes; ratiocination, to compute from

those laws how the causes will operate in the particular combination known

to exist in the case in hand; verification, by comparing this calculated effect

with the actual phenomenon. No one of these three parts of the process can be

dispensed with. In the deduction which proves the identity of gravity with the

central force of the solar system, all the three are found. First, it is proved

from the moon’s motions, that the earth attracts her with a force varying as

the inverse square of the distance. This (though partly dependent on prior

deductions) corresponds to the first, or purely inductive, step: the

ascertainment of the law of the cause. Secondly, from this law, and from the

knowledge previously obtained of the moon’s mean distance from the earth,

and of the actual amount of her deflection from the tangent, it is ascertained

with what rapidity the earth’s attraction would cause the moon to fall, if she

were no further off, and no more acted upon by extraneous forces, than

terrestrial bodies are: that is the second step, the ratiocination. Finally, this

calculated velocity being compared with the observed velocity with which all

heavy bodies fall, by mere gravity, toward the surface of the earth (sixteen

feet in the first second, forty-eight in the second, and so forth, in the ratio of

the odd numbers, 1, 3, 5, etc.), the two quantities are found to agree. The

order in which the steps are here presented was not that of their discovery;

but it is their correct logical order, as portions of the proof that the same

attraction of the earth which causes the moon’s motion causes also the fall of

heavy bodies to the earth: a proof which is thus complete in all its parts.

              Now, the Hypothetical Method suppresses the first of the three steps,

the induction to ascertain the law; and contents itself with the other two

operations, ratiocination and verification; the law which is reasoned from

being assumed instead of proved.

              This process may evidently be legitimate on one supposition,

namely, if the nature of the case be such that the final step, the verification,

shall amount to, and fulfill the conditions of, a complete induction. We want

to be assured that the law we have hypothetically assumed is a true one; and

its leading deductively to true results will afford this assurance, provided the

case be such that a false law can not lead to a true result; provided no law,except the very one which we have assumed, can lead deductively to the

same conclusions which that leads to. And this proviso is often realized. For

example, in the very complete specimen of deduction which we just cited, the

original major premise of the ratiocination, the law of the attractive force,

was ascertained in this mode; by this legitimate employment of the

Hypothetical Method. Newton began by an assumption that the force which

at each instant deflects a planet from its rectilineal course, and makes it

describe a curve round the sun, is a force tending directly toward the sun. He

then proved that if this be so, the planet will describe, as we know by

Kepler’s first law that it does describe, equal areas in equal times; and, lastly,

he proved that if the force acted in any other direction whatever, the planet

would not describe equal areas in equal times. It being thus shown that no

other hypothesis would accord with the facts, the assumption was proved; the

hypothesis became an inductive truth. Not only did Newton ascertain by this

hypothetical process the direction of the deflecting force; he proceeded in

exactly the same manner to ascertain the law of variation of the quantity of

that force. He assumed that the force varied inversely as the square of the

distance; showed that from this assumption the remaining two of Kepler’s

laws might be deduced; and, finally, that any other law of variation would

give results inconsistent with those laws, and inconsistent, therefore, with the

real motions of the planets, of which Kepler’s laws were known to be a

correct expression.

              I have said that in this case the verification fulfills the conditions of

an induction; but an induction of what sort? On examination we find that it

conforms to the canon of the Method of Difference. It affords the two

instances, A B C, a b c , and B C, b c . A represents central force; A B C, the

planets plus a central force; B C, the planets apart from a central force. The

planets with a central force give a , areas proportional to the times; the

planets without a central force give b c (a set of motions) without a , or with

something else instead of a . This is the Method of Difference in all its

strictness. It is true, the two instances which the method requires are obtained

in this case, not by experiment, but by a prior deduction. But that is of no

consequence. It is immaterial what is the nature of the evidence from which

we derive the assurance that A B C will produce a b c , and B C only b c ; it

is enough that we have that assurance. In the present case, a process of

reasoning furnished Newton with the very instances which, if the nature of

the case had admitted of it, he would have sought by experiment.              It is thus perfectly possible, and indeed is a very common

occurrence, that what was an hypothesis at the beginning of the inquiry

becomes a proved law of nature before its close. But in order that this should

happen, we must be able, either by deduction or experiment, to obtain both

the instances which the Method of Difference requires. That we are able from

the hypothesis to deduce the known facts, gives only the affirmative instance,

A B C, a b c . It is equally necessary that we should be able to obtain, as

Newton did, the negative instance B C, b c ; by showing that no antecedent,

except the one assumed in the hypothesis, would in conjunction with B C

produce a .

              Now it appears to me that this assurance can not be obtained, when

the cause assumed in the hypothesis is an unknown cause imagined solely to

account for a . When we are only seeking to determine the precise law of a

cause already ascertained, or to distinguish the particular agent which is in

fact the cause, among several agents of the same kind, one or other of which

it is already known to be, we may then obtain the negative instance. An

inquiry which of the bodies of the solar system causes by its attraction some

particular irregularity in the orbit or periodic time of some satellite or comet,

would be a case of the second description. Newton’s was a case of the first. If

it had not been previously known that the planets were hindered from moving

in straight lines by some force tending toward the interior of their orbit,

though the exact direction was doubtful; or if it had not been known that the

force increased in some proportion or other as the distance diminished, and

diminished as it increased, Newton’s argument would not have proved his

conclusion. These facts, however, being already certain, the range of

admissible suppositions was limited to the various possible directions of a

line, and the various possible numerical relations between the variations of

the distance, and the variations of the attractive force. Now among these it

was easily shown that different suppositions could not lead to identical

consequences.

              Accordingly, Newton could not have performed his second great

scientific operation: that of identifying terrestrial gravity with the central

force of the solar system by the same hypothetical method. When the law of

the moon’s attraction had been proved from the data of the moon itself, then,

on finding the same law to accord with the phenomena of terrestrial gravity,

he was warranted in adopting it as the law of those phenomena likewise; butit would not have been allowable for him, without any lunar data, to assume

that the moon was attracted toward the earth with a force as the inverse

square of the distance, merely because that ratio would enable him to account

for terrestrial gravity; for it would have been impossible for him to prove that

the observed law of the fall of heavy bodies to the earth could not result from

any force, save one extending to the moon, and proportional to the inverse

square.

              It appears, then, to be a condition of the most genuinely scientific

hypothesis, that it be not destined always to remain an hypothesis, but be of

such a nature as to be either proved or disproved by comparison with

observed facts. This condition is fulfilled when the effect is already known to

depend on the very cause supposed, and the hypothesis relates only to the

precise mode of dependence; the law of the variation of the effect according

to the variations in the quantity or in the relations of the cause. With these

may be classed the hypotheses which do not make any supposition with

regard to causation, but only with regard to the law of correspondence

between facts which accompany each other in their variations, though there

may be no relation of cause and effect between them. Such were the different

false hypotheses which Kepler made respecting the law of the refraction of

light. It was known that the direction of the line of refraction varied with

every variation in the direction of the line of incidence, but it was not known

how; that is, what changes of the one corresponded to the different changes

of the other. In this case any law different from the true one must have led to

false results. And, lastly, we must add to these all hypothetical modes of

merely representing or describing phenomena; such as the hypothesis of the

ancient astronomers that the heavenly bodies moved in circles; the various

hypotheses of eccentrics, deferents, and epicycles, which were added to that

original hypothesis; the nineteen false hypotheses which Kepler made and

abandoned respecting the form of the planetary orbits; and even the doctrine

in which he finally rested, that those orbits are ellipses, which was but an

hypothesis like the rest until verified by facts.

              In all these cases, verification is proof; if the supposition accords

with the phenomena there needs no other evidence of it. But in order that this

may be the case, I conceive it to be necessary, when the hypothesis relates to

causation, that the supposed cause should not only be a real phenomenon,

something actually existing in nature, but should be already known toexercise, or at least to be capable of exercising, an influence of some sort

over the effect. In any other case, it is no sufficient evidence of the truth of

the hypothesis that we are able to deduce the real phenomena from it.

              Is it, then, never allowable, in a scientific hypothesis, to assume a

cause, but only to ascribe an assumed law to a known cause? I do not assert

this. I only say, that in the latter case alone can the hypothesis be received as

true merely because it explains the phenomena. In the former case it may be

very useful by suggesting a line of investigation which may possibly

terminate in obtaining real proof. But for this purpose, as is justly remarked

by M. Comte, it is indispensable that the cause suggested by the hypothesis

should be in its own nature susceptible of being proved by other evidence.

This seems to be the philosophical import of Newton’s maxim, (so often cited

with approbation by subsequent writers), that the cause assigned for any

phenomenon must not only be such as if admitted would explain the

phenomenon, but must also be a vera causa . What he meant by a vera causa

Newton did not indeed very explicitly define; and Dr. Whewell, who dissents

from the propriety of any such restriction upon the latitude of framing
                                                      162
hypotheses, has had little difficulty in showing that his conception of it was

neither precise nor consistent with itself; accordingly his optical theory was a

signal instance of the violation of his own rule. It is certainly not necessary

that the cause assigned should be a cause already known; otherwise we

should sacrifice our best opportunities of becoming acquainted with new

causes. But what is true in the maxim is, that the cause, though not known

previously, should be capable of being known thereafter; that its existence

should be capable of being detected, and its connection with the effect

ascribed to it should be susceptible of being proved, by independent

evidence. The hypothesis, by suggesting observations and experiments, puts

us on the road to that independent evidence, if it be really attainable; and till

it be attained, the hypothesis ought only to count for a more or less plausible

conjecture.

              § 5. This function, however, of hypotheses, is one which must be

reckoned absolutely indispensable in science. When Newton said,

“Hypotheses non fingo,” he did not mean that he deprived himself of the

facilities of investigation afforded by assuming in the first instance what he

hoped ultimately to be able to prove. Without such assumptions, science

could never have attained its present state; they are necessary steps in theprogress to something more certain; and nearly every thing which is now

theory was once hypothesis. Even in purely experimental science, some

inducement is necessary for trying one experiment rather than another; and

though it is abstractedly possible that all the experiments which have been

tried, might have been produced by the mere desire to ascertain what would

happen in certain circumstances, without any previous conjecture as to the

result; yet, in point of fact, those unobvious, delicate, and often cumbrous and

tedious processes of experiment, which have thrown most light upon the

general constitution of nature, would hardly ever have been undertaken by

the persons or at the time they were, unless it had seemed to depend on them

whether some general doctrine or theory which had been suggested, but not

yet proved, should be admitted or not. If this be true even of merely

experimental inquiry, the conversion of experimental into deductive truths

could still less have been effected without large temporary assistance from

hypotheses. The process of tracing regularity in any complicated, and at first

sight confused, set of appearances, is necessarily tentative; we begin by

making any supposition, even a false one, to see what consequences will

follow from it; and by observing how these differ from the real phenomena,

we learn what corrections to make in our assumption. The simplest

supposition which accords with the more obvious facts is the best to begin

with; because its consequences are the most easily traced. This rude

hypothesis is then rudely corrected, and the operation repeated; and the

comparison of the consequences deducible from the corrected hypothesis,

with the observed facts, suggests still further correction, until the deductive

results are at last made to tally with the phenomena. “Some fact is as yet little

understood, or some law is unknown; we frame on the subject an hypothesis

as accordant as possible with the whole of the data already possessed; and the

science, being thus enabled to move forward freely, always ends by leading

to new consequences capable of observation, which either confirm or refute,

unequivocally, the first supposition.” Neither induction nor deduction would

enable us to understand even the simplest phenomena, “if we did not often

commence by anticipating on the results; by making a provisional

supposition, at first essentially conjectural, as to some of the very notions
                                                        163
which constitute the final object of the inquiry.” Let any one watch the

manner in which he himself unravels a complicated mass of evidence; let him

observe how, for instance, he elicits the true history of any occurrence from

the involved statements of one or of many witnesses; he will find that he doesnot take all the items of evidence into his mind at once, and attempt to weave

them together; he extemporizes, from a few of the particulars, a first rude

theory of the mode in which the facts took place, and then looks at the other

statements one by one, to try whether they can be reconciled with that

provisional theory, or what alterations or additions it requires to make it

square with them. In this way, which has been justly compared to the

Methods of Approximation of mathematicians, we arrive, by means of
                                                  164
hypotheses, at conclusions not hypothetical.

              § 6. It is perfectly consistent with the spirit of the method, to assume

in this provisional manner not only an hypothesis respecting the law of what

we already know to be the cause, but an hypothesis respecting the cause

itself. It is allowable, useful, and often even necessary, to begin by asking

ourselves what cause may have produced the effect, in order that we may

know in what direction to look out for evidence to determine whether it

actually did . The vortices of Descartes would have been a perfectly

legitimate hypothesis, if it had been possible, by any mode of exploration

which we could entertain the hope of ever possessing, to bring the reality of

the vortices, as a fact in nature, conclusively to the test of observation. The

vice of the hypothesis was that it could not lead to any course of investigation

capable of converting it from an hypothesis into a proved fact. It might

chance to be dis proved, either by some want of correspondence with the

phenomena it purported to explain, or (as actually happened) by some

extraneous fact. “The free passage of comets through the spaces in which

these vortices should have been, convinced men that these vortices did not
      165
exist.” But the hypothesis would have been false, though no such direct

evidence of its falsity had been procurable. Direct evidence of its truth there

could not be.

              The prevailing hypothesis of a luminiferous ether, in other respects

not without analogy to that of Descartes, is not in its own nature entirely cut

off from the possibility of direct evidence in its favor. It is well known that

the difference between the calculated and the observed times of the periodical

return of Encke’s comet, has led to a conjecture that a medium capable of

opposing resistance to motion is diffused through space. If this surmise

should be confirmed, in the course of ages, by the gradual accumulation of a

similar variance in the case of the other bodies of the solar system, the

luminiferous ether would have made a considerable advance toward thecharacter of a vera causa , since the existence would have been ascertained of

a great cosmical agent, possessing some of the attributes which the

hypothesis assumes; though there would still remain many difficulties, and

the identification of the ether with the resisting medium would even, I

imagine, give rise to new ones. At present, however, this supposition can not

be looked upon as more than a conjecture; the existence of the ether still rests

on the possibility of deducing from its assumed laws a considerable number

of actual phenomena; and this evidence I can not regard as conclusive,

because we can not have, in the case of such an hypothesis, the assurance that

if the hypothesis be false it must lead to results at variance with the true facts.

              Accordingly, most thinkers of any degree of sobriety allow that an

hypothesis of this kind is not to be received as probably true because it

accounts for all the known phenomena; since this is a condition sometimes

fulfilled tolerably well by two conflicting hypotheses; while there are

probably many others which are equally possible, but which, for want of any

thing analogous in our experience, our minds are unfitted to conceive. But it

seems to be thought that an hypothesis of the sort in question is entitled to a

more favorable reception, if, besides accounting for all the facts previously

known, it has led to the anticipation and prediction of others which

experience afterward verified; as the undulatory theory of light led to the

prediction, subsequently realized by experiment, that two luminous rays

might meet each other in such a manner as to produce darkness. Such

predictions and their fulfillment are, indeed, well calculated to impress the

uninformed, whose faith in science rests solely on similar coincidences

between its prophecies and what comes to pass. But it is strange that any

considerable stress should be laid upon such a coincidence by persons of

scientific attainments. If the laws of the propagation of light accord with

those of the vibrations of an elastic fluid in as many respects as is necessary

to make the hypothesis afford a correct expression of all or most of the

phenomena known at the time, it is nothing strange that they should accord

with each other in one respect more. Though twenty such coincidences

should occur, they would not prove the reality of the undulatory ether; it

would not follow that the phenomena of light were results of the laws of

elastic fluids, but at most that they are governed by laws partially identical

with these; which, we may observe, is already certain, from the fact that the
                                                              166
hypothesis in question could be for a moment tenable. Cases may be cited,

even in our imperfect acquaintance with nature, where agencies that we havegood reason to consider as radically distinct produce their effects, or some of

their effects, according to laws which are identical. The law, for example, of

the inverse square of the distance, is the measure of the intensity not only of

gravitation, but (it is believed) of illumination, and of heat diffused from a

centre. Yet no one looks upon this identity as proving similarity in the

mechanism by which the three kinds of phenomena are produced.

              According to Dr. Whewell, the coincidence of results predicted from

an hypothesis with facts afterward observed, amounts to a conclusive proof

of the truth of the theory. “If I copy a long series of letters, of which the last

half-dozen are concealed, and if I guess these aright, as is found to be the

case when they are afterward uncovered, this must be because I have made

out the import of the inscription. To say that because I have copied all that I

could see, it is nothing strange that I should guess those which I can not see,
                                                                            167
would be absurd, without supposing such a ground for guessing.” If any

one, from examining the greater part of a long inscription, can interpret the

characters so that the inscription gives a rational meaning in a known

language, there is a strong presumption that his interpretation is correct; but I

do not think the presumption much increased by his being able to guess the

few remaining letters without seeing them; for we should naturally expect

(when the nature of the case excludes chance) that even an erroneous

interpretation which accorded with all the visible parts of the inscription

would accord also with the small remainder; as would be the case, for

example, if the inscription had been designedly so contrived as to admit of a

double sense. I assume that the uncovered characters afford an amount of

coincidence too great to be merely casual; otherwise the illustration is not a

fair one. No one supposes the agreement of the phenomena of light with the

theory of undulations to be merely fortuitous. It must arise from the actual

identity of some of the laws of undulations with some of those of light; and if

there be that identity, it is reasonable to suppose that its consequences would

not end with the phenomena which first suggested the identification, nor be

even confined to such phenomena as were known at the time. But it does not

follow, because some of the laws agree with those of undulations, that there

are any actual undulations; no more than it followed because some (though

not so many) of the same laws agreed with those of the projection of

particles, that there was actual emission of particles. Even the undulatory

hypothesis does not account for all the phenomena of light. The natural colors

of objects, the compound nature of the solar ray, the absorption of light, andits chemical and vital action, the hypothesis leaves as mysterious as it found

them; and some of these facts are, at least apparently, more reconcilable with

the emission theory than with that of Young and Fresnel. Who knows but that

some third hypothesis, including all these phenomena, may in time leave the

undulatory theory as far behind as that has left the theory of Newton and his

successors?

              To the statement, that the condition of accounting for all the known

phenomena is often fulfilled equally well by two conflicting hypotheses, Dr.

Whewell makes answer that he knows “of no such case in the history of
                                                                                168
science, where the phenomena are at all numerous and complicated.” Such

an affirmation, by a writer of Dr. Whewell’s minute acquaintance with the

history of science, would carry great authority, if he had not, a few pages
                                  169
before, taken pains to refute it, by maintaining that even the exploded

scientific hypotheses might always, or almost always, have been so modified

as to make them correct representations of the phenomena. The hypothesis of

vortices, he tells us, was, by successive modifications, brought to coincide in

its results with the Newtonian theory and with the facts. The vortices did not,

indeed, explain all the phenomena which the Newtonian theory was

ultimately found to account for, such as the precession of the equinoxes; but

this phenomenon was not, at the time, in the contemplation of either party, as

one of the facts to be accounted for. All the facts which they did contemplate,

we may believe on Dr. Whewell’s authority to have accorded as accurately

with the Cartesian hypothesis, in its finally improved state, as with Newton’s.

              But it is not, I conceive, a valid reason for accepting any given

hypothesis, that we are unable to imagine any other which will account for

the facts. There is no necessity for supposing that the true explanation must

be one which, with only our present experience, we could imagine. Among

the natural agents with which we are acquainted, the vibrations of an elastic

fluid may be the only one whose laws bear a close resemblance to those of

light; but we can not tell that there does not exist an unknown cause, other

than an elastic ether diffused through space, yet producing effects identical in

some respects with those which would result from the undulations of such an

ether. To assume that no such cause can exist, appears to me an extreme case

of assumption without evidence. And at the risk of being charged with want

of modesty, I can not help expressing astonishment that a philosopher of Dr.

Whewell’s abilities and attainments should have written an elaborate treatiseon the philosophy of induction, in which he recognizes absolutely no mode of

induction except that of trying hypothesis after hypothesis until one is found

which fits the phenomena; which one, when found, is to be assumed as true,

with no other reservation than that if, on re-examination, it should appear to

assume more than is needful for explaining the phenomena, the superfluous

part of the assumption should be cut off. And this without the slightest

distinction between the cases in which it may be known beforehand that two

different hypotheses can not lead to the same result, and those in which, for

aught we can ever know, the range of suppositions, all equally consistent
                                          170
with the phenomena, may be infinite.

              Nevertheless, I do not agree with M. Comte in condemning those

who employ themselves in working out into detail the application of these

hypotheses to the explanation of ascertained facts, provided they bear in mind

that the utmost they can prove is, not that the hypothesis is, but that it may be

true. The ether hypothesis has a very strong claim to be so followed out, a

claim greatly strengthened since it has been shown to afford a mechanism

which would explain the mode of production, not of light only, but also of

heat. Indeed, the speculation has a smaller element of hypothesis in its

application to heat, than in the case for which it was originally framed. We

have proof by our senses of the existence of molecular movement among the

particles of all heated bodies; while we have no similar experience in the case

of light. When, therefore, heat is communicated from the sun to the earth

across apparently empty space, the chain of causation has molecular motion

both at the beginning and end. The hypothesis only makes the motion

continuous by extending it to the middle. Now, motion in a body is known to

be capable of being imparted to another body contiguous to it; and the

intervention of a hypothetical elastic fluid occupying the space between the

sun and the earth, supplies the contiguity which is the only condition

wanting, and which can be supplied by no supposition but that of an

intervening medium. The supposition, notwithstanding, is at best a probable

conjecture, not a proved truth. For there is no proof that contiguity is

absolutely required for the communication of motion from one body to

another. Contiguity does not always exist, to our senses at least, in the cases

in which motion produces motion. The forces which go under the name of

attraction, especially the greatest of all, gravitation, are examples of motion

producing motion without apparent contiguity. When a planet moves, its

distant satellites accompany its motion. The sun carries the whole solarsystem along with it in the progress which it is ascertained to be executing

through space. And even if we were to accept as conclusive the geometrical

reasonings (strikingly similar to those by which the Cartesians defended their

vortices) by which it has been attempted to show that the motions of the ether

may account for gravitation itself, even then it would only have been proved

that the supposed mode of production may be, but not that no other mode can

be, the true one.

              § 7. It is necessary, before quitting the subject of hypotheses, to

guard against the appearance of reflecting upon the scientific value of several

branches of physical inquiry, which, though only in their infancy, I hold to be

strictly inductive. There is a great difference between inventing agencies to

account for classes of phenomena, and endeavoring, in conformity with

known laws, to conjecture what former collocations of known agents may

have given birth to individual facts still in existence. The latter is the

legitimate operation of inferring from an observed effect the existence, in

time past, of a cause similar to that by which we know it to be produced in all

cases in which we have actual experience of its origin. This, for example, is

the scope of the inquiries of geology; and they are no more illogical or

visionary than judicial inquiries, which also aim at discovering a past event

by inference from those of its effects which still subsist. As we can ascertain

whether a man was murdered or died a natural death, from the indications

exhibited by the corpse, the presence or absence of signs of struggling on the

ground or on the adjacent objects, the marks of blood, the footsteps of the

supposed murderers, and so on, proceeding throughout on uniformities

ascertained by a perfect induction without any mixture of hypothesis; so if we

find, on and beneath the surface of our planet, masses exactly similar to

deposits from water, or to results of the cooling of matter melted by fire, we

may justly conclude that such has been their origin; and if the effects, though

similar in kind, are on a far larger scale than any which are now produced, we

may rationally, and without hypothesis, conclude either that the causes

existed formerly with greater intensity, or that they have operated during an

enormous length of time. Further than this no geologist of authority has, since

the rise of the present enlightened school of geological speculation, attempted

to go.

              In many geological inquiries it doubtless happens that though the

laws to which the phenomena are ascribed are known laws, and the agentsknown agents, those agents are not known to have been present in the

particular case. In the speculation respecting the igneous origin of trap or

granite, the fact does not admit of direct proof that those substances have

been actually subjected to intense heat. But the same thing might be said of

all judicial inquiries which proceed on circumstantial evidence. We can

conclude that a man was murdered, though it is not proved by the testimony

of eye-witnesses that some person who had the intention of murdering him

was present on the spot. It is enough for most purposes, if no other known

cause could have generated the effects shown to have been produced.

              The celebrated speculation of Laplace concerning the origin of the

earth and planets, participates essentially in the inductive character of modern

geological theory. The speculation is, that the atmosphere of the sun

originally extended to the present limits of the solar system; from which, by

the process of cooling, it has contracted to its present dimensions; and since,

by the general principles of mechanics the rotation of the sun and of its

accompanying atmosphere must increase in rapidity as its volume diminishes,

the increased centrifugal force generated by the more rapid rotation,

overbalancing the action of gravitation, has caused the sun to abandon

successive rings of vaporous matter, which are supposed to have condensed

by cooling, and to have become the planets. There is in this theory no

unknown substance introduced on supposition, nor any unknown property or

law ascribed to a known substance. The known laws of matter authorize us to

suppose that a body which is constantly giving out so large an amount of heat

as the sun is, must be progressively cooling, and that, by the process of

cooling it must contract; if, therefore, we endeavor, from the present state of

that luminary, to infer its state in a time long past, we must necessarily

suppose that its atmosphere extended much farther than at present, and we are

entitled to suppose that it extended as far as we can trace effects such as it

might naturally leave behind it on retiring; and such the planets are. These

suppositions being made, it follows from known laws that successive zones

of the solar atmosphere might be abandoned; that these would continue to

revolve round the sun with the same velocity as when they formed part of its

substance; and that they would cool down, long before the sun itself, to any

given temperature, and consequently to that at which the greater part of the

vaporous matter of which they consisted would become liquid or solid. The

known law of gravitation would then cause them to agglomerate in masses,

which would assume the shape our planets actually exhibit; would acquire,each about its own axis, a rotatory movement; and would in that state

revolve, as the planets actually do, about the sun, in the same direction with

the sun’s rotation, but with less velocity, because in the same periodic time

which the sun’s rotation occupied when his atmosphere extended to that

point. There is thus, in Laplace’s theory, nothing, strictly speaking,

hypothetical; it is an example of legitimate reasoning from a present effect to

a possible past cause, according to the known laws of that cause. The theory,

therefore, is, as I have said, of a similar character to the theories of

geologists; but considerably inferior to them in point of evidence. Even if it

were proved (which it is not) that the conditions necessary for determining

the breaking off of successive rings would certainly occur, there would still

be a much greater chance of error in assuming that the existing laws of nature

are the same which existed at the origin of the solar system, than in merely

presuming (with geologists) that those laws have lasted through a few

revolutions and transformations of a single one among the bodies of which

that system is composed.

 

 

 Chapter XV. – Of Progressive Effects; And Of The Continued Action Of

                                        Causes.

 

 

              § 1. In the last four chapters we have traced the general outlines of

the theory of the generation of derivative laws from ultimate ones. In the

present chapter our attention will be directed to a particular case of the

derivation of laws from other laws, but a case so general, and so important as

not only to repay, but to require, a separate examination. This is the case of a

complex phenomenon resulting from one simple law, by the continual

addition of an effect to itself.

              There are some phenomena, some bodily sensations, for example,

which are essentially instantaneous, and whose existence can only be

prolonged by the prolongation of the existence of the cause by which they are

produced. But most phenomena are in their own nature permanent; having

begun to exist, they would exist forever unless some cause intervened having

a tendency to alter or destroy them. Such, for example, are all the facts of

phenomena which we call bodies. Water, once produced, will not of itself

relapse into a state of hydrogen and oxygen; such a change requires some

agent having the power of decomposing the compound. Such, again, are the

positions in space and the movements of bodies. No object at rest alters its

position without the intervention of some conditions extraneous to itself; and

when once in motion, no object returns to a state of rest, or alters either its

direction or its velocity, unless some new external conditions are

superinduced. It, therefore, perpetually happens that a temporary cause gives

rise to a permanent effect. The contact of iron with moist air for a few hours,

produces a rust which may endure for centuries; or a projectile force which

launches a cannon-ball into space, produces a motion which would continue

forever unless some other force counteracted it.

              Between the two examples which we have here given, there is a

difference worth pointing out. In the former (in which the phenomenon

produced is a substance, and not a motion of a substance), since the rust

remains forever and unaltered unless some new cause supervenes, we may

speak of the contact of air a hundred years ago as even the proximate cause ofthe rust which has existed from that time until now. But when the effect is

motion, which is itself a change, we must use a different language. The

permanency of the effect is now only the permanency of a series of changes.

The second foot, or inch, or mile of motion is not the mere prolonged

duration of the first foot, or inch, or mile, but another fact which succeeds,

and which may in some respects be very unlike the former, since it carries the

body through a different region of space. Now, the original projectile force

which set the body moving is the remote cause of all its motion, however

long continued, but the proximate cause of no motion except that which took

place at the first instant. The motion at any subsequent instant is proximately

caused by the motion which took place at the instant preceding. It is on that,

and not on the original moving cause, that the motion at any given moment

depends. For, suppose that the body passes through some resisting medium,

which partially counteracts the effect of the original impulse, and retards the

motion; this counteraction (it need scarcely here be repeated) is as strict an

example of obedience to the law of the impulse, as if the body had gone on

moving with its original velocity; but the motion which results is different,

being now a compound of the effects of two causes acting in contrary

directions, instead of the single effect of one cause. Now, what cause does the

body obey in its subsequent motion? The original cause of motion, or the

actual motion at the preceding instant? The latter; for when the object issues

from the resisting medium, it continues moving, not with its original, but with

its retarded velocity. The motion having once been diminished, all that which

follows is diminished. The effect changes, because the cause which it really

obeys, the proximate cause, the real cause in fact, has changed. This principle

is recognized by mathematicians when they enumerate among the causes by

which the motion of a body is at any instant determined the force generated

by the previous motion; an expression which would be absurd if taken to

imply that this “force” was an intermediate link between the cause and the

effect, but which really means only the previous motion itself, considered as

a cause of further motion. We must, therefore, if we would speak with perfect

precision, consider each link in the succession of motions as the effect of the

link preceding it. But if, for the convenience of discourse, we speak of the

whole series as one effect, it must be as an effect produced by the original

impelling force; a permanent effect produced by an instantaneous cause, and

possessing the property of self-perpetuation.

              Let us now suppose that the original agent or cause, instead of beinginstantaneous, is permanent. Whatever effect has been produced up to a given

time, would (unless prevented by the intervention of some new cause) subsist

permanently, even if the cause were to perish. Since, however, the cause does

not perish, but continues to exist and to operate, it must go on producing

more and more of the effect; and instead of a uniform effect, we have a

progressive series of effects, arising from the accumulated influence of a

permanent cause. Thus, the contact of iron with the atmosphere causes a

portion of it to rust; and if the cause ceased, the effect already produced

would be permanent, but no further effect would be added. If, however, the

cause, namely, exposure to moist air, continues, more and more of the iron

becomes rusted, until all which is exposed is converted into a red powder,

when one of the conditions of the production of rust, namely, the presence of

unoxidized iron, has ceased, and the effect can not any longer be produced.

Again, the earth causes bodies to fall toward it; that is, the existence of the

earth at a given instant causes an unsupported body to move toward it at the

succeeding instant; and if the earth were annihilated, as much of the effect as

is already produced would continue; the object would go on moving in the

same direction, with its acquired velocity, until intercepted by some body or

deflected by some other force. The earth, however, not being annihilated,

goes on producing in the second instant an effect similar and of equal amount

with the first, which two effects being added together, there results an

accelerated velocity; and this operation being repeated at each successive

instant, the mere permanence of the cause, though without increase, gives rise

to a constant progressive increase of the effect, so long as all the conditions,

negative and positive, of the production of that effect continue to be realized.

              It is obvious that this state of things is merely a case of the

Composition of Causes. A cause which continues in action must on a strict

analysis be considered as a number of causes exactly similar, successively

introduced, and producing by their combination the sum of the effects which

they would severally produce if they acted singly. The progressive rusting of

the iron is in strictness the sum of the effects of many particles of air acting in

succession upon corresponding particles of iron. The continued action of the

earth upon a falling body is equivalent to a series of forces, applied in

successive instants, each tending to produce a certain constant quantity of

motion; and the motion at each instant is the sum of the effects of the new

force applied at the preceding instant, and the motion already acquired. In

each instant a fresh effect, of which gravity is the proximate cause, is addedto the effect of which it was the remote cause; or (to express the same thing in

another manner), the effect produced by the earth’s influence at the instant

last elapsed is added to the sum of the effects of which the remote causes

were the influences exerted by the earth at all the previous instants since the

motion began. The case, therefore, comes under the principle of a

concurrence of causes producing an effect equal to the sum of their separate

effects. But as the causes come into play not all at once, but successively, and

as the effect at each instant is the sum of the effects of those causes only

which have come into action up to that instant, the result assumes the form of

an ascending series; a succession of sums, each greater than that which

preceded it; and we have thus a progressive effect from the continued action

of a cause.

              Since the continuance of the cause influences the effect only by

adding to its quantity, and since the addition takes place according to a fixed

law (equal quantities in equal times), the result is capable of being computed

on mathematical principles. In fact, this case, being that of infinitesimal

increments, is precisely the case which the differential calculus was invented

to meet. The questions, what effect will result from the continual addition of

a given cause to itself, and what amount of the cause, being continually added

to itself, will produce a given amount of the effect, are evidently

mathematical questions, and to be treated, therefore, deductively. If, as we

have seen, cases of the Composition of Causes are seldom adapted for any

other than deductive investigation, this is especially true in the case now

examined, the continual composition of a cause with its own previous effects;

since such a case is peculiarly amenable to the deductive method, while the

undistinguishable manner in which the effects are blended with one another

and with the causes, must make the treatment of such an instance

experimentally still more chimerical than in any other case.

              § 2. We shall next advert to a rather more intricate operation of the

same principle, namely, when the cause does not merely continue in action,

but undergoes, during the same time, a progressive change in those of its

circumstances which contribute to determine the effect. In this case, as in the

former, the total effect goes on accumulating by the continual addition of a

fresh effect to that already produced, but it is no longer by the addition of

equal quantities in equal times; the quantities added are unequal, and even the

quality may now be different. If the change in the state of the permanentcause be progressive, the effect will go through a double series of changes,

arising partly from the accumulated action of the cause, and partly from the

changes in its action. The effect is still a progressive effect, produced,

however, not by the mere continuance of a cause, but by its continuance and

its progressiveness combined.

              A familiar example is afforded by the increase of the temperature as

summer advances, that is, as the sun draws nearer to a vertical position, and

remains a greater number of hours above the horizon. This instance

exemplifies in a very interesting manner the twofold operation on the effect,

arising from the continuance of the cause, and from its progressive change.

When once the sun has come near enough to the zenith, and remains above

the horizon long enough, to give more warmth during one diurnal rotation

than the counteracting cause, the earth’s radiation, can carry off, the mere

continuance of the cause would progressively increase the effect, even if the

sun came no nearer and the days grew no longer; but in addition to this, a

change takes place in the accidents of the cause (its series of diurnal

positions), tending to increase the quantity of the effect. When the summer

solstice has passed, the progressive change in the cause begins to take place

the reverse way, but, for some time, the accumulating effect of the mere

continuance of the cause exceeds the effect of the changes in it, and the

temperature continues to increase.

              Again, the motion of a planet is a progressive effect, produced by

causes at once permanent and progressive. The orbit of a planet is determined

(omitting perturbations) by two causes: first, the action of the central body, a

permanent cause, which alternately increases and diminishes as the planet

draws nearer to or goes farther from its perihelion, and which acts at every

point in a different direction; and, secondly, the tendency of the planet to

continue moving in the direction and with the velocity which it has already

acquired. This force also grows greater as the planet draws nearer to its

perihelion, because as it does so its velocity increases, and less, as it recedes

from its perihelion; and this force as well as the other acts at each point in a

different direction, because at every point the action of the central force, by

deflecting the planet from its previous direction, alters the line in which it

tends to continue moving. The motion at each instant is determined by the

amount and direction of the motion, and the amount and direction of the

sun’s action, at the previous instant; and if we speak of the entire revolutionof the planet as one phenomenon (which, as it is periodical and similar to

itself, we often find it convenient to do), that phenomenon is the progressive

effect of two permanent and progressive causes, the central force and the

acquired motion. Those causes happening to be progressive in the particular

way which is called periodical, the effect necessarily is so too; because the

quantities to be added together returning in a regular order, the same sums

must also regularly return.

              This example is worthy of consideration also in another respect.

Though the causes themselves are permanent, and independent of all

conditions known to us, the changes which take place in the quantities and

relations of the causes are actually caused by the periodical changes in the

effects. The causes, as they exist at any moment, having produced a certain

motion, that motion, becoming itself a cause, reacts upon the causes, and

produces a change in them. By altering the distance and direction of the

central body relatively to the planet, and the direction and quantity of the

force in the direction of the tangent, it alters the elements which determine

the motion at the next succeeding instant. This change renders the next

motion somewhat different; and this difference, by a fresh reaction upon the

causes, renders the next motion again different, and so on. The original state

of the causes might have been such that this series of actions modified by

reactions would not have been periodical. The sun’s action, and the original

impelling force, might have been in such a ratio to one another, that the

reaction of the effect would have been such as to alter the causes more and

more, without ever bringing them back to what they were at any former time.

The planet would then have moved in a parabola, or an hyperbola, curves not

returning into themselves. The quantities of the two forces were, however,

originally such, that the successive reactions of the effect bring back the

causes, after a certain time, to what they were before; and from that time all

the variations continued to recur again and again in the same periodical order,

and must so continue while the causes subsist and are not counteracted.

              § 3. In all cases of progressive effects, whether arising from the

accumulation of unchanging or of changing elements, there is a uniformity of

succession not merely between the cause and the effect, but between the first

stages of the effect and its subsequent stages. That a body in vacuo falls

sixteen feet in the first second, forty-eight in the second, and so on in the ratio

of the odd numbers, is as much a uniform sequence as that when the supportsare removed the body falls. The sequence of spring and summer is as regular

and invariable as that of the approach of the sun and spring; but we do not

consider spring to be the cause of summer; it is evident that both are

successive effects of the heat received from the sun, and that, considered

merely in itself, spring might continue forever without having the slightest

tendency to produce summer. As we have so often remarked, not the

conditional, but the unconditional invariable antecedent is termed the cause.

That which would not be followed by the effect unless something else had

preceded, and which if that something else had preceded, would not have

been required, is not the cause, however invaluable the sequence may in fact

be.

              It is in this way that most of those uniformities of succession are

generated, which are not cases of causation. When a phenomenon goes on

increasing, or periodically increases and diminishes, or goes through any

continued and unceasing process of variation reducible to a uniform rule or

law of succession, we do not on this account presume that any two successive

terms of the series are cause and effect. We presume the contrary; we expect

to find that the whole series originates either from the continued action of

fixed causes or from causes which go through a corresponding process of

continuous change. A tree grows from half an inch high to a hundred feet;

and some trees will generally grow to that height unless prevented by some

counteracting cause. But we do not call the seedling the cause of the full-

grown tree; the invariable antecedent it certainly is, and we know very

imperfectly on what other antecedents the sequence is contingent, but we are

convinced that it is contingent on something; because the homogeneousness

of the antecedent with the consequent, the close resemblance of the seedling

to the tree in all respects except magnitude, and the graduality of the growth,

so exactly resembling the progressively accumulating effect produced by the

long action of some one cause, leave no possibility of doubting that the

seedling and the tree are two terms in a series of that description, the first

term of which is yet to seek. The conclusion is further confirmed by this, that

we are able to prove by strict induction the dependence of the growth of the

tree, and even of the continuance of its existence, upon the continued

repetition of certain processes of nutrition, the rise of the sap, the absorptions

and exhalations by the leaves, etc.; and the same experiments would probably

prove to us that the growth of the tree is the accumulated sum of the effects

of these continued processes, were we not, for want of sufficientlymicroscopic eyes, unable to observe correctly and in detail what those effects

are.

              This supposition by no means requires that the effect should not,

during its progress, undergo many modifications besides those of quantity, or

that it should not sometimes appear to undergo a very marked change of

character. This may be either because the unknown cause consists of several

component elements or agents, whose effects, accumulating according to

different laws, are compounded in different proportions at different periods in

the existence of the organized being; or because, at certain points in its

progress, fresh causes or agencies come in, or are evolved, which intermix

their laws with those of the prime agent.

 

 

                       Chapter XVI. – Of Empirical Laws.

 

 

              § 1. Scientific inquirers give the name of Empirical Laws to those

uniformities which observation or experiment has shown to exist, but on

which they hesitate to rely in cases varying much from those which have

been actually observed, for want of seeing any reason why such a law should

exist. It is implied, therefore, in the notion of an empirical law, that it is not

an ultimate law; that if true at all, its truth is capable of being, and requires to

be, accounted for. It is a derivative law, the derivation of which is not yet

known. To state the explanation, the why , of the empirical law, would be to

state the laws from which it is derived — the ultimate causes on which it is

contingent. And if we knew these, we should also know what are its limits;

under what conditions it would cease to be fulfilled.

              The periodical return of eclipses, as originally ascertained by the

persevering observation of the early Eastern astronomers, was an empirical

law, until the general laws of the celestial motions had accounted for it. The

following are empirical laws still waiting to be resolved into the simpler laws

from which they are derived: the local laws of the flux and reflux of the tides

in different places; the succession of certain kinds of weather to certain

appearances of sky; the apparent exceptions to the almost universal truth that

bodies expand by increase of temperature; the law that breeds, both animal

and vegetable, are improved by crossing; that gases have a strong tendency to

permeate animal membranes; that substances containing a very high

proportion of nitrogen (such as hydrocyanic acid and morphia) are powerful

poisons; that when different metals are fused together the alloy is harder than

the various elements; that the number of atoms of acid required to neutralize

one atom of any base is equal to the number of atoms of oxygen in the base;
                                                                171
that the solubility of substances in one another depends, at least in some

degree, on the similarity of their elements.

              An empirical law, then, is an observed uniformity, presumed to be

resolvable into simpler laws, but not yet resolved into them. The

ascertainment of the empirical laws of phenomena often precedes by a long

interval the explanation of those laws by the Deductive Method; and the

verification of a deduction usually consists in the comparison of its resultswith empirical laws previously ascertained.

              § 2. From a limited number of ultimate laws of causation, there are

necessarily generated a vast number of derivative uniformities, both of

succession and co-existence. Some are laws of succession or of co-existence

between different effects of the same cause; of these we had examples in the

last chapter. Some are laws of succession between effects and their remote

causes, resolvable into the laws which connect each with the intermediate

link. Thirdly, when causes act together and compound their effects, the laws

of those causes generate the fundamental law of the effect, namely, that it

depends on the co-existence of those causes. And, finally, the order of

succession or of co-existence which obtains among effects necessarily

depends on their causes. If they are effects of the same cause, it depends on

the laws of that cause; if on different causes, it depends on the laws of those

causes severally, and on the circumstances which determine their co-

existence. If we inquire further when and how the causes will co-exist, that,

again, depends on their causes; and we may thus trace back the phenomena

higher and higher, until the different series of effects meet in a point, and the

whole is shown to have depended ultimately on some common cause; or

until, instead of converging to one point, they terminate in different points,

and the order of the effects is proved to have arisen from the collocation of

some of the primeval causes, or natural agents. For example, the order of

succession and of co-existence among the heavenly motions, which is

expressed by Kepler’s laws, is derived from the co-existence of two primeval

causes, the sun, and the original impulse or projectile force belonging to each
      172
planet. Kepler’s laws are resolved into the laws of these causes and the fact

of their co-existence.

              Derivative laws, therefore, do not depend solely on the ultimate laws

into which they are resolvable; they mostly depend on those ultimate laws,

and an ultimate fact; namely, the mode of co-existence of some of the

component elements of the universe. The ultimate laws of causation might be

the same as at present, and yet the derivative laws completely different, if the

causes co-existed in different proportions, or with any difference in those of

their relations by which the effects are influenced. If, for example, the sun’s

attraction, and the original projectile force, had existed in some other ratio to

one another than they did (and we know of no reason why this should not

have been the case), the derivative laws of the heavenly motions might havebeen quite different from what they are. The proportions which exist happen

to be such as to produce regular elliptical motions; any other proportions

would have produced different ellipses, or circular, or parabolic, or

hyperbolic motions, but still regular ones; because the effects of each of the

agents accumulate according to a uniform law; and two regular series of

quantities, when their corresponding terms are added, must produce a regular

series of some sort, whatever the quantities themselves are.

              § 3. Now this last-mentioned element in the resolution of a

derivative law, the element which is not a law of causation, but a collocation

of causes, can not itself be reduced to any law. There is, as formerly
          173
remarked, no uniformity, no norma , principle, or rule, perceivable in the

distribution of the primeval natural agents through the universe. The different

substances composing the earth, the powers that pervade the universe, stand

in no constant relation to one another. One substance is more abundant than

others, one power acts through a larger extent of space than others, without

any pervading analogy that we can discover. We not only do not know of any

reason why the sun’s attraction and the force in the direction of the tangent

co-exist in the exact proportion they do, but we can trace no coincidence

between it and the proportions in which any other elementary powers in the

universe are intermingled. The utmost disorder is apparent in the combination

of the causes, which is consistent with the most regular order in their effects;

for when each agent carries on its own operations according to a uniform law,

even the most capricious combination of agencies will generate a regularity

of some sort; as we see in the kaleidoscope, where any casual arrangement of

colored bits of glass produces by the laws of reflection a beautiful regularity

in the effect.

              § 4. In the above considerations lies the justification of the limited

degree of reliance which scientific inquirers are accustomed to place in

empirical laws.

              A derivative law which results wholly from the operation of some

one cause, will be as universally true as the laws of the cause itself; that is, it

will always be true except where some one of those effects of the cause, on

which the derivative law depends, is defeated by a counteracting cause. But

when the derivative law results not from different effects of one cause, but

from effects of several causes, we can not be certain that it will be true under

any variation in the mode of co-existence of those causes, or of the primitivenatural agents on which the causes ultimately depend. The proposition that

coal-beds rest on certain descriptions of strata exclusively, though true on the

earth, so far as our observation has reached, can not be extended to the moon

or the other planets, supposing coal to exist there; because we can not be

assured that the original constitution of any other planet was such as to

produce the different depositions in the same order as in our globe. The

derivative law in this case depends not solely on laws, but on a collocation;

and collocations can not be reduced to any law.

              Now it is the very nature of a derivative law which has not yet been

resolved into its elements, in other words, an empirical law, that we do not

know whether it results from the different effects of one cause, or from

effects of different causes. We can not tell whether it depends wholly on

laws, or partly on laws and partly on a collocation. If it depends on a

collocation, it will be true in all the cases in which that particular collocation

exists. But, since we are entirely ignorant, in case of its depending on a

collocation, what the collocation is, we are not safe in extending the law

beyond the limits of time and place in which we have actual experience of its

truth. Since within those limits the law has always been found true, we have

evidence that the collocations, whatever they are, on which it depends, do

really exist within those limits. But, knowing of no rule or principle to which

the collocations themselves conform, we can not conclude that because a

collocation is proved to exist within certain limits of place or time, it will

exist beyond those limits. Empirical laws, therefore, can only be received as

true within the limits of time and place in which they have been found true by

observation; and not merely the limits of time and place, but of time, place,

and circumstance; for, since it is the very meaning of an empirical law that

we do not know the ultimate laws of causation on which it is dependent, we

can not foresee, without actual trial, in what manner or to what extent the

introduction of any new circumstance may affect it.

              § 5. But how are we to know that a uniformity ascertained by

experience is only an empirical law? Since, by the supposition, we have not

been able to resolve it into any other laws, how do we know that it is not an

ultimate law of causation?

              I answer that no generalization amounts to more than an empirical

law when the only proof on which it rests is that of the Method of

Agreement. For it has been seen that by that method alone we never canarrive at causes. The utmost that the Method of Agreement can do is, to

ascertain the whole of the circumstances common to all cases in which a

phenomenon is produced; and this aggregate includes not only the cause of

the phenomenon, but all phenomena with which it is connected by any

derivative uniformity, whether as being collateral effects of the same cause,

or effects of any other cause which, in all the instances we have been able to

observe, co-existed with it. The method affords no means of determining

which of these uniformities are laws of causation, and which are merely

derivative laws, resulting from those laws of causation and from the

collocation of the causes. None of them, therefore, can be received in any

other character than that of derivative laws, the derivation of which has not

been traced; in other words, empirical laws: in which light all results obtained

by the Method of Agreement (and therefore almost all truths obtained by

simple observation without experiment) must be considered, until either

confirmed by the Method of Difference, or explained deductively; in other

words, accounted for a priori .

              These empirical laws may be of greater or less authority, according

as there is reason to presume that they are resolvable into laws only, or into

laws and collocations together. The sequences which we observe in the

production and subsequent life of an animal or a vegetable, resting on the

Method of Agreement only, are mere empirical laws; but though the

antecedents in those sequences may not be the causes of the consequents,

both the one and the other are doubtless, in the main, successive stages of a

progressive effect originating in a common cause, and therefore independent

of collocations. The uniformities, on the other hand, in the order of

superposition of strata on the earth, are empirical laws of a much weaker

kind, since they not only are not laws of causation, but there is no reason to

believe that they depend on any common cause; all appearances are in favor

of their depending on the particular collocation of natural agents which at

some time or other existed on our globe, and from which no inference can be

drawn as to the collocation which exists or has existed in any other portion of

the universe.

              § 6. Our definition of an empirical law, including not only those

uniformities which are not known to be laws of causation, but also those

which are, provided there be reason to presume that they are not ultimate

laws; this is the proper place to consider by what signs we may judge thateven if an observed uniformity be a law of causation, it is not an ultimate, but

a derivative law.

              The first sign is, if between the antecedent a and the consequent b

there be evidence of some intermediate link; some phenomenon of which we

can surmise the existence, though from the imperfection of our senses or of

our instruments we are unable to ascertain its precise nature and laws. If there

be such a phenomenon (which may be denoted by the letter x ), it follows that

even if a be the cause of b , it is but the remote cause, and that the law, a

causes b , is resolvable into at least two laws, a causes x , and x causes b .

This is a very frequent case, since the operations of nature mostly take place

on so minute a scale, that many of the successive steps are either

imperceptible, or very indistinctly perceived.

              Take, for example, the laws of the chemical composition of

substances; as that hydrogen and oxygen being combined, water is produced.

All we see of the process is, that the two gases being mixed in certain

proportions, and heat or electricity being applied, an explosion takes place,

the gases disappear, and water remains. There is no doubt about the law, or

about its being a law of causation. But between the antecedent (the gases in a

state of mechanical mixture, heated or electrified), and the consequent (the

production of water), there must be an intermediate process which we do not

see. For if we take any portion whatever of the water, and subject it to

analysis, we find that it always contains hydrogen and oxygen; nay, the very

same proportions of them, namely, two-thirds, in volume, of hydrogen, and

one-third oxygen. This is true of a single drop; it is true of the minutest

portion which our instruments are capable of appreciating. Since, then, the

smallest perceptible portion of the water contains both those substances,

portions of hydrogen and oxygen smaller than the smallest perceptible must

have come together in every such minute portion of space; must have come

closer together than when the gases were in a state of mechanical mixture,

since (to mention no other reasons) the water occupies far less space than the

gases. Now, as we can not see this contact or close approach of the minute

particles, we can not observe with what circumstances it is attended, or

according to what laws it produces its effects. The production of water, that

is, of the sensible phenomena which characterize the compound, may be a

very remote effect of those laws. There may be innumerable intervening

links; and we are sure that there must be some. Having full proof thatcorpuscular action of some kind takes place previous to any of the great

transformations in the sensible properties of substances, we can have no

doubt that the laws of chemical action, as at present known, are not ultimate,

but derivative laws; however ignorant we may be, and even though we should

forever remain ignorant, of the nature of the laws of corpuscular action from

which they are derived.

              In like manner, all the processes of vegetative life, whether in the

vegetable properly so called or in the animal body, are corpuscular processes.

Nutrition is the addition of particles to one another, sometimes merely

replacing other particles separated and excreted, sometimes occasioning an

increase of bulk or weight so gradual that only after a long continuance does

it become perceptible. Various organs, by means of peculiar vessels, secrete

from the blood fluids, the component particles of which must have been in

the blood, but which differ from it most widely both in mechanical properties

and in chemical composition. Here, then, are abundance of unknown links to

be filled up; and there can be no doubt that the laws of the phenomena of

vegetative or organic life are derivative laws, dependent on properties of the

corpuscles, and of those elementary tissues which are comparatively simple

combinations of corpuscles.

              The first sign, then, from which a law of causation, though hitherto

unresolved, may be inferred to be a derivative law, is any indication of the

existence of an intermediate link or links between the antecedent and the

consequent. The second is, when the antecedent is an extremely complex

phenomenon, and its effects, therefore, probably in part at least, compounded

of the effects of its different elements; since we know that the case in which

the effect of the whole is not made up of the effects of its parts is exceptional,

the Composition of Causes being by far the more ordinary case.

              We will illustrate this by two examples, in one of which the

antecedent is the sum of many homogeneous, in the other of heterogeneous,

parts. The weight of a body is made up of the weights of its minute particles;

a truth which astronomers express in its most general terms when they say

that bodies, at equal distances, gravitate to one another in proportion to their

quantity of matter. All true propositions, therefore, which can be made

concerning gravity, are derivative laws; the ultimate law into which they are

all resolvable being, that every particle of matter attracts every other. As our

second example, we may take any of the sequences observed in meteorology;for instance, a diminution of the pressure of the atmosphere (indicated by a

fall of the barometer) is followed by rain. The antecedent is here a complex

phenomenon, made up of heterogeneous elements; the column of the

atmosphere over any particular place consisting of two parts, a column of air,

and a column of aqueous vapor mixed with it; and the change in the two

together manifested by a fall of the barometer, and followed by rain, must be

either a change in one of these, or in the other, or in both. We might, then,

even in the absence of any other evidence, form a reasonable presumption,

from the invariable presence of both these elements in the antecedent, that the

sequence is probably not an ultimate law, but a result of the laws of the two

different agents; a presumption only to be destroyed when we had made

ourselves so well acquainted with the laws of both, as to be able to affirm that

those laws could not by themselves produce the observed result.

              There are but few known cases of succession from very complex

antecedents which have not either been actually accounted for from simpler

laws, or inferred with great probability (from the ascertained existence of

intermediate links of causation not yet understood) to be capable of being so

accounted for. It is, therefore, highly probable that all sequences from

complex antecedents are thus resolvable, and that ultimate laws are in all

cases comparatively simple. If there were not the other reasons already

mentioned for believing that the laws of organized nature are resolvable into

simpler laws, it would be almost a sufficient reason that the antecedents in

most of the sequences are so very complex.

              § 7. In the preceding discussion we have recognized two kinds of

empirical laws: those known to be laws of causation, but presumed to be

resolvable into simpler laws; and those not known to be laws of causation at

all. Both these kinds of laws agree in the demand which they make for being

explained by deduction, and agree in being the appropriate means of

verifying such deduction, since they represent the experience with which the

result of the deduction must be compared. They agree, further, in this, that

until explained, and connected with the ultimate laws from which they result,

they have not attained the highest degree of certainty of which laws are

susceptible. It has been shown on a former occasion that laws of causation

which are derivative, and compounded of simpler laws, are not only, as the

nature of the case implies, less general, but even less certain, than the simpler

laws from which they result; not in the same degree to be relied on asuniversally true. The inferiority of evidence, however, which attaches to this

class of laws, is trifling, compared with that which is inherent in uniformities

not known to be laws of causation at all. So long as these are unresolved, we

can not tell on how many collocations, as well as laws, their truth may be

dependent; we can never, therefore, extend them with any confidence to cases

in which we have not assured ourselves, by trial, that the necessary

collocation of causes, whatever it may be, exists. It is to this class of laws

alone that the property, which philosophers usually consider as characteristic

of empirical laws, belongs in all its strictness — the property of being unfit to

be relied on beyond the limits of time, place, and circumstance in which the

observations have been made. These are empirical laws in a more emphatic

sense; and when I employ that term (except where the context manifestly

indicates the reverse) I shall generally mean to designate those uniformities

only, whether of succession or of co-existence, which are not known to be

laws of causation.

 

 

               Chapter XVII. – Of Chance And Its Elimination.

 

 

              § 1. Considering, then, as empirical laws only those observed

uniformities respecting which the question whether they are laws of causation

must remain undecided until they can be explained deductively, or until some

means are found of applying the Method of Difference to the case, it has been

shown in the preceding chapter that until a uniformity can, in one or the other

of these modes, be taken out of the class of empirical laws, and brought either

into that of laws of causation or of the demonstrated results of laws of

causation, it can not with any assurance be pronounced true beyond the local

and other limits within which it has been found so by actual observation. It

remains to consider how we are to assure ourselves of its truth even within

those limits; after what quantity of experience a generalization which rests

solely on the Method of Agreement can be considered sufficiently

established, even as an empirical law. In a former chapter, when treating of
                                                                                  174
the Methods of Direct Induction, we expressly reserved this question, and

the time is now come for endeavoring to solve it.

              We found that the Method of Agreement has the defect of not

proving causation, and can, therefore, only be employed for the ascertainment

of empirical laws. But we also found that besides this deficiency, it labors

under a characteristic imperfection, tending to render uncertain even such

conclusions as it is in itself adapted to prove. This imperfection arises from

Plurality of Causes. Although two or more cases in which the phenomenon a

has been met with may have no common antecedent except A, this does not

prove that there is any connection between a and A, since a may have many

causes, and may have been produced, in these different instances, not by any

thing which the instances had in common, but by some of those elements in

them which were different. We nevertheless observed, that in proportion to

the multiplication of instances pointing to A as the antecedent, the

characteristic uncertainty of the method diminishes, and the existence of a

law of connection between A and a more nearly approaches to certainty. It is

now to be determined after what amount of experience this certainty may be

deemed to be practically attained, and the connection between A and a may

be received as an empirical law.              This question may be otherwise stated in more familiar terms: After

how many and what sort of instances may it be concluded that an observed

coincidence between two phenomena is not the effect of chance?

              It is of the utmost importance for understanding the logic of

induction, that we should form a distinct conception of what is meant by

chance, and how the phenomena which common language ascribes to that

abstraction are really produced.

              § 2. Chance is usually spoken of in direct antithesis to law;

whatever, it is supposed, can not be ascribed to any law is attributed to

chance. It is, however, certain that whatever happens is the result of some

law; is an effect of causes, and could have been predicted from a knowledge

of the existence of those causes, and from their laws. If I turn up a particular

card, that is a consequence of its place in the pack. Its place in the pack was a

consequence of the manner in which the cards were shuffled, or of the order

in which they were played in the last game; which, again, were effects of

prior causes. At every stage, if we had possessed an accurate knowledge of

the causes in existence, it would have been abstractedly possible to foretell

the effect.

              An event occurring by chance may be better described as a

coincidence from which we have no ground to infer a uniformity — the

occurrence of a phenomenon in certain circumstances, without our having

reason on that account to infer that it will happen again in those

circumstances. This, however, when looked closely into, implies that the

enumeration of the circumstances is not complete. Whatever the fact be, since

it has occurred once, we may be sure that if all the same circumstances were

repeated it would occur again; and not only if all, but there is some particular

portion of those circumstances on which the phenomenon is invariably

consequent. With most of them, however, it is not connected in any

permanent manner; its conjunction with those is said to be the effect of

chance, to be merely casual. Facts casually conjoined are separately the

effects of causes, and therefore of laws; but of different causes, and causes

not connected by any law.

              It is incorrect, then, to say that any phenomenon is produced by

chance; but we may say that two or more phenomena are conjoined by

chance, that they co-exist or succeed one another only by chance; meaningthat they are in no way related through causation; that they are neither cause

and effect, nor effects of the same cause, nor effects of causes between which

there subsists any law of co-existence, nor even effects of the same

collocation of primeval causes.

              If the same casual coincidence never occurred a second time, we

should have an easy test for distinguishing such from the coincidences which

are the results of a law. As long as the phenomena had been found together

only once, so long, unless we knew some more general laws from which the

coincidence might have resulted, we could not distinguish it from a casual

one; but if it occurred twice, we should know that the phenomena so

conjoined must be in some way connected through their causes.

              There is, however, no such test. A coincidence may occur again and

again, and yet be only casual. Nay, it would be inconsistent with what we

know of the order of nature to doubt that every casual coincidence will

sooner or later be repeated, as long as the phenomena between which it

occurred do not cease to exist, or to be reproduced. The recurrence, therefore,

of the same coincidence more than once, or even its frequent recurrence, does

not prove that it is an instance of any law; does not prove that it is not casual,

or, in common language, the effect of chance.

              And yet, when a coincidence can not be deduced from known laws,

nor proved by experiment to be itself a case of causation, the frequency of its

occurrence is the only evidence from which we can infer that it is the result of

a law. Not, however, its absolute frequency. The question is not whether the

coincidence occurs often or seldom, in the ordinary sense of those terms; but

whether it occurs more often than chance will account for; more often than

might rationally be expected if the coincidence were casual. We have to

decide, therefore, what degree of frequency in a coincidence chance will

account for; and to this there can be no general answer. We can only state the

principle by which the answer must be determined; the answer itself will be

different in every different case.

              Suppose that one of the phenomena, A, exists always, and the other

phenomenon, B, only occasionally; it follows that every instance of B will be

an instance of its coincidence with A, and yet the coincidence will be merely

casual, not the result of any connection between them. The fixed stars have

been constantly in existence since the beginning of human experience, and allphenomena that have come under human observation have, in every single

instance, co-existed with them; yet this coincidence, though equally

invariable with that which exists between any of those phenomena and its

own cause, does not prove that the stars are its cause, nor that they are in

anywise connected with it. As strong a case of coincidence, therefore, as can

possibly exist, and a much stronger one in point of mere frequency than most

of those which prove laws, does not here prove a law; why? because, since

the stars exist always, they must co-exist with every other phenomenon,

whether connected with them by causation or not. The uniformity, great

though it be, is no greater than would occur on the supposition that no such

connection exists.

              On the other hand, suppose that we were inquiring whether there be

any connection between rain and any particular wind. Rain, we know,

occasionally occurs with every wind; therefore, the connection, if it exists,

can not be an actual law; but still rain may be connected with some particular

wind through causation; that is, though they can not be always effects of the

same cause (for if so they would regularly co-exist), there may be some

causes common to the two, so that in so far as either is produced by those

common causes, they will, from the laws of the causes, be found to co-exist.

How, then, shall we ascertain this? The obvious answer is, by observing

whether rain occurs with one wind more frequently than with any other. That,

however, is not enough; for perhaps that one wind blows more frequently

than any other; so that its blowing more frequently in rainy weather is no

more than would happen, although it had no connection with the causes of

rain, provided it were not connected with causes adverse to rain. In England,

westerly winds blow during about twice as great a portion of the year as

easterly. If, therefore, it rains only twice as often with a westerly as with an

easterly wind, we have no reason to infer that any law of nature is concerned

in the coincidence. If it rains more than twice as often, we may be sure that

some law is concerned; either there is some cause in nature which, in this

climate, tends to produce both rain and a westerly wind, or a westerly wind

has itself some tendency to produce rain. But if it rains less than twice as

often, we may draw a directly opposite inference: the one, instead of being a

cause, or connected with causes of the other, must be connected with causes

adverse to it, or with the absence of some cause which produces it; and

though it may still rain much oftener with a westerly wind than with an

easterly, so far would this be from proving any connection between thephenomena, that the connection proved would be between rain and an

easterly wind, to which, in mere frequency of coincidence, it is less allied.

              Here, then, are two examples: in one, the greatest possible frequency

of coincidence, with no instance whatever to the contrary, does not prove that

there is any law; in the other, a much less frequency of coincidence, even

when non-coincidence is still more frequent, does prove that there is a law. In

both cases the principle is the same. In both we consider the positive

frequency of the phenomena themselves, and how great frequency of

coincidence that must of itself bring about, without supposing any connection

between them, provided there be no repugnance; provided neither be

connected with any cause tending to frustrate the other. If we find a greater

frequency of coincidence than this, we conclude that there is some

connection; if a less frequency, that there is some repugnance. In the former

case, we conclude that one of the phenomena can under some circumstances

cause the other, or that there exists something capable of causing them both;

in the latter, that one of them, or some cause which produces one of them, is

capable of counteracting the production of the other. We have thus to deduct

from the observed frequency of coincidence as much as may be the effect of

chance, that is, of the mere frequency of the phenomena themselves; and if

any thing remains, what does remain is the residual fact which proves the

existence of a law.

              The frequency of the phenomena can only be ascertained within

definite limits of space and time; depending as it does on the quantity and

distribution of the primeval natural agents, of which we can know nothing

beyond the boundaries of human observation, since no law, no regularity, can

be traced in it, enabling us to infer the unknown from the known. But for the

present purpose this is no disadvantage, the question being confined within

the same limits as the data. The coincidences occurred in certain places and

times, and within those we can estimate the frequency with which such

coincidences would be produced by chance. If, then, we find from

observation that A exists in one case out of every two, and B in one case out

of every three; then, if there be neither connection nor repugnance between

them, or between any of their causes, the instances in which A and B will

both exist, that is to say will co-exist, will be one case in every six. For A

exists in three cases out of six; and B, existing in one case out of every three

without regard to the presence or absence of A, will exist in one case out ofthose three. There will therefore be, of the whole number of cases, two in

which A exists without B; one case of B without A; two in which neither B

nor A exists, and one case out of six in which they both exist. If, then, in

point of fact, they are found to co-exist oftener than in one case out of six;

and, consequently, A does not exist without B so often as twice in three

times, nor B without A so often as once in every twice, there is some cause in

existence which tends to produce a conjunction between A and B.

              Generalizing the result, we may say that if A occurs in a larger

proportion of the cases where B is than of the cases where B is not, then will

B also occur in a larger proportion of the cases where A is than of the cases

where A is not; and there is some connection, through causation, between A

and B. If we could ascend to the causes of the two phenomena, we should

find, at some stage, either proximate or remote, some cause or causes

common to both; and if we could ascertain what these are, we could frame a

generalization which would be true without restriction of place or time; but

until we can do so, the fact of a connection between the two phenomena

remains an empirical law.

              § 3. Having considered in what manner it may be determined

whether any given conjunction of phenomena is casual, or the result of some

law, to complete the theory of chance it is necessary that we should now

consider those effects which are partly the result of chance and partly of law,

or, in other words, in which the effects of casual conjunctions of causes are

habitually blended in one result with the effects of a constant cause.

              This is a case of Composition of Causes; and the peculiarity of it is,

that instead of two or more causes intermixing their effects in a regular

manner with those of one another, we have now one constant cause,

producing an effect which is successively modified by a series of variable

causes. Thus, as summer advances, the approach of the sun to a vertical

position tends to produce a constant increase of temperature; but with this

effect of a constant cause, there are blended the effects of many variable

causes, winds, clouds, evaporation, electric agencies and the like, so that the

temperature of any given day depends in part on these fleeting causes, and

only in part on the constant cause. If the effect of the constant cause is always

accompanied and disguised by effects of variable causes, it is impossible to

ascertain the law of the constant cause in the ordinary manner by separating it

from all other causes and observing it apart. Hence arises the necessity of anadditional rule of experimental inquiry.

              When the action of a cause A is liable to be interfered with, not

steadily by the same cause or causes, but by different causes at different

times, and when these are so frequent, or so indeterminate, that we can not

possibly exclude all of them from any experiment, though we may vary them;

our resource is, to endeavor to ascertain what is the effect of all the variable

causes taken together. In order to do this, we make as many trials as possible,

preserving A invariable. The results of these different trials will naturally be

different, since the indeterminate modifying causes are different in each; if,

then, we do not find these results to be progressive, but, on the contrary, to

oscillate about a certain point, one experiment giving a result a little greater,

another a little less, one a result tending a little more in one direction, another

a little more in the contrary direction; while the average or middle point does

not vary, but different sets of experiments (taken in as great a variety of

circumstances as possible) yield the same mean, provided only they be

sufficiently numerous; then that mean, or average result, is the part, in each

experiment, which is due to the cause A, and is the effect which would have

been obtained if A could have acted alone; the variable remainder is the

effect of chance, that is, of causes the co-existence of which with the cause A

was merely casual. The test of the sufficiency of the induction in this case is,

when any increase of the number of trials from which the average is struck

does not materially alter the average.

              This kind of elimination, in which we do not eliminate any one

assignable cause, but the multitude of floating unassignable ones, may be

termed the Elimination of Chance. We afford an example of it when we

repeat an experiment, in order, by taking the mean of different results, to get

rid of the effects of the unavoidable errors of each individual experiment.

When there is no permanent cause, such as would produce a tendency to error

peculiarly in one direction, we are warranted by experience in assuming that

the errors on one side will, in a certain number of experiments, about balance

the errors on the contrary side. We therefore repeat the experiment, until any

change which is produced in the average of the whole by further repetition,

falls within limits of error consistent with the degree of accuracy required by
                                175
the purpose we have in view.

              § 4. In the supposition hitherto made, the effect of the constant cause

A has been assumed to form so great and conspicuous a part of the generalresult, that its existence never could be a matter of uncertainty, and the object

of the eliminating process was only to ascertain how much is attributable to

that cause; what is its exact law. Cases, however, occur in which the effect of

a constant cause is so small, compared with that of some of the changeable

causes with which it is liable to be casually conjoined, that of itself it escapes

notice, and the very existence of any effect arising from a constant cause is

first learned by the process which in general serves only for ascertaining the

quantity of that effect. This case of induction may be characterized as

follows: A given effect is known to be chiefly, and not known not to be

wholly, determined by changeable causes. If it be wholly so produced, then if

the aggregate be taken of a sufficient number of instances, the effects of these

different causes will cancel one another. If, therefore, we do not find this to

be the case, but, on the contrary, after such a number of trials has been made

that no further increase alters the average result, we find that average to be,

not zero, but some other quantity, about which, though small in comparison

with the total effect, the effect nevertheless oscillates, and which is the

middle point in its oscillation; we may conclude this to be the effect of some

constant cause; which cause, by some of the methods already treated of, we

may hope to detect. This may be called the discovery of a residual

phenomenon by eliminating the effects of chance .

              It is in this manner, for example, that loaded dice may be discovered.

Of course no dice are so clumsily loaded that they must always throw certain

numbers; otherwise the fraud would be instantly detected. The loading, a

constant cause, mingles with the changeable causes which determine what

cast will be thrown in each individual instance. If the dice were not loaded,

and the throw were left to depend entirely on the changeable causes, these in

a sufficient number of instances would balance one another, and there would

be no preponderant number of throws of any one kind. If, therefore, after

such a number of trials that no further increase of their number has any

material effect upon the average, we find a preponderance in favor of a

particular throw; we may conclude with assurance that there is some constant

cause acting in favor of that throw, or, in other words, that the dice are not

fair; and the exact amount of the unfairness. In a similar manner, what is

called the diurnal variation of the barometer, which is very small compared

with the variations arising from the irregular changes in the state of the

atmosphere, was discovered by comparing the average height of the

barometer at different hours of the day. When this comparison was made, itwas found that there was a small difference, which on the average was

constant, however the absolute quantities might vary, and which difference,

therefore, must be the effect of a constant cause. This cause was afterward

ascertained, deductively, to be the rarefaction of the air, occasioned by the

increase of temperature as the day advances.

              § 5. After these general remarks on the nature of chance, we are

prepared to consider in what manner assurance may be obtained that a

conjunction between two phenomena, which has been observed a certain

number of times, is not casual, but a result of causation, and to be received,

therefore, as one of the uniformities of nature, though (until accounted for a

priori ) only as an empirical law.

              We will suppose the strongest case, namely, that the phenomenon B

has never been observed except in conjunction with A. Even then, the

probability that they are connected is not measured by the total number of

instances in which they have been found together, but by the excess of that

number above the number due to the absolutely frequency of A. If, for

example, A exists always, and therefore co-exists with every thing, no

number of instances of its co-existence with B would prove a connection; as

in our example of the fixed stars. If A be a fact of such common occurrence

that it may be presumed to be present in half of all the cases that occur, and

therefore in half the cases in which B occurs, it is only the proportional

excess above half that is to be reckoned as evidence toward proving a

connection between A and B.

              In addition to the question, What is the number of coincidences

which, on an average of a great multitude of trials, may be expected to arise

from chance alone? there is also another question, namely, Of what extent of

deviation from that average is the occurrence credible, from chance alone, in

some number of instances smaller than that required for striking a fair

average? It is not only to be considered what is the general result of the

chances in the long run, but also what are the extreme limits of variation from

the general result, which may occasionally be expected as the result of some

smaller number of instances.

              The consideration of the latter question, and any consideration of the

former beyond that already given to it, belong to what mathematicians term

the doctrine of chances, or, in a phrase of greater pretension, the Theory ofProbabilities.              Chapter XVIII. – Of The Calculation Of Chances.

 

 
                                                176
              § 1. “Probability,” says Laplace, “has reference partly to our

ignorance, partly to our knowledge. We know that among three or more

events, one, and only one, must happen; but there is nothing leading us to

believe that any one of them will happen rather than the others. In this state

of indecision, it is impossible for us to pronounce with certainty on their

occurrence. It is, however, probable that any one of these events, selected at

pleasure, will not take place; because we perceive several cases, all equally

possible, which exclude its occurrence, and only one which favors it.

              “The theory of chances consists in reducing all events of the same

kind to a certain number of cases equally possible, that is, such that we are

equally undecided as to their existence; and in determining the number of

these cases which are favorable to the event of which the probability is

sought. The ratio of that number to the number of all the possible cases is the

measure of the probability; which is thus a fraction, having for its numerator

the number of cases favorable to the event, and for its denominator the

number of all the cases which are possible.”

              To a calculation of chances, then, according to Laplace, two things

are necessary; we must know that of several events some one will certainly

happen, and no more than one; and we must not know, nor have any reason to

expect, that it will be one of these events rather than another. It has been

contended that these are not the only requisites, and that Laplace has

overlooked, in the general theoretical statement, a necessary part of the

foundation of the doctrine of chances. To be able (it has been said) to

pronounce two events equally probable, it is not enough that we should know

that one or the other must happen, and should have no grounds for

conjecturing which. Experience must have shown that the two events are of

equally frequent occurrence. Why, in tossing up a half-penny, do we reckon it

equally probable that we shall throw cross or pile? Because we know that in

any great number of throws, cross and pile are thrown about equally often;

and that the more throws we make, the more nearly the equality is perfect.

We may know this if we please by actual experiment, or by the daily

experience which life affords of events of the same general character, or,deductively, from the effect of mechanical laws on a symmetrical body acted

upon by forces varying indefinitely in quantity and direction. We may know

it, in short, either by specific experience, or on the evidence of our general

knowledge of nature. But, in one way or the other, we must know it, to justify

us in calling the two events equally probable; and if we knew it not, we

should proceed as much at hap-hazard in staking equal sums on the result, as

in laying odds.

              This view of the subject was taken in the first edition of the present

work; but I have since become convinced that the theory of chances, as

conceived by Laplace and by mathematicians generally, has not the

fundamental fallacy which I had ascribed to it.

              We must remember that the probability of an event is not a quality of

the event itself, but a mere name for the degree of ground which we, or some

one else, have for expecting it. The probability of an event to one person is a

different thing from the probability of the same event to another, or to the

same person after he has acquired additional evidence. The probability to me,

that an individual of whom I know nothing but his name will die within the

year, is totally altered by my being told the next minute that he is in the last

stage of a consumption. Yet this makes no difference in the event itself, nor

in any of the causes on which it depends. Every event is in itself certain, not

probable; if we knew all, we should either know positively that it will

happen, or positively that it will not. But its probability to us means the

degree of expectation of its occurrence, which we are warranted in

entertaining by our present evidence.

              Bearing this in mind, I think it must be admitted, that even when we

have no knowledge whatever to guide our expectations, except the

knowledge that what happens must be some one of a certain number of

possibilities, we may still reasonably judge, that one supposition is more

probable to us than another supposition; and if we have any interest at stake,

we shall best provide for it by acting conformably to that judgment.

              § 2. Suppose that we are required to take a ball from a box, of which

we only know that it contains balls both black and white, and none of any

other color. We know that the ball we select will be either a black or a white

ball; but we have no ground for expecting black rather than white, or white

rather than black. In that case, if we are obliged to make a choice, and tostake something on one or the other supposition, it will, as a question of

prudence, be perfectly indifferent which; and we shall act precisely as we

should have acted if we had known beforehand that the box contained an

equal number of black and white balls. But though our conduct would be the

same, it would not be founded on any surmise that the balls were in fact thus

equally divided; for we might, on the contrary, know by authentic

information that the box contained ninety-nine balls of one color, and only

one of the other; still, if we are not told which color has only one, and which

has ninety-nine, the drawing of a white and of a black ball will be equally

probable to us. We shall have no reason for staking any thing on the one

event rather than on the other; the option between the two will be a matter of

indifference; in other words, it will be an even chance.

              But let it now be supposed that instead of two there are three colors

— white, black, and red; and that we are entirely ignorant of the proportion in

which they are mingled. We should then have no reason for expecting one

more than another, and if obliged to bet, should venture our stake on red,

white, or black with equal indifference. But should we be indifferent whether

we betted for or against some one color, as, for instance, white? Surely not.

From the very fact that black and red are each of them separately equally

probable to us with white, the two together must be twice as probable. We

should in this case expect not white rather than white, and so much rather that

we would lay two to one upon it. It is true, there might, for aught we knew,

be more white balls than black and red together; and if so, our bet would, if

we knew more, be seen to be a disadvantageous one. But so also, for aught

we knew, might there be more red balls than black and white, or more black

balls than white and red, and in such case the effect of additional knowledge

would be to prove to us that our bet was more advantageous than we had

supposed it to be. There is in the existing state of our knowledge a rational

probability of two to one against white; a probability fit to be made a basis of

conduct. No reasonable person would lay an even wager in favor of white

against black and red; though against black alone or red alone he might do so

without imprudence.

              The common theory, therefore, of the calculation of chances,

appears to be tenable. Even when we know nothing except the number of the

possible and mutually excluding contingencies, and are entirely ignorant of

their comparative frequency, we may have grounds, and grounds numericallyappreciable, for acting on one supposition rather than on another; and this is

the meaning of Probability.

              § 3. The principle, however, on which the reasoning proceeds, is

sufficiently evident. It is the obvious one that when the cases which exist are

shared among several kinds, it is impossible that each of those kinds should

be a majority of the whole: on the contrary, there must be a majority against

each kind, except one at most; and if any kind has more than its share in

proportion to the total number, the others collectively must have less.

Granting this axiom, and assuming that we have no ground for selecting any

one kind as more likely than the rest to surpass the average proportion, it

follows that we can not rationally presume this of any, which we should do if

we were to bet in favor of it, receiving less odds than in the ratio of the

number of the other kinds. Even, therefore, in this extreme case of the

calculation of probabilities, which does not rest on special experience at all,

the logical ground of the process is our knowledge — such knowledge as we

then have — of the laws governing the frequency of occurrence of the

different cases; but in this case the knowledge is limited to that which, being

universal and axiomatic, does not require reference to specific experience, or

to any considerations arising out of the special nature of the problem under

discussion.

              Except, however, in such cases as games of chance, where the very

purpose in view requires ignorance instead of knowledge, I can conceive no

case in which we ought to be satisfied with such an estimate of chances as

this — an estimate founded on the absolute minimum of knowledge

respecting the subject. It is plain that, in the case of the colored balls, a very

slight ground of surmise that the white balls were really more numerous than

either of the other colors, would suffice to vitiate the whole of the

calculations made in our previous state of indifference. It would place us in

that position of more advanced knowledge, in which the probabilities, to us,

would be different from what they were before; and in estimating these new

probabilities we should have to proceed on a totally different set of data,

furnished no longer by mere counting of possible suppositions, but by

specific knowledge of facts. Such data it should always be our endeavor to

obtain; and in all inquiries, unless on subjects equally beyond the range of

our means of knowledge and our practical uses, they may be obtained, if not
                                          177
good, at least better than none at all.              It is obvious, too, that even when the probabilities are derived from

observation and experiment, a very slight improvement in the data, by better

observations, or by taking into fuller consideration the special circumstances

of the case, is of more use than the most elaborate application of the calculus

to probabilities founded on the data in their previous state of inferiority. The

neglect of this obvious reflection has given rise to misapplications of the

calculus of probabilities which have made it the real opprobrium of

mathematics. It is sufficient to refer to the applications made of it to the

credibility of witnesses, and to the correctness of the verdicts of juries. In

regard to the first, common sense would dictate that it is impossible to strike

a general average of the veracity and other qualifications for true testimony of

mankind, or of any class of them; and even if it were possible, the

employment of it for such a purpose implies a misapprehension of the use of

averages, which serve, indeed, to protect those whose interest is at stake,

against mistaking the general result of large masses of instances, but are of

extremely small value as grounds of expectation in any one individual

instance, unless the case be one of those in which the great majority of

individual instances do not differ much from the average. In the case of a

witness, persons of common sense would draw their conclusions from the

degree of consistency of his statements, his conduct under cross-examination,

and the relation of the case itself to his interests, his partialities, and his

mental capacity, instead of applying so rude a standard (even if it were

capable of being verified) as the ratio between the number of true and the

number of erroneous statements which he may be supposed to make in the

course of his life.

              Again, on the subject of juries or other tribunals, some

mathematicians have set out from the proposition that the judgment of any

one judge or juryman is, at least in some small degree, more likely to be right

than wrong, and have concluded that the chance of a number of persons

concurring in a wrong verdict is diminished the more the number is

increased; so that if the judges are only made sufficiently numerous, the

correctness of the judgment may be reduced almost to certainty. I say nothing

of the disregard shown to the effect produced on the moral position of the

judges by multiplying their numbers, the virtual destruction of their

individual responsibility, and weakening of the application of their minds to

the subject. I remark only the fallacy of reasoning from a wide average to

cases necessarily differing greatly from any average. It may be true that,taking all causes one with another, the opinion of any one of the judges

would be oftener right than wrong; but the argument forgets that in all but the

more simple cases, in all cases in which it is really of much consequence

what the tribunal is, the proposition might probably be reversed; besides

which, the cause of error, whether arising from the intricacy of the case or

from some common prejudice or mental infirmity, if it acted upon one judge,

would be extremely likely to affect all the others in the same manner, or at

least a majority, and thus render a wrong instead of a right decision more

probable the more the number was increased.

              These are but samples of the errors frequently committed by men

who, having made themselves familiar with the difficult formulæ which

algebra affords for the estimation of chances under suppositions of a complex

character, like better to employ those formulæ in computing what are the

probabilities to a person half informed about a case than to look out for

means of being better informed. Before applying the doctrine of chances to

any scientific purpose, the foundation must be laid for an evaluation of the

chances, by possessing ourselves of the utmost attainable amount of positive

knowledge. The knowledge required is that of the comparative frequency

with which the different events in fact occur. For the purposes, therefore, of

the present work, it is allowable to suppose that conclusions respecting the

probability of a fact of a particular kind rest on our knowledge of the

proportion between the cases in which facts of that kind occur, and those in

which they do not occur; this knowledge being either derived from specific

experiment, or deduced from our knowledge of the causes in operation which

tend to produce, compared with those which tend to prevent, the fact in

question.

              Such calculation of chances is grounded on an induction; and to

render the calculation legitimate, the induction must be a valid one. It is not

less an induction, though it does not prove that the event occurs in all cases of

a given description, but only that out of a given number of such cases it

occurs in about so many. The fraction which mathematicians use to designate

the probability of an event is the ratio of these two numbers; the ascertained

proportion between the number of cases in which the event occurs and the

sum of all the cases, those in which it occurs and in which it does not occur,

taken together. In playing at cross and pile, the description of cases

concerned are throws, and the probability of cross is one-half, because if wethrow often enough cross is thrown about once in every two throws. In the

cast of a die, the probability of ace is one-sixth; not simply because there are

six possible throws, of which ace is one, and because we do not know any

reason why one should turn up rather than another — though I have admitted

the validity of this ground in default of a better — but because we do actually

know, either by reasoning or by experience, that in a hundred or a million of

throws ace is thrown in about one-sixth of that number, or once in six times.

              § 4. I say, “either by reasoning or by experience,” meaning specific

experience. But in estimating probabilities, it is not a matter of indifference

from which of these two sources we derive our assurance. The probability of

events, as calculated from their mere frequency in past experience, affords a

less secure basis for practical guidance than their probability as deduced from

an equally accurate knowledge of the frequency of occurrence of their causes.

              The generalization that an event occurs in ten out of every hundred

cases of a given description, is as real an induction as if the generalization

were that it occurs in all cases. But when we arrive at the conclusion by

merely counting instances in actual experience, and comparing the number of

cases in which A has been present with the number in which it has been

absent, the evidence is only that of the Method of Agreement, and the

conclusion amounts only to an empirical law. We can make a step beyond

this when we can ascend to the causes on which the occurrence of A or its

non-occurrence will depend, and form an estimate of the comparative

frequency of the causes favorable and of those unfavorable to the occurrence.

These are data of a higher order, by which the empirical law derived from a

mere numerical comparison of affirmative and negative instances will be

either corrected or confirmed, and in either case we shall obtain a more

correct measure of probability than is given by that numerical comparison. It

has been well remarked that in the kind of examples by which the doctrine of

chances is usually illustrated, that of balls in a box, the estimate of

probabilities is supported by reasons of causation, stronger than specific

experience. “What is the reason that in a box where there are nine black balls

and one white, we expect to draw a black ball nine times as much (in other

words, nine times as often, frequency being the gauge of intensity in

expectation) as a white? Obviously because the local conditions are nine

times as favorable; because the hand may alight in nine places and get a black

ball, while it can only alight in one place and find a white ball; just for thesame reason that we do not expect to succeed in finding a friend in a crowd,

the conditions in order that we and he should come together being many and

difficult. This of course would not hold to the same extent were the white

balls of smaller size than the black, neither would the probability remain the
                                                                              178
same; the larger ball would be much more likely to meet the hand.”

              It is, in fact, evident that when once causation is admitted as a

universal law, our expectation of events can only be rationally grounded on

that law. To a person who recognizes that every event depends on causes, a

thing’s having happened once is a reason for expecting it to happen again,

only because proving that there exists, or is liable to exist, a cause adequate
              179
to produce it. The frequency of the particular event, apart from all surmise

respecting its cause, can give rise to no other induction than that per

enumerationem simplicem ; and the precarious inferences derived from this

are superseded, and disappear from the field as soon as the principle of

causation makes its appearance there.

              Notwithstanding, however, the abstract superiority of an estimate of

probability grounded on causes, it is a fact that in almost all cases in which

chances admit of estimation sufficiently precise to render their numerical

appreciation of any practical value, the numerical data are not drawn from

knowledge of the causes, but from experience of the events themselves. The

probabilities of life at different ages or in different climates; the probabilities

of recovery from a particular disease; the chances of the birth of male or

female offspring; the chances of the destruction of houses or other property

by fire; the chances of the loss of a ship in a particular voyage, are deduced

from bills of mortality, returns from hospitals, registers of births, of

shipwrecks, etc., that is, from the observed frequency not of the causes, but of

the effects. The reason is, that in all these classes of facts the causes are either

not amenable to direct observation at all, or not with the requisite precision,

and we have no means of judging of their frequency except from the

empirical law afforded by the frequency of the effects. The inference does not

the less depend on causation alone. We reason from an effect to a similar

effect by passing through the cause. If the actuary of an insurance office

infers from his tables that among a hundred persons now living of a particular

age, five on the average will attain the age of seventy, his inference is

legitimate, not for the simple reason that this is the proportion who have lived

till seventy in times past, but because the fact of their having so lived showsthat this is the proportion existing, at that place and time, between the causes

which prolong life to the age of seventy and those tending to bring it to an
              180
earlier close.

              § 5. From the preceding principles it is easy to deduce the

demonstration of that theorem of the doctrine of probabilities which is the

foundation of its application to inquiries for ascertaining the occurrence of a

given event, or the reality of an individual fact. The signs or evidences by

which a fact is usually proved are some of its consequences; and the inquiry

hinges upon determining what cause is most likely to have produced a given

effect. The theorem applicable to such investigations is the Sixth Principle in

Laplace’s “Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités ,” which is described by

him as the “fundamental principle of that branch of the Analysis of Chances
                                                                  181
which consists in ascending from events to their causes.”

              Given an effect to be accounted for, and there being several causes

which might have produced it, but of the presence of which in the particular

case nothing is known; the probability that the effect was produced by any

one of these causes is as the antecedent probability of the cause, multiplied

by the probability that the cause, if it existed, would have produced the given

effect .

              Let M be the effect, and A, B, two causes, by either of which it

might have been produced. To find the probability that it was produced by

the one and not by the other, ascertain which of the two is most likely to have

existed, and which of them, if it did exist, was most likely to produce the

effect M: the probability sought is a compound of these two probabilities.

              CASE I. Let the causes be both alike in the second respect: either A

or B, when it exists, being supposed equally likely (or equally certain) to

produce M; but let A be in itself twice as likely as B to exist, that is, twice as

frequent a phenomenon. Then it is twice as likely to have existed in this case,

and to have been the cause which produced M.

              For, since A exists in nature twice as often as B, in any 300 cases in

which one or other existed, A has existed 200 times and B 100. But either A

or B must have existed wherever M is produced; therefore, in 300 times that

M is produced, A was the producing cause 200 times, B only 100, that is, in

the ratio of 2 to 1. Thus, then, if the causes are alike in their capacity of

producing the effect, the probability as to which actually produced it is in theratio of their antecedent probabilities.

              CASE II. Reversing the last hypothesis, let us suppose that the

causes are equally frequent, equally likely to have existed, but not equally

likely, if they did exist, to produce M; that in three times in which A occurs,

it produces that effect twice, while B, in three times, produces it only once.

Since the two causes are equally frequent in their occurrence; in every six

times that either one or the other exists, A exists three times and B three

times. A, of its three times, produces M in two; B, of its three times, produces

M in one. Thus, in the whole six times, M is only produced thrice; but of that

thrice it is produced twice by A, once only by B. Consequently, when the

antecedent probabilities of the causes are equal, the chances that the effect

was produced by them are in the ratio of the probabilities that if they did exist

they would produce the effect.

              CASE III. The third case, that in which the causes are unlike in both

respects, is solved by what has preceded. For, when a quantity depends on

two other quantities, in such a manner that while either of them remains

constant it is proportional to the other, it must necessarily be proportional to

the product of the two quantities, the product being the only function of the

two which obeys that law of variation. Therefore, the probability that M was

produced by either cause, is as the antecedent probability of the cause,

multiplied by the probability that if it existed it would produce M. Which was

to be demonstrated.

              Or we may prove the third case as we proved the first and second.

Let A be twice as frequent as B, and let them also be unequally likely, when

they exist, to produce M; let A produce it twice in four times, B thrice in four

times. The antecedent probability of A is to that of B as 2 to 1; the

probabilities of their producing M are as 2 to 3; the product of these ratios is

the ratio of 4 to 3; and this will be the ratio of the probabilities that A or B

was the producing cause in the given instance. For, since A is twice as

frequent as B, out of twelve cases in which one or other exists, A exists in 8

and B in 4. But of its eight cases, A, by the supposition, produces M in only

4, while B of its four cases produces M in 3. M, therefore, is only produced at

all in seven of the twelve cases; but in four of these it is produced by A, in

three by B; hence the probabilities of its being produced by A and by B are as

4 to 3, and are expressed by the fractions 4/7 and 3/7. Which was to be

demonstrated.              § 6. It remains to examine the bearing of the doctrine of chances on

the peculiar problem which occupied us in the preceding chapter, namely,

how to distinguish coincidences which are casual from those which are the

result of law; from those in which the facts which accompany or follow one

another are somehow connected through causation.

              The doctrine of chances affords means by which, if we knew the

average number of coincidences to be looked for between two phenomena

connected only casually, we could determine how often any given deviation

from that average will occur by chance. If the probability of any casual

coincidence, considered in itself, be 1/m , the probability that the same

coincidence will be repeated n times in succession is 1/m n. For example, in

one throw of a die the probability of ace being 1/6; the probability of

throwing ace twice in succession will be 1 divided by the square of 6, or 1/36.

For ace is thrown at the first throw once in six, or six in thirty-six times, and

of those six, the die being cast again, ace will be thrown but once; being

altogether once in thirty-six times. The chance of the same cast three times

successively is, by a similar reasoning, 1/63 or 1/216; that is, the event will

happen, on a large average, only once in two hundred and sixteen throws.

              We have thus a rule by which to estimate the probability that any

given series of coincidences arises from chance, provided we can measure

correctly the probability of a single coincidence. If we can obtain an equally

precise expression for the probability that the same series of coincidences

arises from causation, we should only have to compare the numbers. This,

however, can rarely be done. Let us see what degree of approximation can

practically be made to the necessary precision.

              The question falls within Laplace’s sixth principle, just

demonstrated. The given fact, that is to say, the series of coincidences, may

have originated either in a casual conjunction of causes or in a law of nature.

The probabilities, therefore, that the fact originated in these two modes, are as

their antecedent probabilities, multiplied by the probabilities that if they

existed they would produce the effect. But the particular combination of

chances, if it occurred, or the law of nature if real, would certainly produce

the series of coincidences. The probabilities, therefore, that the coincidences

are produced by the two causes in question are as the antecedent probabilities

of the causes. One of these, the antecedent probability of the combination of

mere chances which would produce the given result, is an appreciablequantity. The antecedent probability of the other supposition may be

susceptible of a more or less exact estimation, according to the nature of the

case.

              In some cases, the coincidence, supposing it to be the result of

causation at all, must be the result of a known cause; as the succession of

aces, if not accidental, must arise from the loading of the die. In such cases

we may be able to form a conjecture as to the antecedent probability of such a

circumstance from the characters of the parties concerned, or other such

evidence; but it would be impossible to estimate that probability with any

thing like numerical precision. The counter-probability, however, that of the

accidental origin of the coincidence, dwindling so rapidly as it does at each

new trial, the stage is soon reached at which the chance of unfairness in the

die, however small in itself, must be greater than that of a casual coincidence;

and on this ground, a practical decision can generally be come to without

much hesitation, if there be the power of repeating the experiment.

              When, however, the coincidence is one which can not be accounted

for by any known cause, and the connection between the two phenomena, if

produced by causation, must be the result of some law of nature hitherto

unknown; which is the case we had in view in the last chapter; then, though

the probability of a casual coincidence may be capable of appreciation, that

of the counter-supposition, the existence of an undiscovered law of nature, is

clearly unsusceptible of even an approximate valuation. In order to have the

data which such a case would require, it would be necessary to know what

proportion of all the individual sequences or co-existences occurring in

nature are the result of law, and what proportion are mere casual

coincidences. It being evident that we can not form any plausible conjecture

as to this proportion, much less appreciate it numerically, we can not attempt

any precise estimation of the comparitive probabilities. But of this we are

sure, that the detection of an unknown law of nature — of some previously

unrecognized constancy of conjunction among phenomena — is no

uncommon event. If, therefore, the number of instances in which a

coincidence is observed, over and above that which would arise on the

average from the mere concurrence of chances, be such that so great an

amount of coincidences from accident alone would be an extremely

uncommon event; we have reason to conclude that the coincidence is the

effect of causation, and may be received (subject to correction from furtherexperience) as an empirical law. Further than this, in point of precision, we

can not go; nor, in most cases, is greater precision required, for the solution
                        182
of any practical doubt.

 

 

   Chapter XIX. – Of The Extension Of Derivative Laws To Adjacent

                                          Cases.

 

 

              § 1. We have had frequent occasion to notice the inferior generality

of derivative laws, compared with the ultimate laws from which they are

derived. This inferiority, which affects not only the extent of the propositions

themselves, but their degree of certainty within that extent, is most

conspicuous in the uniformities of co-existence and sequence obtaining

between effects which depend ultimately on different primeval causes. Such

uniformities will only obtain where there exists the same collocation of those

primeval causes. If the collocation varies, though the laws themselves remain

the same, a totally different set of derivative uniformities may, and generally

will, be the result.

              Even where the derivative uniformity is between different effects of

the same cause, it will by no means obtain as universally as the law of the

cause itself. If a and b accompany or succeed one another as effects of the

cause A, it by no means follows that A is the only cause which can produce

them, or that if there be another cause, as B, capable of producing a , it must

produce b likewise. The conjunction, therefore, of a and b perhaps does not

hold universally, but only in the instances in which a arises from A. When it

is produced by a cause other than A, a and b may be dissevered. Day (for

example) is always in our experience followed by night; but day is not the

cause of night; both are successive effects of a common cause, the periodical

passage of the spectator into and out of the earth’s shadow, consequent on the

earth’s rotation, and on the illuminating property of the sun. If, therefore, day

is ever produced by a different cause or set of causes from this, day will not,

or at least may not, be followed by night. On the sun’s own surface, for

instance, this may be the case.

              Finally, even when the derivative uniformity is itself a law of

causation (resulting from the combination of several causes), it is not

altogether independent of collocations. If a cause supervenes, capable of

wholly or partially counteracting the effect of any one of the conjoined

causes, the effect will no longer conform to the derivative law. While,therefore, each ultimate law is only liable to frustration from one set of

counteracting causes, the derivative law is liable to it from several. Now, the

possibility of the occurrence of counteracting causes which do not arise from

any of the conditions involved in the law itself depends on the original

collocations.

              It is true that, as we formerly remarked, laws of causation, whether

ultimate or derivative, are, in most cases, fulfilled even when counteracted;

the cause produces its effect, though that effect is destroyed by something

else. That the effect may be frustrated, is, therefore, no objection to the

universality of laws of causation. But it is fatal to the universality of the

sequences or co-existences of effects, which compose the greater part of the

derivative laws flowing from laws of causation. When, from the law of a

certain combination of causes, there results a certain order in the effects; as

from the combination of a single sun with the rotation of an opaque body

round its axis, there results, on the whole surface of that opaque body, an

alternation of day and night; then, if we suppose one of the combined causes

counteracted, the rotation stopped, the sun extinguished, or a second sun

superadded, the truth of that particular law of causation is in no way affected;

it is still true that one sun shining on an opaque revolving body will

alternately produce day and night; but since the sun no longer does shine on

such a body, the derivative uniformity, the succession of day and night on the

given planet, is no longer true. Those derivative uniformities, therefore,

which are not laws of causation, are (except in the rare case of their

depending on one cause alone, not on a combination of causes) always more

or less contingent on collocations; and are hence subject to the characteristic

infirmity of empirical laws — that of being admissible only where the

collocations are known by experience to be such as are requisite for the truth

of the law; that is, only within the conditions of time and place confirmed by

actual observation.

              § 2. This principle, when stated in general terms, seems clear and

indisputable; yet many of the ordinary judgments of mankind, the propriety

of which is not questioned, have at least the semblance of being inconsistent

with it. On what grounds, it may be asked, do we expect that the sun will rise

to-morrow? To-morrow is beyond the limits of time comprehended in our

observations. They have extended over some thousands of years past, but

they do not include the future. Yet we infer with confidence that the sun willrise to-morrow; and nobody doubts that we are entitled to do so. Let us

consider what is the warrant for this confidence.

              In the example in question, we know the causes on which the

derivative uniformity depends. They are: the sun giving out light, the earth in

a state of rotation and intercepting light. The induction which shows these to

be the real causes, and not merely prior effects of a common cause, being

complete, the only circumstances which could defeat the derivative law are

such as would destroy or counteract one or other of the combined causes.

While the causes exist and are not counteracted, the effect will continue. If

they exist and are not counteracted to-morrow, the sun will rise to-morrow.

              Since the causes, namely, the sun and the earth, the one in the state

of giving out light, the other in a state of rotation, will exist until something

destroys them, all depends on the probabilities of their destruction, or of their

counteraction. We know by observation (omitting the inferential proofs of an

existence for thousands of ages anterior) that these phenomena have

continued for (say) five thousand years. Within that time there has existed no

cause sufficient to diminish them appreciably, nor which has counteracted

their effect in any appreciable degree. The chance, therefore, that the sun may

not rise to-morrow amounts to the chance that some cause, which has not

manifested itself in the smallest degree during five thousand years, will exist

to-morrow in such intensity as to destroy the sun or the earth, the sun’s light

or the earth’s rotation, or to produce an immense disturbance in the effect

resulting from those causes.

              Now, if such a cause will exist to-morrow, or at any future time,

some cause, proximate or remote, of that cause must exist now, and must

have existed during the whole of the five thousand years. If, therefore, the

sun do not rise to-morrow, it will be because some cause has existed, the

effects of which, though during five thousand years they have not amounted

to a perceptible quantity, will in one day become overwhelming. Since this

cause has not been recognized during such an interval of time by observers

stationed on our earth, it must, if it be a single agent, be either one whose

effects develop themselves gradually and very slowly, or one which existed

in regions beyond our observation, and is now on the point of arriving in our

part of the universe. Now all causes which we have experience of act

according to laws incompatible with the supposition that their effects, after

accumulating so slowly as to be imperceptible for five thousand years, shouldstart into immensity in a single day. No mathematical law of proportion

between an effect and the quantity or relations of its cause could produce

such contradictory results. The sudden development of an effect of which

there was no previous trace always arises from the coming together of several

distinct causes, not previously conjoined; but if such sudden conjunction is

destined to take place, the causes, or their causes, must have existed during

the entire five thousand years; and their not having once come together

during that period shows how rare that particular combination is. We have,

therefore, the warrant of a rigid induction for considering it probable, in a

degree undistinguishable from certainty, that the known conditions requisite

for the sun’s rising will exist to-morrow.

              § 3. But this extension of derivative laws, not causative, beyond the

limits of observation can only be to adjacent cases. If, instead of to-morrow,

we had said this day twenty thousand years, the inductions would have been

any thing but conclusive. That a cause which, in opposition to very powerful

causes, produced no perceptible effect during five thousand years, should

produce a very considerable one by the end of twenty thousand, has nothing

in it which is not in conformity with our experience of causes. We know

many agents, the effect of which in a short period does not amount to a

perceptible quantity, but by accumulating for a much longer period becomes

considerable. Besides, looking at the immense multitude of the heavenly

bodies, their vast distances, and the rapidity of the motion of such of them as

are known to move, it is a supposition not at all contradictory to experience

that some body may be in motion toward us, or we toward it, within the limits

of whose influence we have not come during five thousand years, but which

in twenty thousand more may be producing effects upon us of the most

extraordinary kind. Or the fact which is capable of preventing sunrise may

be, not the cumulative effect of one cause, but some new combination of

causes; and the chances favorable to that combination, though they have not

produced it once in five thousand years, may produce it once in twenty

thousand. So that the inductions which authorize us to expect future events,

grow weaker and weaker the further we look into the future, and at length

become inappreciable.

              We have considered the probabilities of the sun’s rising to-morrow,

as derived from the real laws; that is, from the laws of the causes on which

that uniformity is dependent. Let us now consider how the matter would havestood if the uniformity had been known only as an empirical law; if we had

not been aware that the sun’s light and the earth’s rotation (or the sun’s

motion) were the causes on which the periodical occurrence of daylight

depends. We could have extended this empirical law to cases adjacent in

time, though not to so great a distance of time as we can now. Having

evidence that the effects had remained unaltered and been punctually

conjoined for five thousand years, we could infer that the unknown causes on

which the conjunction is dependent had existed undiminished and

uncounteracted during the same period. The same conclusions, therefore,

would follow as in the preceding case, except that we should only know that

during five thousand years nothing had occurred to defeat perceptibly this

particular effect; while, when we know the causes, we have the additional

assurance that during that interval no such change has been noticeable in the

causes themselves as by any degree of multiplication or length of continuance

could defeat the effect.

              To this must be added, that when we know the causes, we may be

able to judge whether there exists any known cause capable of counteracting

them, while as long as they are unknown, we can not be sure but that if we

did know them, we could predict their destruction from causes actually in

existence. A bed-ridden savage, who had never seen the cataract of Niagara,

but who lived within hearing of it, might imagine that the sound he heard

would endure forever; but if he knew it to be the effect of a rush of waters

over a barrier of rock which is progressively wearing away, he would know

that within a number of ages which may be calculated it will be heard no

more. In proportion, therefore, to our ignorance of the causes on which the

empirical law depends, we can be less assured that it will continue to hold

good; and the further we look into futurity, the less improbable is it that some

one of the causes, whose co-existence gives rise to the derivative uniformity,

may be destroyed or counteracted. With every prolongation of time the

chances multiply of such an event; that is to say, its non-occurrence hitherto

becomes a less guarantee of its not occurring within the given time. If, then, it

is only to cases which in point of time are adjacent (or nearly adjacent) to

those which we have actually observed, that any derivative law, not of

causation, can be extended with an assurance equivalent to certainty, much

more is this true of a merely empirical law. Happily, for the purposes of life it

is to such cases alone that we can almost ever have occasion to extend them.              In respect of place, it might seem that a merely empirical law could

not be extended even to adjacent cases; that we could have no assurance of its

being true in any place where it has not been specially observed. The past

duration of a cause is a guarantee for its future existence, unless something

occurs to destroy it; but the existence of a cause in one or any number of

places is no guarantee for its existence in any other place, since there is no

uniformity in the collocations of primeval causes. When, therefore, an

empirical law is extended beyond the local limits within which it has been

found true by observation, the cases to which it is thus extended must be such

as are presumably within the influence of the same individual agents. If we

discover a new planet within the known bounds of the solar system (or even

beyond those bounds, but indicating its connection with the system by

revolving round the sun), we may conclude, with great probability, that it

revolves on its axis. For all the known planets do so; and this uniformity

points to some common cause, antecedent to the first records of astronomical

observation; and though the nature of this cause can only be matter of

conjecture, yet if it be, as is not unlikely, and as Laplace’s theory supposes,

not merely the same kind of cause, but the same individual cause (such as an

impulse given to all the bodies at once), that cause, acting at the extreme

points of the space occupied by the sun and planets, is likely, unless defeated

by some counteracting cause, to have acted at every intermediate point, and

probably somewhat beyond; and therefore acted, in all probability, upon the

supposed newly-discovered planet.

              When, therefore, effects which are always found conjoined can be

traced with any probability to an identical (and not merely a similar) origin,

we may with the same probability extend the empirical law of their

conjunction to all places within the extreme local boundaries within which

the fact has been observed, subject to the possibility of counteracting causes

in some portion of the field. Still more confidently may we do so when the

law is not merely empirical; when the phenomena which we find conjoined

are effects of ascertained causes, from the laws of which the conjunction of

their effects is deducible. In that case, we may both extend the derivative

uniformity over a larger space, and with less abatement for the chance of

counteracting causes. The first, because instead of the local boundaries of our

observation of the fact itself, we may include the extreme boundaries of the

ascertained influence of its causes. Thus the succession of day and night, we

know, holds true of all the bodies of the solar system except the sun itself; butwe know this only because we are acquainted with the causes. If we were not,

we could not extend the proposition beyond the orbits of the earth and moon,

at both extremities of which we have the evidence of observation for its truth.

With respect to the probability of counteracting causes, it has been seen that

this calls for a greater abatement of confidence, in proportion to our

ignorance of the causes on which the phenomena depend. On both accounts,

therefore, a derivative law which we know how to resolve, is susceptible of a

greater extension to cases adjacent in place, than a merely empirical law.

 

 

                             Chapter XX. – Of Analogy.

 

 

              § 1. The word Analogy, as the name of a mode of reasoning, is

generally taken for some kind of argument supposed to be of an inductive

nature, but not amounting to a complete induction. There is no word,

however, which is used more loosely, or in a greater variety of senses, than

Analogy. It sometimes stands for arguments which may be examples of the

most rigorous induction. Archbishop Whately, for instance, following

Ferguson and other writers, defines Analogy conformably to its primitive

acceptation, that which was given to it by mathematicians: Resemblance of

Relations. In this sense, when a country which has sent out colonies is termed

the mother country, the expression is analogical, signifying that the colonies

of a country stand in the same relation to her in which children stand to their

parents. And if any inference be drawn from this resemblance of relations, as,

for instance, that obedience or affection is due from colonies to the mother

country, this is called reasoning by analogy. Or, if it be argued that a nation is

most beneficially governed by an assembly elected by the people, from the

admitted fact that other associations for a common purpose, such as joint-

stock companies, are best managed by a committee chosen by the parties

interested; this, too, is an argument from analogy in the preceding sense,

because its foundation is, not that a nation is like a joint-stock company, or

Parliament like a board of directors, but that Parliament stands in the same

relation to the nation in which a board of directors stands to a joint-stock

company. Now, in an argument of this nature, there is no inherent inferiority

of conclusiveness. Like other arguments from resemblance, it may amount to

nothing, or it may be a perfect and conclusive induction. The circumstance in

which the two cases resemble, may be capable of being shown to be the

material circumstance; to be that on which all the consequences, necessary to

be taken into account in the particular discussion, depend. In the example last

given, the resemblance is one of relation; the fundamentum relationis being

the management, by a few persons, of affairs in which a much greater number

are interested along with them. Now, some may contend that this

circumstance which is common to the two cases, and the various

consequences which follow from it, have the chief share in determining allthe effects which make up what we term good or bad administration. If they

can establish this, their argument has the force of a rigorous induction; if they

can not, they are said to have failed in proving the analogy between the two

cases; a mode of speech which implies that when the analogy can be proved,

the argument founded on it can not be resisted.

              § 2. It is on the whole more usual, however, to extend the name of

analogical evidence to arguments from any sort of resemblance, provided

they do not amount to a complete induction; without peculiarly distinguishing

resemblance of relations. Analogical reasoning, in this sense, may be reduced

to the following formula: Two things resemble each other in one or more

respects; a certain proposition is true of the one; therefore it is true of the

other. But we have nothing here by which to discriminate analogy from

induction, since this type will serve for all reasoning from experience. In the

strictest induction, equally with the faintest analogy, we conclude because A

resembles B in one or more properties, that it does so in a certain other

property. The difference is, that in the case of a complete induction it has

been previously shown, by due comparison of instances, that there is an

invariable conjunction between the former property or properties and the

latter property; but in what is called analogical reasoning, no such

conjunction has been made out. There have been no opportunities of putting

in practice the Method of Difference, or even the Method of Agreement; but

we conclude (and that is all which the argument of analogy amounts to) that a

fact m , known to be true of A, is more likely to be true of B if B agrees with

A in some of its properties (even though no connection is known to exist

between m and those properties), than if no resemblance at all could be traced

between B and any other thing known to possess the attribute m .

              To this argument it is of course requisite that the properties common

to A with B shall be merely not known to be connected with m ; they must

not be properties known to be unconnected with it. If, either by processes of

elimination, or by deduction from previous knowledge of the laws of the

properties in question, it can be concluded that they have nothing to do with

m , the argument of analogy is put out of court. The supposition must be that

m is an effect really dependent on some property of A, but we know not on

which. We can not point out any of the properties of A, which is the cause of

m , or united with it by any law. After rejecting all which we know to have

nothing to do with it, there remain several between which we are unable todecide; of which remaining properties, B possesses one or more. This,

accordingly, we consider as affording grounds, of more or less strength, for

concluding by analogy that B possesses the attribute m .

              There can be no doubt that every such resemblance which can be

pointed out between B and A, affords some degree of probability, beyond

what would otherwise exist, in favor of the conclusion drawn from it. If B

resembled A in all its ultimate properties, its possessing the attribute m would

be a certainty, not a probability; and every resemblance which can be shown

to exist between them, places it by so much the nearer to that point. If the

resemblance be in an ultimate property, there will be resemblance in all the

derivative properties dependent on that ultimate property, and of these m may

be one. If the resemblance be in a derivative property, there is reason to

expect resemblance in the ultimate property on which it depends, and in the

other derivative properties dependent on the same ultimate property. Every

resemblance which can be shown to exist, affords ground for expecting an

indefinite number of other resemblances; the particular resemblance sought

will, therefore, be oftener found among things thus known to resemble, than

among things between which we know of no resemblance.

              For example, I might infer that there are probably inhabitants in the

moon, because there are inhabitants on the earth, in the sea, and in the air:

and this is the evidence of analogy. The circumstance of having inhabitants is

here assumed not to be an ultimate property, but (as is reasonable to suppose)

a consequence of other properties; and depending, therefore, in the case of

the earth, on some of its properties as a portion of the universe, but on which

of those properties we know not. Now the moon resembles the earth in being

a solid, opaque, nearly spherical substance, appearing to contain, or to have

contained, active volcanoes; receiving heat and light from the sun, in about

the same quantity as our earth; revolving on its axis; composed of materials

which gravitate, and obeying all the various laws resulting from that property.

And I think no one will deny that if this were all that was known of the moon,

the existence of inhabitants in that luminary would derive from these various

resemblances to the earth, a greater degree of probability than it would

otherwise have; though the amount of the augmentation it would be useless to

attempt to estimate.

              If, however, every resemblance proved between B and A, in any

point not known to be immaterial with respect to m , forms some additionalreason for presuming that B has the attribute m ; it is clear, è contra , that

every dissimilarity which can be proved between them furnishes a counter-

probability of the same nature on the other side. It is not, indeed, unusual that

different ultimate properties should, in some particular instances, produce the

same derivative property; but on the whole it is certain that things which

differ in their ultimate properties, will differ at least as much in the aggregate

of their derivative properties, and that the differences which are unknown

will, on the average of cases, bear some proportion to those which are known.

There will, therefore, be a competition between the known points of

agreement and the known points of difference in A and B; and according as

the one or the other may be deemed to preponderate, the probability derived

from analogy will be for or against B’s having the property m . The moon, for

instance, agrees with the earth in the circumstances already mentioned; but

differs in being smaller, in having its surface more unequal, and apparently

volcanic throughout, in having, at least on the side next the earth, no

atmosphere sufficient to refract light, no clouds, and (it is therefore

concluded) no water. These differences, considered merely as such, might

perhaps balance the resemblances, so that analogy would afford no

presumption either way. But considering that some of the circumstances

which are wanting on the moon are among those which, on the earth, are

found to be indispensable conditions of animal life, we may conclude that if

that phenomenon does exist in the moon (or at all events on the nearer side),

it must be as an effect of causes totally different from those on which it

depends here; as a consequence, therefore, of the moon’s differences from the

earth, not of the points of agreement. Viewed in this light, all the

resemblances which exist become presumptions against, not in favor of, the

moon’s being inhabited. Since life can not exist there in the manner in which

it exists here, the greater the resemblance of the lunar world to the terrestrial

in other respects, the less reason we have to believe that it can contain life.

              There are, however, other bodies in our system, between which and

the earth there is a much closer resemblance; which possess an atmosphere,

clouds, consequently water (or some fluid analogous to it), and even give

strong indications of snow in their polar regions; while the cold, or heat,

though differing greatly on the average from ours, is, in some parts at least of

those planets, possibly not more extreme than in some regions of our own

which are habitable. To balance these agreements, the ascertained differences

are chiefly in the average light and heat, velocity of rotation, density ofmaterial, intensity of gravity, and similar circumstances of a secondary kind.

With regard to these planets, therefore, the argument of analogy gives a

decided preponderance in favor of their resembling the earth in any of its

derivative properties, such as that of having inhabitants; though when we

consider how immeasurably multitudinous are those of their properties which

we are entirely ignorant of, compared with the few which we know, we can

attach but trifling weight to any considerations of resemblance in which the

known elements bear so inconsiderable a proportion to the unknown.

              Besides the competition between analogy and diversity, there may

be a competition of conflicting analogies. The new case may be similar in

some of its circumstances to cases in which the fact m exists, but in others to

cases in which it is known not to exist. Amber has some properties in

common with vegetable, others with mineral products. A painting of

unknown origin may resemble, in certain of its characters, known works of a

particular master, but in others it may as strikingly resemble those of some

other painter. A vase may bear some analogy to works of Grecian, and some

to those of Etruscan, or Egyptian art. We are of course supposing that it does

not possess any quality which has been ascertained, by a sufficient induction,

to be a conclusive mark either of the one or of the other.

              § 3. Since the value of an analogical argument inferring one

resemblance from other resemblances without any antecedent evidence of a

connection between them, depends on the extent of ascertained resemblance,

compared first with the amount of ascertained difference, and next with the

extent of the unexplored region of unascertained properties; it follows that

where the resemblance is very great, the ascertained difference very small,

and our knowledge of the subject-matter tolerably extensive, the argument

from analogy may approach in strength very near to a valid induction. If,

after much observation of B, we find that it agrees with A in nine out of ten

of its known properties, we may conclude with a probability of nine to one,

that it will possess any given derivative property of A. If we discover, for

example, an unknown animal or plant, resembling closely some known one in

the greater number of the properties we observe in it, but differing in some

few, we may reasonably expect to find in the unobserved remainder of its

properties, a general agreement with those of the former; but also a difference

corresponding proportionately to the amount of observed diversity.

              It thus appears that the conclusions derived from analogy are only ofany considerable value, when the case to which we reason is an adjacent case;

adjacent, not as before, in place or time, but in circumstances. In the case of

effects of which the causes are imperfectly or not at all known, when

consequently the observed order of their occurrence amounts only to an

empirical law, it often happens that the conditions which have co-existed

whenever the effect was observed, have been very numerous. Now if a new

case presents itself, in which all these conditions do not exist, but the far

greater part of them do, some one or a few only being wanting, the inference

that the effect will occur, notwithstanding this deficiency of complete

resemblance to the cases in which it has been observed, may, though of the

nature of analogy, possess a high degree of probability. It is hardly necessary

to add that, however considerable this probability may be, no competent

inquirer into nature will rest satisfied with it when a complete induction is

attainable; but will consider the analogy as a mere guide-post, pointing out

the direction in which more rigorous investigations should be prosecuted.

              It is in this last respect that considerations of analogy have the

highest scientific value. The cases in which analogical evidence affords in

itself any very high degree of probability, are, as we have observed, only

those in which the resemblance is very close and extensive; but there is no

analogy, however faint, which may not be of the utmost value in suggesting

experiments or observations that may lead to more positive conclusions.

When the agents and their effects are out of the reach of further observation

and experiment, as in the speculations already alluded to respecting the moon

and planets, such slight probabilities are no more than an interesting theme

for the pleasant exercise of imagination; but any suspicion, however slight,

that sets an ingenious person at work to contrive an experiment, or affords a

reason for trying one experiment rather than another, may be of the greatest

benefit to science.

              On this ground, though I can not accept as positive truths any of

those scientific hypotheses which are unsusceptible of being ultimately

brought to the test of actual induction, such, for instance, as the two theories

of light, the emission theory of the last century, and the undulatory theory

which predominates in the present, I am yet unable to agree with those who

consider such hypotheses to be worthy of entire disregard. As is well said by

Hartley (and concurred in by a thinker in general so diametrically opposed to

Hartley’s opinions as Dugald Stewart), “any hypothesis which has so muchplausibility as to explain a considerable number of facts, helps us to digest

these facts in proper order, to bring new ones to light, and make experimenta
                                            183
crucis for the sake of future inquirers.” If an hypothesis both explains

known facts, and has led to the prediction of others previously unknown, and

since verified by experience, the laws of the phenomenon which is the subject

of inquiry must bear at least a great similarity to those of the class of

phenomena to which the hypothesis assimilates it; and since the analogy

which extends so far may probably extend further, nothing is more likely to

suggest experiments tending to throw light upon the real properties of the

phenomenon, than the following out such an hypothesis. But to this end it is

by no means necessary that the hypothesis be mistaken for a scientific truth.

On the contrary, that illusion is in this respect, as in every other, an

impediment to the progress of real knowledge, by leading inquirers to restrict

themselves arbitrarily to the particular hypothesis which is most accredited at

the time, instead of looking out for every class of phenomena between the

laws of which and those of the given phenomenon any analogy exists, and

trying all such experiments as may tend to the discovery of ulterior analogies

pointing in the same direction.

 

 

 Chapter XXI. – Of The Evidence Of The Law Of Universal Causation.

 

 

              § 1. We have now completed our review of the logical processes by

which the laws, or uniformities, of the sequence of phenomena, and those

uniformities in their co-existence which depend on the laws of their

sequence, are ascertained or tested. As we recognized in the commencement,

and have been enabled to see more clearly in the progress of the

investigation, the basis of all these logical operations is the law of causation.

              The validity of all the Inductive Methods depends on the assumption

that every event, or the beginning of every phenomenon, must have some

cause; some antecedent, on the existence of which it is invariably and

unconditionally consequent. In the Method of Agreement this is obvious; that

method avowedly proceeding on the supposition that we have found the true

cause as soon as we have negatived every other. The assertion is equally true

of the Method of Difference. That method authorizes us to infer a general law

from two instances; one, in which A exists together with a multitude of other

circumstances, and B follows; another, in which, A being removed, and all

other circumstances remaining the same, B is prevented. What, however,

does this prove? It proves that B, in the particular instance, can not have had

any other cause than A; but to conclude from this that A was the cause, or

that A will on other occasions be followed by B, is only allowable on the

assumption that B must have some cause; that among its antecedents in any

single instance in which it occurs, there must be one which has the capacity

of producing it at other times. This being admitted, it is seen that in the case

in question that antecedent can be no other than A; but that if it be no other

than A it must be A, is not proved, by these instances at least, but taken for

granted. There is no need to spend time in proving that the same thing is true

of the other Inductive Methods. The universality of the law of causation is

assumed in them all.

              But is this assumption warranted? Doubtless (it may be said) most

phenomena are connected as effects with some antecedent or cause, that is,

are never produced unless some assignable fact has preceded them; but the

very circumstance that complicated processes of induction are sometimes

necessary, shows that cases exist in which this regular order of succession isnot apparent to our unaided apprehension. If, then, the processes which bring

these cases within the same category with the rest, require that we should

assume the universality of the very law which they do not at first sight appear

to exemplify, is not this a petitio principii ? Can we prove a proposition, by

an argument which takes it for granted? And if not so proved, on what

evidence does it rest?

              For this difficulty, which I have purposely stated in the strongest

terms it will admit of, the school of metaphysicians who have long

predominated in this country find a ready salvo. They affirm, that the

universality of causation is a truth which we can not help believing; that the

belief in it is an instinct, one of the laws of our believing faculty. As the proof

of this, they say, and they have nothing else to say, that every body does

believe it; and they number it among the propositions, rather numerous in

their catalogue, which may be logically argued against, and perhaps can not

be logically proved, but which are of higher authority than logic, and so

essentially inherent in the human mind, that even he who denies them in

speculation, shows by his habitual practice that his arguments make no

impression upon himself.

              Into the merits of this question, considered as one of psychology, it

would be foreign to my purpose to enter here; but I must protest against

adducing, as evidence of the truth of a fact in external nature, the disposition,

however strong or however general, of the human mind to believe it. Belief is

not proof, and does not dispense with the necessity of proof. I am aware, that

to ask for evidence of a proposition which we are supposed to believe

instinctively, is to expose one’s self to the charge of rejecting the authority of

the human faculties; which of course no one can consistently do, since the

human faculties are all which any one has to judge by; and inasmuch as the

meaning of the word evidence is supposed to be, something which when laid

before the mind, induces it to believe; to demand evidence when the belief is

insured by the mind’s own laws, is supposed to be appealing to the intellect

against the intellect. But this, I apprehend, is a misunderstanding of the nature

of evidence. By evidence is not meant any thing and every thing which

produces belief. There are many things which generate belief besides

evidence. A mere strong association of ideas often causes a belief so intense

as to be unshakable by experience or argument. Evidence is not that which

the mind does or must yield to, but that which it ought to yield to, namely,that, by yielding to which its belief is kept conformable to fact. There is no

appeal from the human faculties generally, but there is an appeal from one

human faculty to another; from the judging faculty, to those which take

cognizance of fact, the faculties of sense and consciousness. The legitimacy

of this appeal is admitted whenever it is allowed that our judgments ought to

be conformable to fact. To say that belief suffices for its own justification is

making opinion the test of opinion; it is denying the existence of any outward

standard, the conformity of an opinion to which constitutes its truth. We call

one mode of forming opinions right and another wrong, because the one

does, and the other does not, tend to make the opinion agree with the fact —

to make people believe what really is, and expect what really will be. Now a

mere disposition to believe, even if supposed instinctive, is no guarantee for

the truth of the thing believed. If, indeed, the belief ever amounted to an

irresistible necessity, there would then be no use in appealing from it,

because there would be no possibility of altering it. But even then the truth of

the belief would not follow; it would only follow that mankind were under a

permanent necessity of believing what might possibly not be true; in other

words, that a case might occur in which our senses or consciousness, if they

could be appealed to, might testify one thing, and our reason believe another.

But in fact there is no such permanent necessity. There is no proposition of

which it can be asserted that every human mind must eternally and

irrevocably believe it. Many of the propositions of which this is most

confidently stated, great numbers of human beings have disbelieved. The

things which it has been supposed that nobody could possibly help believing,

are innumerable; but no two generations would make out the same catalogue

of them. One age or nation believes implicitly what to another seems

incredible and inconceivable; one individual has not a vestige of a belief

which another deems to be absolutely inherent in humanity. There is not one

of these supposed instinctive beliefs which is really inevitable. It is in the

power of every one to cultivate habits of thought which make him

independent of them. The habit of philosophical analysis (of which it is the

surest effect to enable the mind to command, instead of being commanded

by, the laws of the merely passive part of its own nature), by showing to us

that things are not necessarily connected in fact because their ideas are

connected in our minds, is able to loosen innumerable associations which

reign despotically over the undisciplined or early-prejudiced mind. And this

habit is not without power even over those associations which the school ofwhich I have been speaking regard as connate and instinctive. I am convinced

that any one accustomed to abstraction and analysis, who will fairly exert his

faculties for the purpose, will, when his imagination has once learned to

entertain the notion, find no difficulty in conceiving that in some one, for

instance, of the many firmaments into which sidereal astronomy now divides

the universe, events may succeed one another at random, without any fixed

law; nor can any thing in our experience, or in our mental nature, constitute a

sufficient, or indeed any, reason for believing that this is nowhere the case.

              Were we to suppose (what it is perfectly possible to imagine) that

the present order of the universe were brought to an end, and that a chaos

succeeded in which there was no fixed succession of events, and the past

gave no assurance of the future; if a human being were miraculously kept

alive to witness this change, he surely would soon cease to believe in any

uniformity, the uniformity itself no longer existing. If this be admitted, the

belief in uniformity either is not an instinct, or it is an instinct conquerable,

like all other instincts, by acquired knowledge.

              But there is no need to speculate on what might be, when we have

positive and certain knowledge of what has been. It is not true, as a matter of

fact, that mankind have always believed that all the successions of events

were uniform and according to fixed laws. The Greek philosophers, not even

excepting Aristotle, recognized Chance and Spontaneity (τύχη and τὸ

αὐτομάτον) as among the agents in nature; in other words, they believed that

to that extent there was no guarantee that the past had been similar to itself, or

that the future would resemble the past. Even now a full half of the

philosophical world, including the very same metaphysicians who contend

most for the instinctive character of the belief in uniformity, consider one

important class of phenomena, volitions, to be an exception to the uniformity,
                                      184
and not governed by a fixed law.

                                                        185
              § 2. As was observed in a former place, the belief we entertain in

the universality, throughout nature, of the law of cause and effect, is itself an

instance of induction; and by no means one of the earliest which any of us, or

which mankind in general, can have made. We arrive at this universal law, by

generalization from many laws of inferior generality. We should never have

had the notion of causation (in the philosophical meaning of the term) as a

condition of all phenomena, unless many cases of causation, or in other

words, many partial uniformities of sequence, had previously becomefamiliar. The more obvious of the particular uniformities suggest, and give

evidence of, the general uniformity, and the general uniformity, once

established, enables us to prove the remainder of the particular uniformities

of which it is made up. As, however, all rigorous processes of induction

presuppose the general uniformity, our knowledge of the particular

uniformities from which it was first inferred was not, of course, derived from

rigorous induction, but from the loose and uncertain mode of induction per

enumerationem simplicem ; and the law of universal causation, being

collected from results so obtained, can not itself rest on any better foundation.

              It would seem, therefore, that induction per enumerationem

simplicem not only is not necessarily an illicit logical process, but is in reality

the only kind of induction possible; since the more elaborate process depends

for its validity on a law, itself obtained in that inartificial mode. Is there not

then an inconsistency in contrasting the looseness of one method with the

rigidity of another, when that other is indebted to the looser method for its

own foundation?

              The inconsistency, however, is only apparent. Assuredly, if

induction by simple enumeration were an invalid process, no process

grounded on it could be valid; just as no reliance could be placed on

telescopes, if we could not trust our eyes. But though a valid process, it is a

fallible one, and fallible in very different degrees: if, therefore, we can

substitute for the more fallible forms of the process, an operation grounded

on the same process in a less fallible form, we shall have effected a very

material improvement. And this is what scientific induction does.

              A mode of concluding from experience must be pronounced

untrustworthy when subsequent experience refuses to confirm it. According

to this criterion, induction by simple enumeration — in other words,

generalization of an observed fact from the mere absence of any known

instance to the contrary — affords in general a precarious and unsafe ground

of assurance; for such generalizations are incessantly discovered, on further

experience, to be false. Still, however, it affords some assurance, sufficient,

in many cases, for the ordinary guidance of conduct. It would be absurd to

say, that the generalizations arrived at by mankind in the outset of their

experience, such as these — food nourishes, fire burns, water drowns — were
                        186
unworthy of reliance. There is a scale of trustworthiness in the results of

the original unscientific induction; and on this diversity (as observed in thefourth chapter of the present book) depend the rules for the improvement of

the process. The improvement consists in correcting one of these inartificial

generalizations by means of another. As has been already pointed out, this is

all that art can do. To test a generalization, by showing that it either follows

from, or conflicts with, some stronger induction, some generalization resting

on a broader foundation of experience, is the beginning and end of the logic

of induction.

              § 3. Now the precariousness of the method of simple enumeration is

in an inverse ratio to the largeness of the generalization. The process is

delusive and insufficient, exactly in proportion as the subject-matter of the

observation is special and limited in extent. As the sphere widens, this

unscientific method becomes less and less liable to mislead; and the most

universal class of truths, the law of causation, for instance, and the principles

of number and of geometry, are duly and satisfactorily proved by that method

alone, nor are they susceptible of any other proof.

              With respect to the whole class of generalizations of which we have

recently treated, the uniformities which depend on causation, the truth of the

remark just made follows by obvious inference from the principles laid down

in the preceding chapters. When a fact has been observed a certain number of

times to be true, and is not in any instance known to be false, if we at once

affirm that fact as a universal truth or law of nature, without either testing it

by any of the four methods of induction, or deducing it from other known

laws, we shall in general err grossly; but we are perfectly justified in

affirming it as an empirical law, true within certain limits of time, place, and

circumstance, provided the number of coincidences be greater than can with

any probability be ascribed to chance. The reason for not extending it beyond

those limits is, that the fact of its holding true within them may be a

consequence of collocations, which can not be concluded to exist in one place

because they exist in another; or may be dependent on the accidental absence

of counteracting agencies, which any variation of time, or the smallest change

of circumstances, may possibly bring into play. If we suppose, then, the

subject-matter of any generalization to be so widely diffused that there is no

time, no place, and no combination of circumstances, but must afford an

example either of its truth or of its falsity, and if it be never found otherwise

than true, its truth can not be contingent on any collocations, unless such as

exist at all times and places; nor can it be frustrated by any counteractingagencies, unless by such as never actually occur. It is, therefore, an empirical

law co-extensive with all human experience; at which point the distinction

between empirical laws and laws of nature vanishes, and the proposition

takes its place among the most firmly established as well as largest truths

accessible to science.

              Now, the most extensive in its subject-matter of all generalizations

which experience warrants, respecting the sequences and co-existences of

phenomena, is the law of causation. It stands at the head of all observed

uniformities, in point of universality, and therefore (if the preceding

observations are correct) in point of certainty. And if we consider, not what

mankind would have been justified in believing in the infancy of their

knowledge, but what may rationally be believed in its present more advanced

state, we shall find ourselves warranted in considering this fundamental law,

though itself obtained by induction from particular laws of causation, as not

less certain, but on the contrary, more so, than any of those from which it was

drawn. It adds to them as much proof as it receives from them. For there is

probably no one even of the best established laws of causation which is not

sometimes counteracted, and to which, therefore, apparent exceptions do not

present themselves, which would have necessarily and justly shaken the

confidence of mankind in the universality of those laws, if inductive

processes founded on the universal law had not enabled us to refer those

exceptions to the agency of counteracting causes, and thereby reconcile them

with the law with which they apparently conflict. Errors, moreover, may have

slipped into the statement of any one of the special laws, through inattention

to some material circumstance: and instead of the true proposition, another

may have been enunciated, false as a universal law, though leading, in all

cases hitherto observed, to the same result. To the law of causation, on the

contrary, we not only do not know of any exception, but the exceptions which

limit or apparently invalidate the special laws, are so far from contradicting

the universal one, that they confirm it; since in all cases which are sufficiently

open to our observation, we are able to trace the difference of result, either to

the absence of a cause which had been present in ordinary cases, or to the

presence of one which had been absent.

              The law of cause and effect, being thus certain, is capable of

imparting its certainty to all other inductive propositions which can be

deduced from it; and the narrower inductions may be regarded as receivingtheir ultimate sanction from that law, since there is no one of them which is

not rendered more certain than it was before, when we are able to connect it

with that larger induction, and to show that it can not be denied, consistently

with the law that every thing which begins to exist has a cause. And hence we

are justified in the seeming inconsistency, of holding induction by simple

enumeration to be good for proving this general truth, the foundation of

scientific induction, and yet refusing to rely on it for any of the narrower

inductions. I fully admit that if the law of causation were unknown,

generalization in the more obvious cases of uniformity in phenomena would

nevertheless be possible, and though in all cases more or less precarious, and

in some extremely so, would suffice to constitute a certain measure of

probability; but what the amount of this probability might be, we are

dispensed from estimating, since it never could amount to the degree of

assurance which the proposition acquires, when, by the application to it of the

Four Methods, the supposition of its falsity is shown to be inconsistent with

the Law of Causation. We are therefore logically entitled, and, by the

necessities of scientific induction, required, to disregard the probabilities

derived from the early rude method of generalizing, and to consider no minor

generalization as proved except so far as the law of causation confirms it, nor

probable except so far as it may reasonably be expected to be so confirmed.

              § 4. The assertion, that our inductive processes assume the law of

causation, while the law of causation is itself a case of induction, is a

paradox, only on the old theory of reasoning, which supposes the universal

truth, or major premise, in a ratiocination, to be the real proof of the

particular truths which are ostensibly inferred from it. According to the
                                                187
doctrine maintained in the present treatise, the major premise is not the

proof of the conclusion, but is itself proved, along with the conclusion from

the same evidence. “All men are mortal” is not the proof that Lord

Palmerston is mortal; but our past experience of mortality authorizes us to

infer both the general truth and the particular fact, and the one with exactly

the same degree of assurance as the other. The mortality of Lord Palmerston

is not an inference from the mortality of all men, but from the experience

which proves the mortality of all men; and is a correct inference from

experience, if that general truth is so too. This relation between our general

beliefs and their particular applications holds equally true in the more

comprehensive case which we are now discussing. Any new fact of causation

inferred by induction, is rightly inferred, if no other objection can be made tothe inference than can be made to the general truth that every event has a

cause. The utmost certainty which can be given to a conclusion arrived at in

the way of inference, stops at this point. When we have ascertained that the

particular conclusion must stand or fall with the general uniformity of the

laws of nature — that it is liable to no doubt except the doubt whether every

event has a cause — we have done all that can be done for it. The strongest

assurance we can obtain of any theory respecting the cause of a given

phenomenon, is that the phenomenon has either that cause or none.

              The latter supposition might have been an admissible one in a very

early period of our study of nature. But we have been able to perceive that in

the stage which mankind have now reached, the generalization which gives

the Law of Universal Causation has grown into a stronger and better

induction, one deserving of greater reliance, than any of the subordinate

generalizations. We may even, I think, go a step further than this, and regard

the certainty of that great induction as not merely comparative, but, for all

practical purposes, complete.

              The considerations, which, as I apprehend, give, at the present day,

to the proof of the law of uniformity of succession as true of all phenomena

without exception, this character of completeness and conclusiveness, are the

following: First, that we now know it directly to be true of far the greatest

number of phenomena; that there are none of which we know it not to be

true, the utmost that can be said being, that of some we can not positively

from direct evidence affirm its truth; while phenomenon after phenomenon,

as they become better known to us, are constantly passing from the latter

class into the former; and in all cases in which that transition has not yet

taken place, the absence of direct proof is accounted for by the rarity or the

obscurity of the phenomena, our deficient means of observing them, or the

logical difficulties arising from the complication of the circumstances in

which they occur; insomuch that, notwithstanding as rigid a dependence on

given conditions as exists in the case of any other phenomenon, it was not

likely that we should be better acquainted with those conditions than we are.

Besides this first class of considerations, there is a second, which still further

corroborates the conclusion. Although there are phenomena the production

and changes of which elude all our attempts to reduce them universally to any

ascertained law; yet in every such case, the phenomenon, or the objects

concerned in it, are found in some instances to obey the known laws ofnature. The wind, for example, is the type of uncertainty and caprice, yet we

find it in some cases obeying with as much constancy as any phenomenon in

nature the law of the tendency of fluids to distribute themselves so as to

equalize the pressure on every side of each of their particles; as in the case of

the trade-winds and the monsoons.

              Lightning might once have been supposed to obey no laws; but since

it has been ascertained to be identical with electricity, we know that the very

same phenomenon in some of its manifestations is implicitly obedient to the

action of fixed causes. I do not believe that there is now one object or event

in all our experience of nature, within the bounds of the solar system at least,

which has not either been ascertained by direct observation to follow laws of

its own, or been proved to be closely similar to objects and events which, in

more familiar manifestations, or on a more limited scale, follow strict laws;

our inability to trace the same laws on a larger scale and in the more

recondite instances, being accounted for by the number and complication of

the modifying causes, or by their inaccessibility to observation.

              The progress of experience, therefore, has dissipated the doubt

which must have rested on the universality of the law of causation while there

were phenomena which seemed to be sui generis , not subject to the same

laws with any other class of phenomena, and not as yet ascertained to have

peculiar laws of their own. This great generalization, however, might

reasonably have been, as it in fact was, acted on as a probability of the

highest order, before there were sufficient grounds for receiving it as a

certainty. In matters of evidence, as in all other human things, we neither

require, nor can attain, the absolute. We must hold even our strongest

convictions with an opening left in our minds for the reception of facts which

contradict them; and only when we have taken this precaution, have we

earned the right to act upon our convictions with complete confidence when

no such contradiction appears. Whatever has been found true in innumerable

instances, and never found to be false after due examination in any, we are

safe in acting on as universal provisionally, until an undoubted exception

appears; provided the nature of the case be such that a real exception could

scarcely have escaped notice. When every phenomenon that we ever knew

sufficiently well to be able to answer the question, had a cause on which it

was invariably consequent, it was more rational to suppose that our inability

to assign the causes of other phenomena arose from our ignorance, than thatthere were phenomena which were uncaused, and which happened to be

exactly those which we had hitherto had no sufficient opportunity of

studying.

              It must, at the same time, be remarked, that the reasons for this

reliance do not hold in circumstances unknown to us, and beyond the possible

range of our experience. In distant parts of the stellar regions, where the

phenomena may be entirely unlike those with which we are acquainted, it

would be folly to affirm confidently that this general law prevails, any more

than those special ones which we have found to hold universally on our own

planet. The uniformity in the succession of events, otherwise called the law

of causation, must be received not as a law of the universe, but of that portion

of it only which is within the range of our means of sure observation, with a

reasonable degree of extension to adjacent cases. To extend it further is to

make a supposition without evidence, and to which, in the absence of any

ground from experience for estimating its degree of probability, it would be
                                188
idle to attempt to assign any.

 

 

 Chapter XXII. – Of Uniformities Of Co–Existence Not Dependent On

                                      Causation.

 

 

              § 1. The order of the occurrence of phenomena in time, is either

successive or simultaneous; the uniformities, therefore, which obtain in their

occurrence, are either uniformities of succession or of co-existence.

Uniformities of succession are all comprehended under the law of causation

and its consequences. Every phenomenon has a cause, which it invariably

follows; and from this are derived other invariable sequences among the

successive stages of the same effect, as well as between the effects resulting

from causes which invariably succeed one another.

              In the same manner with these derivative uniformities of succession,

a great variety of uniformities of co-existence also take their rise. Co-ordinate

effects of the same cause naturally co-exist with one another. High water at

any point on the earth’s surface, and high water at the point diametrically

opposite to it, are effects uniformly simultaneous, resulting from the direction

in which the combined attractions of the sun and moon act upon the waters of

the ocean. An eclipse of the sun to us, and an eclipse of the earth to a

spectator situated in the moon, are in like manner phenomena invariably co-

existent; and their co-existence can equally be deduced from the laws of their

production.

              It is an obvious question, therefore, whether all the uniformities of

co-existence among phenomena may not be accounted for in this manner.

And it can not be doubted that between phenomena which are themselves

effects, the co-existences must necessarily depend on the causes of those

phenomena. If they are effects immediately or remotely of the same cause,

they can not co-exist except by virtue of some laws or properties of that

cause; if they are effects of different causes, they can not co-exist unless it be

because their causes co-exist; and the uniformity of co-existence, if such

there be, between the effects, proves that those particular causes, within the

limits of our observation, have uniformly been co-existent.

              § 2. But these same considerations compel us to recognize that there

must be one class of co-existences which can not depend on causation: theco-existences between the ultimate properties of things — those properties

which are the causes of all phenomena, but are not themselves caused by any

phenomenon, and a cause for which could only be sought by ascending to the

origin of all things. Yet among these ultimate properties there are not only

co-existences, but uniformities of co-existence. General propositions may be,

and are, formed, which assert that whenever certain properties are found,

certain others are found along with them. We perceive an object; say, for

instance, water. We recognize it to be water, of course by certain of its

properties. Having recognized it, we are able to affirm of it innumerable other

properties; which we could not do unless it were a general truth, a law or

uniformity in nature, that the set of properties by which we identify the

substance as water always have those other properties conjoined with them.

                            189
              In a former place it has been explained, in some detail, what is

meant by the Kinds of objects; those classes which differ from one another

not by a limited and definite, but by an indefinite and unknown, number of

distinctions. To this we have now to add, that every proposition by which any

thing is asserted of a Kind, affirms a uniformity of co-existence. Since we

know nothing of Kinds but their properties, the Kind, to us, is the set of

properties by which it is identified, and which must of course be sufficient to
                                          190
distinguish it from every other kind. In affirming any thing, therefore, of a

Kind, we are affirming something to be uniformly co-existent with the

properties by which the kind is recognized; and that is the sole meaning of

the assertion.

              Among the uniformities of co-existence which exist in nature, may

hence be numbered all the properties of Kinds. The whole of these, however,

are not independent of causation, but only a portion of them. Some are

ultimate properties, others derivative: of some, no cause can be assigned, but

others are manifestly dependent on causes. Thus, pure oxygen gas is a Kind,

and one of its most unequivocal properties is its gaseous form; this property,

however, has for its cause the presence of a certain quantity of latent heat;

and if that heat could be taken away (as has been done from so many gases in

Faraday’s experiments), the gaseous form would doubtless disappear,

together with numerous other properties which depend on, or are caused by,

that property.

              In regard to all substances which are chemical compounds, and

which therefore may be regarded as products of the juxtaposition ofsubstances different in Kind from themselves, there is considerable reason to

presume that the specific properties of the compound are consequent, as

effects, on some of the properties of the elements, though little progress has

yet been made in tracing any invariable relation between the latter and the

former. Still more strongly will a similar presumption exist, when the object

itself, as in the case of organized beings, is no primeval agent, but an effect,

which depends on a cause or causes for its very existence. The Kinds,

therefore, which are called in chemistry simple substances, or elementary

natural agents, are the only ones, any of whose properties can with certainty

be considered ultimate; and of these the ultimate properties are probably

much more numerous than we at present recognize, since every successful

instance of the resolution of the properties of their compounds into simpler

laws, generally leads to the recognition of properties in the elements distinct

from any previously known. The resolution of the laws of the heavenly

motions established the previously unknown ultimate property of a mutual

attraction between all bodies; the resolution, so far as it has yet proceeded, of

the laws of crystallization, of chemical composition, electricity, magnetism,

etc., points to various polarities, ultimately inherent in the particles of which

bodies are composed; the comparative atomic weights of different kinds of

bodies were ascertained by resolving into more general laws the uniformities

observed in the proportions in which substances combine with one another,

and so forth. Thus, although every resolution of a complex uniformity into

simpler and more elementary laws has an apparent tendency to diminish the

number of the ultimate properties, and really does remove many properties

from the list; yet (since the result of this simplifying process is to trace up an

ever greater variety of different effects to the same agents) the further we

advance in this direction, the greater number of distinct properties we are

forced to recognize in one and the same object; the co-existences of which

properties must accordingly be ranked among the ultimate generalities of

nature.

              § 3. There are, therefore, only two kinds of propositions which assert

uniformity of co-existence between properties. Either the properties depend

on causes or they do not. If they do, the proposition which affirms them to be

co-existent is a derivative law of co-existence between effects, and, until

resolved into the laws of causation on which it depends, is an empirical law,

and to be tried by the principles of induction to which such laws are

amenable. If, on the other hand, the properties do not depend on causes, butare ultimate properties, then, if it be true that they invariably co-exist, they

must all be ultimate properties of one and the same Kind; and it is of these

only that the co-existences can be classed as a peculiar sort of laws of nature.

              When we affirm that all crows are black, or that all negroes have

woolly hair, we assert a uniformity of co-existence. We assert that the

property of blackness or of having woolly hair invariably co-exists with the

properties which, in common language, or in the scientific classification that

we adopt, are taken to constitute the class crow, or the class negro. Now,

supposing blackness to be an ultimate property of black objects, or woolly

hair an ultimate property of the animals which possess it; supposing that

these properties are not results of causation, are not connected with

antecedent phenomena by any law; then if all crows are black, and all negroes

have woolly hair, these must be ultimate properties of the kind crow , or

negro , or of some kind which includes them. If, on the contrary, blackness or

woolly hair be an effect depending on causes, these general propositions are

manifestly empirical laws; and all that has already been said respecting that

class of generalizations may be applied without modification to these.

              Now, we have seen that in the case of all compounds — of all

things, in short, except the elementary substances and primary powers of

nature — the presumption is, that the properties do really depend upon

causes; and it is impossible in any case whatever to be certain that they do

not. We therefore should not be safe in claiming for any generalization

respecting the co-existence of properties, a degree of certainty to which, if the

properties should happen to be the result of causes, it would have no claim. A

generalization respecting co-existence, or, in other words, respecting the

properties of kinds, may be an ultimate truth, but it may also be merely a

derivative one; and since, if so, it is one of those derivative laws which are

neither laws of causation nor have been resolved into the laws of causation on

which they depend, it can possess no higher degree of evidence than belongs

to an empirical law.

              § 4. This conclusion will be confirmed by the consideration of one

great deficiency, which precludes the application to the ultimate uniformities

of co-existence, of a system of rigorous scientific induction, such as the

uniformities in the succession of phenomena have been found to admit of.

The basis of such a system is wanting; there is no general axiom standing in

the same relation to the uniformities of co-existence as the law of causationdoes to those of succession. The Methods of Induction applicable to the

ascertainment of causes and effects are grounded on the principle that every

thing which has a beginning must have some cause or other; that among the

circumstances which actually existed at the time of its commencement, there

is certainly some one combination, on which the effect in question is

unconditionally consequent, and on the repetition of which it would certainly

again recur. But in an inquiry whether some kind (as crow) universally

possesses a certain property (as blackness), there is no room for any

assumption analogous to this. We have no previous certainty that the property

must have something which constantly co-exists with it; must have an

invariable co-existent, in the same manner as an event must have an

invariable antecedent. When we feel pain, we must be in some circumstances

under which, if exactly repeated, we should always feel pain. But when we

are conscious of blackness, it does not follow that there is something else

present of which blackness is a constant accompaniment. There is, therefore,

no room for elimination; no method of Agreement or Difference, or of

Concomitant Variations (which is but a modification either of the Method of

Agreement or of the Method of Difference). We can not conclude that the

blackness we see in crows must be an invariable property of crows merely

because there is nothing else present of which it can be an invariable

property. We therefore inquire into the truth of a proposition like “All crows

are black,” under the same disadvantage as if, in our inquiries into causation,

we were compelled to let in, as one of the possibilities, that the effect may in

that particular instance have arisen without any cause at all.

              To overlook this grand distinction was, as it seems to me, the capital

error in Bacon’s view of inductive philosophy. The principle of elimination,

that great logical instrument which he had the immense merit of first bringing

into general use, he deemed applicable in the same sense, and in as

unqualified a manner, to the investigation of the co-existences, as to that of

the successions of phenomena. He seems to have thought that as every event

has a cause, or invariable antecedent, so every property of an object has an

invariable co-existent, which he called its form; and the examples he chiefly

selected for the application and illustration of his method, were inquiries into

such forms; attempts to determine in what else all those objects resembled,

which agreed in some one general property, as hardness or softness, dryness

or moistness, heat or coldness. Such inquiries could lead to no result. The

objects seldom have any such circumstances in common. They usually agreein the one point inquired into, and in nothing else. A great proportion of the

properties which, so far as we can conjecture, are the likeliest to be really

ultimate, would seem to be inherently properties of many different kinds of

things not allied in any other respect. And as for the properties which, being

effects of causes, we are able to give some account of, they have generally

nothing to do with the ultimate resemblances or diversities in the objects

themselves, but depend on some outward circumstances, under the influence

of which any objects whatever are capable of manifesting those properties; as

is emphatically the case with those favorite subjects of Bacon’s scientific

inquiries, hotness and coldness, as well as with hardness and softness,

solidity and fluidity, and many other conspicuous qualities.

              In the absence, then, of any universal law of co-existence similar to

the universal law of causation which regulates sequence, we are thrown back

upon the unscientific induction of the ancients, per enumerationem

simplicem, ubi non reperitur instantia contradictoria . The reason we have

for believing that all crows are black, is simply that we have seen and heard

of many black crows, and never one of any other color. It remains to be

considered how far this evidence can reach, and how we are to measure its

strength in any given case.

              § 5. It sometimes happens that a mere change in the mode of

verbally enunciating a question, though nothing is really added to the

meaning expressed, is of itself a considerable step toward its solution. This, I

think, happens in the present instance. The degree of certainty of any

generalization which rests on no other evidence than the agreement, so far as

it goes, of all past observation, is but another phrase for the degree of

improbability that an exception, if any existed, could have hitherto remained

unobserved. The reason for believing that all crows are black, is measured by

the improbability that crows of any other color should have existed to the

present time without our being aware of it. Let us state the question in this

last mode, and consider what is implied in the supposition that there may be

crows which are not black, and under what conditions we can be justified in

regarding this as incredible.

              If there really exist crows which are not black, one of two things

must be the fact. Either the circumstance of blackness, in all crows hitherto

observed, must be, as it were, an accident, not connected with any distinction

of Kind; or if it be a property of Kind, the crows which are not black must bea new Kind, a Kind hitherto overlooked, though coming under the same

general description by which crows have hitherto been characterized. The

first supposition would be proved true if we were to discover casually a white

crow among black ones, or if it were found that black crows sometimes turn

white. The second would be shown to be the fact if in Australia or Central

Africa a species or a race of white or gray crows were found to exist.

              § 6. The former of these suppositions necessarily implies that the

color is an effect of causation. If blackness, in the crows in which it has been

observed, be not a property of Kind, but can be present or absent without any

difference generally in the properties of the object, then it is not an ultimate

fact in the individuals themselves, but is certainly dependent on a cause.

There are, no doubt, many properties which vary from individual to

individual of the same Kind, even the same infima species , or lowest Kind.

Some flowers may be either white or red, without differing in any other

respect. But these properties are not ultimate; they depend on causes. So far

as the properties of a thing belong to its own nature, and do not arise from

some cause extrinsic to it, they are always the same in the same Kind. Take,

for instance, all simple substances and elementary powers; the only things of

which we are certain that some at least of their properties are really ultimate.

Color is generally esteemed the most variable of all properties: yet we do not

find that sulphur is sometimes yellow and sometimes white, or that it varies

in color at all, except so far as color is the effect of some extrinsic cause, as

of the sort of light thrown upon it, the mechanical arrangement of the

particles (as after fusion), etc. We do not find that iron is sometimes fluid and

sometimes solid at the same temperature; gold sometimes malleable and

sometimes brittle; that hydrogen will sometimes combine with oxygen and

sometimes not; or the like. If from simple substances we pass to any of their

definite compounds, as water, lime, or sulphuric acid, there is the same

constancy in their properties. When properties vary from individual to

individual, it is either in the case of miscellaneous aggregations, such as

atmospheric air or rock, composed of heterogeneous substances, and not
                                                  191
constituting or belonging to any real Kind, or it is in the case of organic

beings. In them, indeed, there is variability in a high degree. Animals of the

same species and race, human beings of the same age, sex, and country, will

be most different, for example, in face and figure. But organized beings (from

the extreme complication of the laws by which they are regulated) being

more eminently modifiable, that is, liable to be influenced by a greaternumber and variety of causes, than any other phenomena whatever; having

also themselves had a beginning, and therefore a cause; there is reason to

believe that none of their properties are ultimate, but all of them derivative,

and produced by causation. And the presumption is confirmed, by the fact

that the properties which vary from one individual to another, also generally

vary more or less at different times in the same individual; which variation,

like any other event, supposes a cause, and implies, consequently, that the

properties are not independent of causation.

              If, therefore, blackness be merely accidental in crows, and capable of

varying while the Kind remains the same, its presence or absence is doubtless

no ultimate fact, but the effect of some unknown cause: and in that case the

universality of the experience that all crows are black is sufficient proof of a

common cause, and establishes the generalization as an empirical law. Since

there are innumerable instances in the affirmative, and hitherto none at all in

the negative, the causes on which the property depends must exist

everywhere in the limits of the observations which have been made; and the

proposition may be received as universal within those limits, and with the

allowable degree of extension to adjacent cases.

              § 7. If, in the second place, the property, in the instances in which it

has been observed, is not an effect of causation, it is a property of Kind; and

in that case the generalization can only be set aside by the discovery of a new

Kind of crow. That, however, a peculiar Kind not hitherto discovered should

exist in nature, is a supposition so often realized that it can not be considered

at all improbable. We have nothing to authorize us in attempting to limit the

Kinds of things which exist in nature. The only unlikelihood would be that a

new Kind should be discovered in localities which there was previously

reason to believe had been thoroughly explored; and even this improbability

depends on the degree of conspicuousness of the difference between the

newly-discovered Kind and all others, since new kinds of minerals, plants,

and even animals, previously overlooked or confounded with known species,

are still continually detected in the most frequented situations. On this second

ground, therefore, as well as on the first, the observed uniformity of co-

existence can only hold good as an empirical law, within the limits not only

of actual observation, but of an observation as accurate as the nature of the

case required. And hence it is that (as remarked in an early chapter of the

present book) we so often give up generalizations of this class at the firstsummons. If any credible witness stated that he had seen a white crow, under

circumstances which made it not incredible that it should have escaped notice

previously, we should give full credence to the statement.

              It appears, then, that the uniformities which obtain in the co-

existence of phenomena — those which we have reason to consider as

ultimate, no less than those which arise from the laws of causes yet

undetected — are entitled to reception only as empirical laws; are not to be

presumed true except within the limits of time, place, and circumstance, in

which the observations were made, or except in cases strictly adjacent.

              § 8. We have seen in the last chapter that there is a point of

generality at which empirical laws become as certain as laws of nature, or,

rather, at which there is no longer any distinction between empirical laws and

laws of nature. As empirical laws approach this point, in other words, as they

rise in their degree of generality, they become more certain; their universality

may be more strongly relied on. For, in the first place, if they are results of

causation (which, even in the class of uniformities treated of in the present

chapter, we never can be certain that they are not) the more general they are,

the greater is proved to be the space over which the necessary collocations

prevail, and within which no causes exist capable of counteracting the

unknown causes on which the empirical law depends. To say that any thing is

an invariable property of some very limited class of objects, is to say that it

invariably accompanies some very numerous and complex group of

distinguishing properties; which, if causation be at all concerned in the

matter, argues a combination of many causes, and therefore a great liability to

counteraction; while the comparatively narrow range of the observations

renders it impossible to predict to what extent unknown counteracting causes

may be distributed throughout nature. But when a generalization has been

found to hold good of a very large proportion of all things whatever, it is

already proved that nearly all the causes which exist in nature have no power

over it; that very few changes in the combination of causes can affect it; since

the greater number of possible combinations must have already existed in

some one or other of the instances in which it has been found true. If,

therefore, any empirical law is a result of causation, the more general it is, the

more it may be depended on. And even if it be no result of causation, but an

ultimate co-existence, the more general it is, the greater amount of experience

it is derived from, and the greater therefore is the probability that ifexceptions had existed, some would already have presented themselves.

              For these reasons, it requires much more evidence to establish an

exception to one of the more general empirical laws than to the more special

ones. We should not have any difficulty in believing that there might be a

new Kind of crow; or a new kind of bird resembling a crow in the properties

hitherto considered distinctive of that Kind. But it would require stronger

proof to convince us of the existence of a Kind of crow having properties at

variance with any generally recognized universal property of birds; and a still

higher degree if the properties conflict with any recognized universal

property of animals. And this is conformable to the mode of judgment

recommended by the common sense and general practice of mankind, who

are more incredulous as to any novelties in nature, according to the degree of

generality of the experience which these novelties seem to contradict.

              § 9. It is conceivable that the alleged properties might conflict with

some recognized universal property of all matter. In that case their

improbability would be at the highest, but would not even then amount to

incredibility. There are only two known properties common to all matter; in

other words, there is but one known uniformity of co-existence of properties

co-extensive with all physical nature, namely, that whatever opposes

resistance to movement gravitates, or, as Professor Bain expresses it, Inertia

and Gravity are co-existent through all matter, and proportionate in their

amount. These properties, as he truly says, are not mutually implicated; from

neither of them could we, on grounds of causation, presume the other. But,

for this very reason, we are never certain that a Kind may not be discovered

possessing one of the properties without the other. The hypothetical ether, if

it exists, may be such a Kind. Our senses can not recognize in it either

resistance or gravity; but if the reality of a resisting medium should

eventually be proved (by alteration, for example, in the times of revolution of

periodic comets, combined with the evidences afforded by the phenomena of

light and heat), it would be rash to conclude from this alone, without other

proofs, that it must gravitate.

              For even the greater generalizations, which embrace comprehensive

Kinds containing under them a great number and variety of infimæ species ,

are only empirical laws, resting on induction by simple enumeration merely,

and not on any process of elimination — a process wholly inapplicable to this

sort of case. Such generalizations, therefore, ought to be grounded on anexamination of all the infimæ species comprehended in them, and not of a

portion only. We can not conclude (where causation is not concerned),

because a proposition is true of a number of things resembling one another

only in being animals, that it is therefore true of all animals. If, indeed, any

thing be true of species which differ more from one another than either

differs from a third, especially if that third species occupies in most of its

known properties a position between the two former, there is some

probability that the same thing will also be true of that intermediate species;

for it is often, though by no means universally, found, that there is a sort of

parallelism in the properties of different Kinds, and that their degree of

unlikeness in one respect bears some proportion to their unlikeness in others.

We see this parallelism in the properties of the different metals; in those of

sulphur, phosphorus, and carbon; of chlorine, iodine, and bromine; in the

natural orders of plants and animals, etc. But there are innumerable anomalies

and exceptions to this sort of conformity; if indeed the conformity itself be

any thing but an anomaly and an exception in nature.

              Universal propositions, therefore, respecting the properties of

superior Kinds, unless grounded on proved or presumed connection by

causation, ought not to be hazarded except after separately examining every

known sub-kind included in the larger Kind. And even then such

generalizations must be held in readiness to be given up on the occurrence of

some new anomaly, which, when the uniformity is not derived from

causation, can never, even in the case of the most general of these empirical

laws, be considered very improbable. Thus, all the universal propositions

which it has been attempted to lay down respecting simple substances, or

concerning any of the classes which have been formed among simple

substances (and the attempt has been often made), have, with the progress of

experience, either faded into inanity, or been proved to be erroneous; and

each Kind of simple substance remains, with its own collection of properties

apart from the rest, saving a certain parallelism with a few other Kinds, the

most similar to itself. In organized beings, indeed, there are abundance of

propositions ascertained to be universally true of superior genera, to many of

which the discovery hereafter of any exceptions must be regarded as

extremely improbable. But these, as already observed, are, we have every
                                                              192
reason to believe, properties dependent on causation.

              Uniformities of co-existence, then, not only when they areconsequences of laws of succession, but also when they are ultimate truths,

must be ranked, for the purpose of logic, among empirical laws; and are

amenable in every respect to the same rules with those unresolved
                                                                      193
uniformities which are known to be dependent on causation.

 

 

   Chapter XXIII. – Of Approximate Generalizations, And Probable

                                        Evidence.

 

 

              § 1. In our inquiries into the nature of the inductive process, we must

not confine our notice to such generalizations from experience as profess to

be universally true. There is a class of inductive truths avowedly not

universal; in which it is not pretended that the predicate is always true of the

subject; but the value of which, as generalizations, is nevertheless extremely

great. An important portion of the field of inductive knowledge does not

consist of universal truths, but of approximations to such truths; and when a

conclusion is said to rest on probable evidence, the premises it is drawn from

are usually generalizations of this sort.

              As every certain inference respecting a particular case implies that

there is ground for a general proposition of the form, every A is B; so does

every probable inference suppose that there is ground for a proposition of the

form, Most A are B; and the degree of probability of the inference in an

average case will depend on the proportion between the number of instances

existing in nature which accord with the generalization, and the number of

those which conflict with it.

              § 2. Propositions in the form, Most A are B, are of a very different

degree of importance in science, and in the practice of life. To the scientific

inquirer they are valuable chiefly as materials for, and steps toward universal

truths. The discovery of these is the proper end of science; its work is not

done if it stops at the proposition that a majority of A are B, without

circumscribing that majority by some common character, fitted to distinguish

them from the minority. Independently of the inferior precision of such

imperfect generalizations, and the inferior assurance with which they can be

applied to individual cases, it is plain that, compared with exact

generalizations, they are almost useless as means of discovering ulterior

truths by way of deduction. We may, it is true, by combining the proposition

Most A are B, with a universal proposition, Every B is C, arrive at the

conclusion that Most A are C. But when a second proposition of the

approximate kind is introduced — or even when there is but one, if that onebe the major premise — nothing can, in general, be positively concluded.

When the major is Most B are D, then, even if the minor be Every A is B, we

can not infer that most A are D, or with any certainty that even some A are D.

Though the majority of the class B have the attribute signified by D, the
                                                              194
whole of the sub-class A may belong to the minority.

              Though so little use can be made, in science, of approximate

generalizations, except as a stage on the road to something better, for

practical guidance they are often all we have to rely on. Even when science

has really determined the universal laws of any phenomenon, not only are

those laws generally too much encumbered with conditions to be adapted for

everyday use, but the cases which present themselves in life are too

complicated, and our decisions require to be taken too rapidly, to admit of

waiting till the existence of a phenomenon can be proved by what have been

scientifically ascertained to be universal marks of it. To be indecisive and

reluctant to act, because we have not evidence of a perfectly conclusive

character to act on, is a defect sometimes incident to scientific minds, but

which, wherever it exists, renders them unfit for practical emergencies. If we

would succeed in action, we must judge by indications which, though they do

not generally mislead us, sometimes do, and must make up, as far as possible,

for the incomplete conclusiveness of any one indication, by obtaining others

to corroborate it. The principles of induction applicable to approximate

generalization are therefore a not less important subject of inquiry than the

rules for the investigation of universal truths; and might reasonably be

expected to detain us almost as long, were it not that these principles are mere

corollaries from those which have been already treated of.

              § 3. There are two sorts of cases in which we are forced to guide

ourselves by generalizations of the imperfect form, Most A are B. The first is,

when we have no others; when we have not been able to carry our

investigation of the laws of the phenomena any further; as in the following

propositions — Most dark-eyed persons have dark hair; Most springs contain

mineral substances; Most stratified formations contain fossils. The

importance of this class of generalizations is not very great; for, though it

frequently happens that we see no reason why that which is true of most

individuals of a class is not true of the remainder, nor are able to bring the

former under any general description which can distinguish them from the

latter, yet if we are willing to be satisfied with propositions of a less degree ofgenerality, and to break down the class A into sub-classes, we may generally

obtain a collection of propositions exactly true. We do not know why most

wood is lighter than water, nor can we point out any general property which

discriminates wood that is lighter than water from that which is heavier. But

we know exactly what species are the one and what the other. And if we meet

with a specimen not conformable to any known species (the only case in

which our previous knowledge affords no other guidance than the

approximate generalization), we can generally make a specific experiment,

which is a surer resource.

              It often happens, however, that the proposition, Most A are B, is not

the ultimatum of our scientific attainments, though the knowledge we possess

beyond it can not conveniently be brought to bear upon the particular

instance. We may know well enough what circumstances distinguish the

portion of A which has the attribute B from the portion which has it not, but

may have no means, or may not have time, to examine whether those

characteristic circumstances exist or not in the individual case. This is the

situation we are generally in when the inquiry is of the kind called moral, that

is, of the kind which has in view to predict human actions. To enable us to

affirm any thing universally concerning the actions of classes of human

beings, the classification must be grounded on the circumstances of their

mental culture and habits, which in an individual case are seldom exactly

known; and classes grounded on these distinctions would never precisely

accord with those into which mankind are divided for social purposes. All

propositions which can be framed respecting the actions of human beings as

ordinarily classified, or as classified according to any kind of outward

indications, are merely approximate. We can only say, Most persons of a

particular age, profession, country, or rank in society, have such and such

qualities; or, Most persons, when placed in certain circumstances, act in such

and such a way. Not that we do not often know well enough on what causes

the qualities depend, or what sort of persons they are who act in that

particular way; but we have seldom the means of knowing whether any

individual person has been under the influence of those causes, or is a person

of that particular sort. We could replace the approximate generalizations by

propositions universally true; but these would hardly ever be capable of being

applied to practice. We should be sure of our majors, but we should not be

able to get minors to fit; we are forced, therefore, to draw our conclusions

from coarser and more fallible indications.              § 4. Proceeding now to consider what is to be regarded as sufficient

evidence of an approximate generalization, we can have no difficulty in at

once recognizing that, when admissible at all, it is admissible only as an

empirical law. Propositions of the form, Every A is B, are not necessarily

laws of causation, or ultimate uniformities of co-existence; propositions like

Most A are B, can not be so. Propositions hitherto found true in every

observed instance may yet be no necessary consequence of laws of causation,

or of ultimate uniformities, and unless they are so, may, for aught we know,

be false beyond the limits of actual observation; still more evidently must this

be the case with propositions which are only true in a mere majority of the

observed instances.

              There is some difference, however, in the degree of certainty of the

proposition, Most A are B, according as that approximate generalization

composes the whole of our knowledge of the subject, or not. Suppose, first,

that the former is the case. We know only that most A are B, not why they are

so, nor in what respect those which are differ from those which are not. How,

then, did we learn that most A are B? Precisely in the manner in which we

should have learned, had such happened to be the fact that all A are B. We

collected a number of instances sufficient to eliminate chance, and, having

done so, compared the number of instances in the affirmative with the

number in the negative. The result, like other unresolved derivative laws, can

be relied on solely within the limits not only of place and time, but also of

circumstance, under which its truth has been actually observed; for, as we are

supposed to be ignorant of the causes which make the proposition true, we

can not tell in what manner any new circumstance might perhaps affect it.

The proposition, Most judges are inaccessible to bribes, would probably be

found true of Englishmen, Frenchmen, Germans, North Americans, and so

forth; but if on this evidence alone we extended the assertion to Orientals, we

should step beyond the limits, not only of place but of circumstance, within

which the fact had been observed, and should let in possibilities of the

absence of the determining causes, or the presence of counteracting ones,

which might be fatal to the approximate generalization.

              In the case where the approximate proposition is not the ultimatum

of our scientific knowledge, but only the most available form of it for

practical guidance; where we know, not only that most A have the attribute

B, but also the causes of B, or some properties by which the portion of Awhich has that attribute is distinguished from the portion which has it not, we

are rather more favorably situated than in the preceding case. For we have

now a double mode of ascertaining whether it be true that most A are B; the

direct mode, as before, and an indirect one, that of examining whether the

proposition admits of being deduced from the known cause, or from any

known criterion, of B. Let the question, for example, be whether most

Scotchmen can read? We may not have observed, or received the testimony

of others respecting, a sufficient number and variety of Scotchmen to

ascertain this fact; but when we consider that the cause of being able to read

is the having been taught it, another mode of determining the question

presents itself, namely, by inquiring whether most Scotchmen have been sent

to schools where reading is effectually taught. Of these two modes,

sometimes one and sometimes the other is the more available. In some cases,

the frequency of the effect is the more accessible to that extensive and varied

observation which is indispensable to the establishment of an empirical law;

at other times, the frequency of the causes, or of some collateral indications.

It commonly happens that neither is susceptible of so satisfactory an

induction as could be desired, and that the grounds on which the conclusion

is received are compounded of both. Thus a person may believe that most

Scotchmen can read, because, so far as his information extends, most

Scotchmen have been sent to school, and most Scotch schools teach reading

effectually; and also because most of the Scotchmen whom he has known or

heard of could read; though neither of these two sets of observations may by

itself fulfill the necessary conditions of extent and variety.

              Although the approximate generalization may in most cases be

indispensable for our guidance, even when we know the cause, or some

certain mark, of the attribute predicated, it needs hardly be observed that we

may always replace the uncertain indication by a certain one, in any case in

which we can actually recognize the existence of the cause or mark. For

example, an assertion is made by a witness, and the question is whether to

believe it. If we do not look to any of the individual circumstances of the

case, we have nothing to direct us but the approximate generalization, that

truth is more common than falsehood, or, in other words, that most persons,

on most occasions, speak truth. But if we consider in what circumstances the

cases where truth is spoken differ from those in which it is not, we find, for

instance, the following: the witness’s being an honest person or not; his being

an accurate observer or not; his having an interest to serve in the matter ornot. Now, not only may we be able to obtain other approximate

generalizations respecting the degree of frequency of these various

possibilities, but we may know which of them is positively realized in the

individual case. That the witness has or has not an interest to serve, we

perhaps know directly; and the other two points indirectly, by means of

marks; as, for example, from his conduct on some former occasion; or from

his reputation, which, though a very uncertain mark, affords an approximate

generalization (as, for instance, Most persons who are believed to be honest

by those with whom they have had frequent dealings, are really so), which

approaches nearer to a universal truth than the approximate general

proposition with which we set out, viz., Most persons on most occasions

speak truth.

              As it seems unnecessary to dwell further on the question of the

evidence of approximate generalizations, we shall proceed to a not less

important topic, that of the cautions to be observed in arguing from these

incompletely universal propositions to particular cases.

              § 5. So far as regards the direct application of an approximate

generalization to an individual instance, this question presents no difficulty.

If the proposition, Most A are B, has been established, by a sufficient

induction, as an empirical law, we may conclude that any particular A is B

with a probability proportioned to the preponderance of the number of

affirmative instances over the number of exceptions. If it has been found

practicable to attain numerical precision in the data, a corresponding degree

of precision may be given to the evaluation of the chances of error in the

conclusion. If it can be established as an empirical law that nine out of every

ten A are B, there will be one chance in ten of error in assuming that any A,

not individually known to us, is a B: but this of course holds only within the

limits of time, place, and circumstance, embraced in the observations, and

therefore can not be counted on for any sub-class or variety of A (or for A in

any set of external circumstances) which were not included in the average. It

must be added, that we can guide ourselves by the proposition, Nine out of

every ten A are B, only in cases of which we know nothing except that they

fall within the class A. For if we know, of any particular instances i , not only

that it falls under A, but to what species or variety of A it belongs, we shall

generally err in applying to i the average struck for the whole genus, from

which the average corresponding to that species alone would, in allprobability, materially differ. And so if i , instead of being a particular sort of

instance, is an instance known to be under the influence of a particular set of

circumstances, the presumption drawn from the numerical proportions in the

whole genus would probably, in such a case, only mislead. A general average

should only be applied to cases which are neither known, nor can be

presumed, to be other than average cases. Such averages, therefore, are

commonly of little use for the practical guidance of any affairs but those

which concern large numbers. Tables of the chances of life are useful to

insurance offices, but they go a very little way toward informing any one of

the chances of his own life, or any other life in which he is interested, since

almost every life is either better or worse than the average. Such averages can

only be considered as supplying the first term in a series of approximations;

the subsequent terms proceeding on an appreciation of the circumstances

belonging to the particular case.

              § 6. From the application of a single approximate generalization to

individual cases, we proceed to the application of two or more of them

together to the same case.

              When a judgment applied to an individual instance is grounded on

two approximate generalizations taken in conjunction, the propositions may

cooperate toward the result in two different ways. In the one, each

proposition is separately applicable to the case in hand, and our object in

combining them is to give to the conclusion in that particular case the double

probability arising from the two propositions separately. This may be called

joining two probabilities by way of Addition; and the result is a probability

greater than either. The other mode is, when only one of the propositions is

directly applicable to the case, the second being only applicable to it by virtue

of the application of the first. This is joining two probabilities by way of

Ratiocination or Deduction; the result of which is a less probability than

either. The type of the first argument is, Most A are B; most C are B; this

thing is both an A and a C; therefore it is probably a B. The type of the

second is, Most A are B; most C are A; this is a C; therefore it is probably an

A, therefore it is probably a B. The first is exemplified when we prove a fact

by the testimony of two unconnected witnesses; the second, when we adduce

only the testimony of one witness that he has heard the thing asserted by

another. Or again, in the first mode it may be argued that the accused

committed the crime, because he concealed himself, and because his clotheswere stained with blood; in the second, that he committed it because he

washed or destroyed his clothes, which is supposed to render it probable that

they were stained with blood. Instead of only two links, as in these instances,

we may suppose chains of any length. A chain of the former kind was termed
            195
by Bentham a self-corroborative chain of evidence; the second, a self-

infirmative chain.

              When approximate generalizations are joined by way of addition, we

may deduce from the theory of probabilities laid down in a former chapter, in

what manner each of them adds to the probability of a conclusion which has

the warrant of them all.

              If, on an average, two of every three As are Bs, and three of every

four Cs are Bs, the probability that something which is both an A and a C is a

B, will be more than two in three, or than three in four. Of every twelve

things which are As, all except four are Bs by the supposition; and if the

whole twelve, and consequently those four, have the characters of C likewise,

three of these will be Bs on that ground. Therefore, out of twelve which are

both As and Cs, eleven are Bs. To state the argument in another way; a thing

which is both an A and a C, but which is not a B, is found in only one of

three sections of the class A, and in only one of four sections of the class C;

but this fourth of C being spread over the whole of A indiscriminately, only

one-third part of it (or one-twelfth of the whole number) belongs to the third

section of A; therefore a thing which is not a B occurs only once, among

twelve things which are both As and Cs. The argument would, in the

language of the doctrine of chances, be thus expressed: the chance that an A

is not a B is 1/3, the chance that a C is not a B is 1/4; hence if the thing be
                                                          196
both an A and a C, the chance is 1/3 of 1/4 = 1/12.

              In this computation it is of course supposed that the probabilities

arising from A and C are independent of each other. There must not be any

such connection between A and C, that when a thing belongs to the one class

it will therefore belong to the other, or even have a greater chance of doing

so. Otherwise the not-Bs which are Cs may be, most or even all of them,

identical with the not-Bs which are As; in which last case the probability

arising from A and C together will be no greater than that arising from A

alone.

              When approximate generalizations are joined together in the othermode, that of deduction, the degree of probability of the inference, instead of

increasing, diminishes at each step. From two such premises as Most A are B,

Most B are C, we can not with certainty conclude that even a single A is C;

for the whole of the portion of A which in any way falls under B, may

perhaps be comprised in the exceptional part of it. Still, the two propositions

in question afford an appreciable probability that any given A is C, provided

the average on which the second proposition is grounded was taken fairly

with reference to the first; provided the proposition, Most B are C, was

arrived at in a manner leaving no suspicion that the probability arising from it

is otherwise than fairly distributed over the section of B which belongs to A.

For though the instances which are A may be all in the minority, they may,

also, be all in the majority; and the one possibility is to be set against the

other. On the whole, the probability arising from the two propositions taken

together, will be correctly measured by the probability arising from the one,

abated in the ratio of that arising from the other. If nine out of ten Swedes

have light hair, and eight out of nine inhabitants of Stockholm are Swedes,

the probability arising from these two propositions, that any given inhabitant

of Stockholm is light-haired, will amount to eight in ten; though it is

rigorously possible that the whole Swedish population of Stockholm might

belong to that tenth section of the people of Sweden who are an exception to

the rest.

              If the premises are known to be true not of a bare majority, but of

nearly the whole, of their respective subjects, we may go on joining one such

proposition to another for several steps, before we reach a conclusion not

presumably true even of a majority. The error of the conclusion will amount

to the aggregate of the errors of all the premises. Let the proposition, most A

are B, be true of nine in ten; Most B are C, of eight in nine; then not only will

one A in ten not be C, because not B, but even of the nine-tenths which are B,

only eight-ninths will be C; that is, the cases of A which are C will be only

8/9 of 9/10, or four-fifths. Let us now add Most C are D, and suppose this to

be true of seven cases out of eight; the proportion of A which is D will be

only 7/8 of 8/9 of 9/10, or 7/10. Thus the probability progressively dwindles.

The experience, however, on which our approximate generalizations are

grounded, has so rarely been subjected to, or admits of, accurate numerical

estimation, that we can not in general apply any measurement to the

diminution of probability which takes place at each illation; but must be

content with remembering that it does diminish at every step, and that unlessthe premises approach very nearly indeed to being universally true, the

conclusion after a very few steps is worth nothing. A hearsay of a hearsay, or

an argument from presumptive evidence depending not on immediate marks

but on marks of marks, is worthless at a very few removes from the first

stage.

              § 7. There are, however, two cases in which reasonings depending

on approximate generalizations may be carried to any length we please with

as much assurance, and are as strictly scientific, as if they were composed of

universal laws of nature. But these cases are exceptions of the sort which are

currently said to prove the rule. The approximate generalizations are as

suitable, in the cases in question, for purposes of ratiocination, as if they were

complete generalizations, because they are capable of being transformed into

complete generalizations exactly equivalent.

              First: If the approximate generalization is of the class in which our

reason for stopping at the approximation is not the impossibility, but only the

inconvenience, of going further; if we are cognizant of the character which

distinguishes the cases that accord with the generalization from those which

are exceptions to it; we may then substitute for the approximate proposition, a

universal proposition with a proviso. The proposition, Most persons who

have uncontrolled power employ it ill, is a generalization of this class, and

may be transformed into the following: All persons who have uncontrolled

power employ it ill, provided they are not persons of unusual strength of

judgment and rectitude of purpose. The proposition, carrying the hypothesis

or proviso with it, may then be dealt with no longer as an approximate, but as

a universal proposition; and to whatever number of steps the reasoning may

reach, the hypothesis, being carried forward to the conclusion, will exactly

indicate how far that conclusion is from being applicable universally. If in the

course of the argument other approximate generalizations are introduced,

each of them being in like manner expressed as a universal proposition with a

condition annexed, the sum of all the conditions will appear at the end as the

sum of all the errors which affect the conclusion. Thus, to the proposition last

cited, let us add the following: All absolute monarchs have uncontrolled

power, unless their position is such that they need the active support of their

subjects (as was the case with Queen Elizabeth, Frederick of Prussia, and

others). Combining these two propositions, we can deduce from them a

universal conclusion, which will be subject to both the hypotheses in thepremises; All absolute monarchs employ their power ill, unless their position

makes them need the active support of their subjects, or unless they are

persons of unusual strength of judgment and rectitude of purpose. It is of no

consequence how rapidly the errors in our premises accumulate, if we are

able in this manner to record each error, and keep an account of the aggregate

as it swells up.

              Secondly: there is a case in which approximate propositions, even

without our taking note of the conditions under which they are not true of

individual cases, are yet, for the purposes of science, universal ones; namely,

in the inquiries which relate to the properties not of individuals, but of

multitudes. The principal of these is the science of politics, or of human

society. This science is principally concerned with the actions not of solitary

individuals, but of masses; with the fortunes not of single persons, but of

communities. For the statesman, therefore, it is generally enough to know

that most persons act or are acted upon in a particular way; since his

speculations and his practical arrangements refer almost exclusively to cases

in which the whole community, or some large portion of it, is acted upon at

once, and in which, therefore, what is done or felt by most persons

determines the result produced by or upon the body at large. He can get on

well enough with approximate generalizations on human nature, since what is

true approximately of all individuals is true absolutely of all masses. And

even when the operations of individual men have a part to play in his

deductions, as when he is reasoning of kings, or other single rulers, still, as he

is providing for indefinite duration, involving an indefinite succession of such

individuals, he must in general both reason and act as if what is true of most

persons were true of all.

              The two kinds of considerations above adduced are a sufficient

refutation of the popular error, that speculations on society and government,

as resting on merely probable evidence, must be inferior in certainty and

scientific accuracy to the conclusions of what are called the exact sciences,

and less to be relied on in practice. There are reasons enough why the moral

sciences must remain inferior to at least the more perfect of the physical; why

the laws of their more complicated phenomena can not be so completely

deciphered, nor the phenomena predicted with the same degree of assurance.

But though we can not attain to so many truths, there is no reason that those

we can attain should deserve less reliance, or have less of a scientificcharacter. Of this topic, however, I shall treat more systematically in the

concluding Book, to which place any further consideration of it must be

deferred.

 

 

           Chapter XXIV. – Of The Remaining Laws Of Nature.

 

 

              § 1. In the First Book we found that all the assertions which can be

conveyed by language, express some one or more of five different things:
                                                                                    197
Existence; Order in Place; Order in Time; Causation; and Resemblance. Of

these, Causation, in our view of the subject, not being fundamentally

different from Order in Time, the five species of possible assertions are

reduced to four. The propositions which affirm Order in Time in either of its

two modes, Co-existence and Succession, have formed, thus far, the subject

of the present Book. And we have now concluded the exposition, so far as it

falls within the limits assigned to this work, of the nature of the evidence on

which these propositions rest, and the processes of investigation by which

they are ascertained and proved. There remain three classes of facts:

Existence, Order in Place, and Resemblance; in regard to which the same

questions are now to be resolved.

              Regarding the first of these, very little needs be said. Existence in

general, is a subject not for our science, but for metaphysics. To determine

what things can be recognized as really existing, independently of our own

sensible or other impressions, and in what meaning the term is, in that case,

predicated of them, belongs to the consideration of “Things in themselves,”

from which, throughout this work, we have as much as possible kept aloof.

Existence, so far as Logic is concerned about it, has reference only to

phenomena; to actual, or possible, states of external or internal

consciousness, in ourselves or others. Feelings of sensitive beings, or

possibilities of having such feelings, are the only things the existence of

which can be a subject of logical induction, because the only things of which

the existence in individual cases can be a subject of experience.

              It is true that a thing is said by us to exist, even when it is absent, and

therefore is not and can not be perceived. But even then, its existence is to us

only another word for our conviction that we should perceive it on a certain

supposition; namely, if we were in the needful circumstances of time and

place, and endowed with the needful perfection of organs. My belief that the

Emperor of China exists, is simply my belief that if I were transported to the

imperial palace or some other locality in Pekin, I should see him. My beliefthat Julius Cæsar existed, is my belief that I should have seen him if I had

been present in the field of Pharsalia, or in the senate-house at Rome. When I

believe that stars exist beyond the utmost range of my vision, though assisted

by the most powerful telescopes yet invented, my belief, philosophically

expressed, is, that with still better telescopes, if such existed, I could see

them, or that they may be perceived by beings less remote from them in

space, or whose capacities of perception are superior to mine.

              The existence, therefore, of a phenomenon, is but another word for

its being perceived, or for the inferred possibility of perceiving it. When the

phenomenon is within the range of present observation, by present

observation we assure ourselves of its existence; when it is beyond that range,

and is therefore said to be absent, we infer its existence from marks or

evidences. But what can these evidences be? Other phenomena; ascertained

by induction to be connected with the given phenomenon, either in the way

of succession or of co-existence. The simple existence, therefore, of an

individual phenomenon, when not directly perceived, is inferred from some

inductive law of succession or co-existence; and is consequently not

amenable to any peculiar inductive principles. We prove the existence of a

thing, by proving that it is connected by succession or co-existence with some

known thing.

              With respect to general propositions of this class, that is, which

affirm the bare fact of existence, they have a peculiarity which renders the

logical treatment of them a very easy matter; they are generalizations which

are sufficiently proved by a single instance. That ghosts, or unicorns, or sea-

serpents exist, would be fully established if it could be ascertained positively

that such things had been even once seen. Whatever has once happened, is

capable of happening again; the only question relates to the conditions under

which it happens.

              So far, therefore, as relates to simple existence, the Inductive Logic

has no knots to untie. And we may proceed to the remaining two of the great

classes into which facts have been divided; Resemblance, and Order in Place.

              § 2. Resemblance and its opposite, except in the case in which they

assume the names of Equality and Inequality, are seldom regarded as subjects

of science; they are supposed to be perceived by simple apprehension; by

merely applying our senses or directing our attention to the two objects atonce, or in immediate succession. And this simultaneous, or virtually

simultaneous, application of our faculties to the two things which are to be

compared, does necessarily constitute the ultimate appeal, wherever such

application is practicable. But, in most cases, it is not practicable: the objects

can not be brought so close together that the feeling of their resemblance (at

least a complete feeling of it) directly arises in the mind. We can only

compare each of them with some third object, capable of being transported

from one to the other. And besides, even when the objects can be brought

into immediate juxtaposition, their resemblance or difference is but

imperfectly known to us, unless we have compared them minutely, part by

part. Until this has been done, things in reality very dissimilar often appear

undistinguishably alike. Two lines of very unequal length will appear about

equal when lying in different directions; but place them parallel with their

farther extremities even, and if we look at the nearer extremities, their

inequality becomes a matter of direct perception.

              To ascertain whether, and in what, two phenomena resemble or

differ, is not always, therefore, so easy a thing as it might at first appear.

When the two can not be brought into juxtaposition, or not so that the

observer is able to compare their several parts in detail, he must employ the

indirect means of reasoning and general propositions. When we can not bring

two straight lines together, to determine whether they are equal, we do it by

the physical aid of a foot-rule applied first to one and then to the other, and

the logical aid of the general proposition or formula, “Things which are equal

to the same thing are equal to one another.” The comparison of two things

through the intervention of a third thing, when their direct comparison is

impossible, is the appropriate scientific process for ascertaining resemblances

and dissimilarities, and is the sum total of what Logic has to teach on the

subject.

              An undue extension of this remark induced Locke to consider

reasoning itself as nothing but the comparison of two ideas through the

medium of a third, and knowledge as the perception of the agreement or

disagreement of two ideas; doctrines which the Condillac school blindly

adopted, without the qualifications and distinctions with which they were

studiously guarded by their illustrious author. Where, indeed, the agreement

or disagreement (otherwise called resemblance or dissimilarity) of any two

things is the very matter to be determined, as is the case particularly in thesciences of quantity and extension; there, the process by which a solution, if

not attainable by direct perception, must be indirectly sought, consists in

comparing these two things through the medium of a third. But this is far

from being true of all inquiries. The knowledge that bodies fall to the ground

is not a perception of agreement or disagreement, but of a series of physical

occurrences, a succession of sensations. Locke’s definitions of knowledge

and of reasoning required to be limited to our knowledge of, and reasoning

about, resemblances. Nor, even when thus restricted, are the propositions

strictly correct; since the comparison is not made, as he represents, between

the ideas of the two phenomena, but between the phenomena themselves.
                                                                              198
This mistake has been pointed out in an earlier part of our inquiry, and we

traced it to an imperfect conception of what takes place in mathematics,

where very often the comparison is really made between the ideas, without

any appeal to the outward senses; only, however, because in mathematics a

comparison of the ideas is strictly equivalent to a comparison of the

phenomena themselves. Where, as in the case of numbers, lines, and figures,

our idea of an object is a complete picture of the object, so far as respects the

matter in hand; we can, of course, learn from the picture, whatever could be

learned from the object itself by mere contemplation of it as it exists at the

particular instant when the picture is taken. No mere contemplation of

gunpowder would ever teach us that a spark would make it explode, nor,

consequently, would the contemplation of the idea of gunpowder do so; but

the mere contemplation of a straight line shows that it can not inclose a space;

accordingly the contemplation of the idea of it will show the same. What

takes place in mathematics is thus no argument that the comparison is

between the ideas only. It is always, either indirectly or directly, a

comparison of the phenomena.

              In cases in which we can not bring the phenomena to the test of

direct inspection at all, or not in a manner sufficiently precise, but must judge

of their resemblance by inference from other resemblances or dissimilarities

more accessible to observation, we of course require, as in all cases of

ratiocination, generalizations or formulæ applicable to the subject. We must

reason from laws of nature; from the uniformities which are observable in the

fact of likeness or unlikeness.

              § 3. Of these laws or uniformities, the most comprehensive are those

supplied by mathematics; the axioms relating to equality, inequality, andproportionality, and the various theorems thereon founded. And these are the

only Laws of Resemblance which require to be, or which can be, treated

apart. It is true there are innumerable other theorems which affirm

resemblances among phenomena; as that the angle of the reflection of light is

equal to its angle of incidence (equality being merely exact resemblance in

magnitude). Again, that the heavenly bodies describe equal areas in equal

times; and that their periods of revolution are proportional (another species

of resemblance) to the sesquiplicate powers of their distances from the centre

of force. These and similar propositions affirm resemblances, of the same

nature with those asserted in the theorems of mathematics; but the distinction

is, that the propositions of mathematics are true of all phenomena whatever,

or at least without distinction of origin; while the truths in question are

affirmed only of special phenomena, which originate in a certain way; and

the equalities, proportionalities, or other resemblances, which exist between

such phenomena, must necessarily be either derived from, or identical with,

the law of their origin — the law of causation on which they depend. The

equality of the areas described in equal times by the planets, is derived from

the laws of the causes; and, until its derivation was shown, it was an

empirical law. The equality of the angles of reflection and incidence is

identical with the law of the cause; for the cause is the incidence of a ray of

light upon a reflecting surface, and the equality in question is the very law

according to which that cause produces its effects. This class, therefore, of

the uniformities of resemblance between phenomena, are inseparable, in fact

and in thought, from the laws of the production of those phenomena; and the

principles of induction applicable to them are no other than those of which

we have treated in the preceding chapters of this Book.

              It is otherwise with the truths of mathematics. The laws of equality

and inequality between spaces, or between numbers, have no connection with

laws of causation. That the angle of reflection is equal to the angle of

incidence, is a statement of the mode of action of a particular cause; but that

when two straight lines intersect each other the opposite angles are equal, is

true of all such lines and angles, by whatever cause produced. That the

squares of the periodic times of the planets are proportional to the cubes of

their distances from the sun, is a uniformity derived from the laws of the

causes (or forces) which produce the planetary motions; but that the square of

any number is four times the square of half the number, is true independently

of any cause. The only laws of resemblance, therefore, which we are calledupon to consider independently of causation, belong to the province of

mathematics.

              § 4. The same thing is evident with respect to the only one remaining

of our five categories, Order in Place. The order in place, of the effects of a

cause, is (like every thing else belonging to the effects) a consequence of the

laws of that cause. The order in place, or, as we have termed it, the

collocation, of the primeval causes, is (as well as their resemblance) in each

instance an ultimate fact, in which no laws or uniformities are traceable. The

only remaining general propositions respecting order in place, and the only

ones which have nothing to do with causation, are some of the truths of

geometry; laws through which we are able, from the order in place of certain

points, lines, or spaces, to infer the order in place of others which are

connected with the former in some known mode; quite independently of the

particular nature of those points, lines, or spaces, in any other respect than

position or magnitude, as well as independently of the physical cause from

which in any particular case they happen to derive their origin.

              It thus appears that mathematics is the only department of science

into the methods of which it still remains to inquire. And there is the less

necessity that this inquiry should occupy us long, as we have already, in the

Second Book, made considerable progress in it. We there remarked, that the

directly inductive truths of mathematics are few in number; consisting of the

axioms, together with certain propositions concerning existence, tacitly

involved in most of the so-called definitions. And we gave what appeared

conclusive reasons for affirming that these original premises, from which the

remaining truths of the science are deduced, are, notwithstanding all

appearances to the contrary, results of observation and experience; founded,

in short, on the evidence of the senses. That things equal to the same thing are

equal to one another, and that two straight lines which have once intersected

one another continue to diverge, are inductive truths; resting, indeed, like the

law of universal causation, only on induction per enumerationem simplicem ;

on the fact that they have been perpetually perceived to be true, and never

once found to be false. But, as we have seen in a recent chapter that this

evidence, in the case of a law so completely universal as the law of causation,

amounts to the fullest proof, so is this even more evidently true of the general

propositions to which we are now adverting; because, as a perception of their

truth in any individual case whatever, requires only the simple act of lookingat the objects in a proper position, there never could have been in their case

(what, for a long period, there were in the case of the law of causation)

instances which were apparently, though not really, exceptions to them. Their

infallible truth was recognized from the very dawn of speculation; and as

their extreme familiarity made it impossible for the mind to conceive the

objects under any other law, they were, and still are, generally considered as

truths recognized by their own evidence, or by instinct.

              § 5. There is something which seems to require explanation, in the

fact that the immense multitude of truths (a multitude still as far from being

exhausted as ever) comprised in the mathematical sciences, can be elicited

from so small a number of elementary laws. One sees not, at first, how it is

that there can be room for such an infinite variety of true propositions, on

subjects apparently so limited.

              To begin with the science of number. The elementary or ultimate

truths of this science are the common axioms concerning equality, namely,

“Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another,” and
                                                                                        199
“Equals added to equals make equal sums” (no other axioms are required),

together with the definitions of the various numbers. Like other so-called

definitions, these are composed of two things, the explanation of a name, and

the assertion of a fact; of which the latter alone can form a first principle or

premise of a science. The fact asserted in the definition of a number is a

physical fact. Each of the numbers two, three, four, etc., denotes physical

phenomena, and connotes a physical property of those phenomena. Two, for

instance, denotes all pairs of things, and twelve all dozens of things,

connoting what makes them pairs, or dozens; and that which makes them so

is something physical; since it can not be denied that two apples are

physically distinguishable from three apples, two horses from one horse, and

so forth; that they are a different visible and tangible phenomenon. I am not

undertaking to say what the difference is; it is enough that there is a

difference of which the senses can take cognizance. And although a hundred

and two horses are not so easily distinguished from a hundred and three, as

two horses are from three — though in most positions the senses do not

perceive any difference — yet they may be so placed that a difference will be

perceptible, or else we should never have distinguished them, and given them

different names. Weight is confessedly a physical property of things; yet

small differences between great weights are as imperceptible to the senses inmost situations, as small differences between great numbers; and are only put

in evidence by placing the two objects in a peculiar position — namely, in the

opposite scales of a delicate balance.

              What, then, is that which is connoted by a name of number? Of

course, some property belonging to the agglomeration of things which we

call by the name; and that property is, the characteristic manner in which the

agglomeration is made up of, and may be separated into, parts. I will

endeavor to make this more intelligible by a few explanations.

              When we call a collection of objects two , three , or four , they are

not two, three, or four in the abstract; they are two, three, or four things of

some particular kind; pebbles, horses, inches, pounds’ weight. What the name

of number connotes is, the manner in which single objects of the given kind

must be put together, in order to produce that particular aggregate. If the

aggregate be of pebbles, and we call it two , the name implies that, to

compose the aggregate, one pebble must be joined to one pebble. If we call it

three , one and one and one pebble must be brought together to produce it, or

else one pebble must be joined to an aggregate of the kind called two ,

already existing. The aggregate which we call four , has a still greater number

of characteristic modes of formation. One and one and one and one pebble

may be brought together; or two aggregates of the kind called two may be

united; or one pebble may be added to an aggregate of the kind called three .

Every succeeding number in the ascending series, may be formed by the

junction of smaller numbers in a progressively greater variety of ways. Even

limiting the parts to two, the number may be formed, and consequently may

be divided, in as many different ways as there are numbers smaller than itself;

and, if we admit of threes, fours, etc., in a still greater variety. Other modes of

arriving at the same aggregate present themselves, not by the union of

smaller, but by the dismemberment of larger aggregates. Thus, three pebbles

may be formed by taking away one pebble from an aggregate of four; two

pebbles , by an equal division of a similar aggregate; and so on.

              Every arithmetical proposition; every statement of the result of an

arithmetical operation; is a statement of one of the modes of formation of a

given number. It affirms that a certain aggregate might have been formed by

putting together certain other aggregates, or by withdrawing certain portions

of some aggregate; and that, by consequence, we might reproduce those

aggregates from it, by reversing the process.              Thus, when we say that the cube of 12 is 1728, what we affirm is

this: that if, having a sufficient number of pebbles or of any other objects, we

put them together into the particular sort of parcels or aggregates called

twelves; and put together these twelves again into similar collections; and,

finally, make up twelve of these largest parcels; the aggregate thus formed

will be such a one as we call 1728; namely, that which (to take the most

familiar of its modes of formation) may be made by joining the parcel called

a thousand pebbles, the parcel called seven hundred pebbles, the parcel called

twenty pebbles, and the parcel called eight pebbles.

              The converse proposition that the cube root of 1728 is 12, asserts

that this large aggregate may again be decomposed into the twelve twelves of

twelves of pebbles which it consists of.

              The modes of formation of any number are innumerable; but when

we know one mode of formation of each, all the rest may be determined

deductively. If we know that a is formed from b and c , b from a and e , c

from d and f , and so forth, until we have included all the numbers of any

scale we choose to select (taking care that for each number the mode of

formation be really a distinct one, not bringing us round again to the former

numbers, but introducing a new number), we have a set of propositions from

which we may reason to all the other modes of formation of those numbers

from one another. Having established a chain of inductive truths connecting

together all the numbers of the scale, we can ascertain the formation of any

one of those numbers from any other by merely traveling from one to the

other along the chain. Suppose that we know only the following modes of

formation: 6=4+2, 4=7–3, 7=5+2, 5=9–4. We could determine how 6 may be

formed from 9. For 6=4+2=7–3+2=5+2–3+2=9–4+2–3+2. It may therefore

be formed by taking away 4 and 3, and adding 2 and 2. If we know besides

that 2+2=4, we obtain 6 from 9 in a simpler mode, by merely taking away 3.

              It is sufficient, therefore, to select one of the various modes of

formation of each number, as a means of ascertaining all the rest. And since

things which are uniform, and therefore simple, are most easily received and

retained by the understanding, there is an obvious advantage in selecting a

mode of formation which shall be alike for all; in fixing the connotation of

names of number on one uniform principle. The mode in which our existing

numerical nomenclature is contrived possesses this advantage, with the

additional one, that it happily conveys to the mind two of the modes offormation of every number. Each number is considered as formed by the

addition of a unit to the number next below it in magnitude, and this mode of

formation is conveyed by the place which it occupies in the series. And each

is also considered as formed by the addition of a number of units less than

ten, and a number of aggregates each equal to one of the successive powers

of ten; and this mode of its formation is expressed by its spoken name, and by

its numerical character.

              What renders arithmetic the type of a deductive science, is the

fortunate applicability to it of a law so comprehensive as “The sums of equals

are equals:” or (to express the same principle in less familiar but more

characteristic language), Whatever is made up of parts, is made up of the

parts of those parts. This truth, obvious to the senses in all cases which can be

fairly referred to their decision, and so general as to be co-extensive with

nature itself, being true of all sorts of phenomena (for all admit of being

numbered), must be considered an inductive truth, or law of nature, of the

highest order. And every arithmetical operation is an application of this law,

or of other laws capable of being deduced from it. This is our warrant for all

calculations. We believe that five and two are equal to seven, on the evidence

of this inductive law, combined with the definitions of those numbers. We

arrive at that conclusion (as all know who remember how they first learned it)

by adding a single unit at a time: 5 + 1=6, therefore 5+1+1=6+1=7; and again

2=1+1, therefore 5+2=5+1+1=7.

              § 6. Innumerable as are the true propositions which can be formed

concerning particular numbers, no adequate conception could be gained, from

these alone, of the extent of the truths composing the science of number.

Such propositions as we have spoken of are the least general of all numerical

truths. It is true that even these are co-extensive with all nature; the properties

of the number four are true of all objects that are divisible into four equal

parts, and all objects are either actually or ideally so divisible. But the

propositions which compose the science of algebra are true, not of a

particular number, but of all numbers; not of all things under the condition of

being divided in a particular way, but of all things under the condition of

being divided in any way — of being designated by a number at all.

              Since it is impossible for different numbers to have any of their

modes of formation completely in common, it is a kind of paradox to say,

that all propositions which can be made concerning numbers relate to theirmodes of formation from other numbers, and yet that there are propositions

which are true of all numbers. But this very paradox leads to the real

principle of generalization concerning the properties of numbers. Two

different numbers can not be formed in the same manner from the same

numbers; but they may be formed in the same manner from different

numbers; as nine is formed from three by multiplying it into itself, and

sixteen is formed from four by the same process. Thus there arises a

classification of modes of formation, or in the language commonly used by

mathematicians, a classification of Functions. Any number, considered as

formed from any other number, is called a function of it; and there are as

many kinds of functions as there are modes of formation. The simple

functions are by no means numerous, most functions being formed by the

combination of several of the operations which form simple functions, or by

successive repetitions of some one of those operations. The simple functions

of any number x are all reducible to the following forms: x +a , x -a , ax , x /a

, log. x (to the base a ), and the same expressions varied by putting x for a and

a for x , wherever that substitution would alter the value: to which, perhaps,

ought to be added sin x , and arc (sin=x ). All other functions of x are formed

by putting some one or more of the simple functions in the place of x or a ,

and subjecting them to the same elementary operations.

              In order to carry on general reasonings on the subject of Functions,

we require a nomenclature enabling us to express any two numbers by names

which, without specifying what particular numbers they are, shall show what

function each is of the other; or, in other words, shall put in evidence their

mode of formation from one another. The system of general language called

algebraical notation does this. The expressions a and a2+3a denote, the one

any number, the other the number formed from it in a particular manner. The

expressions a , b , n , and (a+b )n, denote any three numbers, and a fourth

which is formed from them in a certain mode.

              The following may be stated as the general problem of the

algebraical calculus: F being a certain function of a given number, to find

what function F will be of any function of that number. For example, a

binomial a + b is a function of its two parts a and b , and the parts are, in

their turn, functions of a + b : now (a + b )n is a certain function of the

binomial; what function will this be of a and b , the two parts? The answer to

this question is the binomial theorem. The formula (a + b) n = a n + n/1 a n-1 b + n.n-1/1.2 a n-2 b 2 , etc., shows in what manner the number which is

formed by multiplying a + b into itself n times, might be formed without that

process, directly from a, b , and n . And of this nature are all the theorems of

the science of number. They assert the identity of the result of different

modes of formation. They affirm that some mode of formation from x , and

some mode of formation from a certain function of x , produce the same

number.

              Such, as above described, is the aim and end of the calculus. As for

its processes, every one knows that they are simply deductive. In

demonstrating an algebraical theorem, or in resolving an equation, we travel

from the datum to the quæsitum by pure ratiocination; in which the only

premises introduced, besides the original hypotheses, are the fundamental

axioms already mentioned — that things equal to the same thing are equal to

one another, and that the sums of equal things are equal. At each step in the

demonstration or in the calculation, we apply one or other of these truths, or

truths deducible from them, as, that the differences, products, etc., of equal

numbers are equal.

              It would be inconsistent with the scale of this work, and not

necessary to its design, to carry the analysis of the truths and processes of

algebra any further; which is also the less needful, as the task has been, to a

very great extent, performed by other writers. Peacock’s Algebra, and Dr.

Whewell’s Doctrine of Limits , are full of instruction on the subject. The

profound treatises of a truly philosophical mathematician, Professor De

Morgan, should be studied by every one who desires to comprehend the

evidence of mathematical truths, and the meaning of the obscurer processes

of the calculus, and the speculations of M. Comte, in his Cours de

Philosophie Positive , on the philosophy of the higher branches of

mathematics, are among the many valuable gifts for which philosophy is

indebted to that eminent thinker.

              § 7. If the extreme generality, and remoteness not so much from

sense as from the visual and tactual imagination, of the laws of number,

renders it a somewhat difficult effort of abstraction to conceive those laws as

being in reality physical truths obtained by observation; the same difficulty

does not exist with regard to the laws of extension. The facts of which those

laws are expressions, are of a kind peculiarly accessible to the senses, and

suggesting eminently distinct images to the fancy. That geometry is a strictlyphysical science would doubtless have been recognized in all ages, had it not

been for the illusions produced by two circumstances. One of these is the

characteristic property, already noticed, of the facts of geometry, that they

may be collected from our ideas or mental pictures of objects as effectually as

from the objects themselves. The other is, the demonstrative character of

geometrical truths; which was at one time supposed to constitute a radical

distinction between them and physical truths; the latter, as resting on merely

probable evidence, being deemed essentially uncertain and unprecise. The

advance of knowledge has, however, made it manifest that physical science,

in its better understood branches, is quite as demonstrative as geometry. The

task of deducing its details from a few comparatively simple principles is

found to be any thing but the impossibility it was once supposed to be; and

the notion of the superior certainty of geometry is an illusion, arising from

the ancient prejudice which, in that science, mistakes the ideal data from

which we reason, for a peculiar class of realities, while the corresponding

ideal data of any deductive physical science are recognized as what they

really are, hypotheses.

              Every theorem in geometry is a law of external nature, and might

have been ascertained by generalizing from observation and experiment,

which in this case resolve themselves into comparison and measurement. But

it was found practicable, and, being practicable, was desirable, to deduce

these truths by ratiocination from a small number of general laws of nature,

the certainty and universality of which are obvious to the most careless

observer, and which compose the first principles and ultimate premises of the

science. Among these general laws must be included the same two which we

have noticed as ultimate principles of the Science of Number also, and which

are applicable to every description of quantity; viz., The sums of equals are

equal, and Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another;

the latter of which may be expressed in a manner more suggestive of the

inexhaustible multitude of its consequences, by the following terms:

Whatever is equal to any one of a number of equal magnitudes, is equal to

any other of them. To these two must be added, in geometry, a third law of

equality, namely, that lines, surfaces, or solid spaces, which can be so applied

to one another as to coincide, are equal. Some writers have asserted that this

law of nature is a mere verbal definition; that the expression “equal

magnitudes” means nothing but magnitudes which can be so applied to one

another as to coincide. But in this opinion I can not agree. The equality oftwo geometrical magnitudes can not differ fundamentally in its nature from

the equality of two weights, two degrees of heat, or two portions of duration,

to none of which would this definition of equality be suitable. None of these

things can be so applied to one another as to coincide, yet we perfectly

understand what we mean when we call them equal. Things are equal in

magnitude, as things are equal in weight, when they are felt to be exactly

similar in respect of the attribute in which we compare them: and the

application of the objects to each other in the one case, like the balancing

them with a pair of scales in the other, is but a mode of bringing them into a

position in which our senses can recognize deficiencies of exact resemblance

that would otherwise escape our notice.

              Along with these three general principles or axioms, the remainder

of the premises of geometry consists of the so-called definitions: that is to

say, propositions asserting the real existence of the various objects therein

designated, together with some one property of each. In some cases more

than one property is commonly assumed, but in no case is more than one

necessary. It is assumed that there are such things in nature as straight lines,

and that any two of them setting out from the same point, diverge more and

more without limit. This assumption (which includes and goes beyond

Euclid’s axiom that two straight lines can not inclose a space) is as

indispensable in geometry, and as evident, resting on as simple, familiar, and

universal observation, as any of the other axioms. It is also assumed that

straight lines diverge from one another in different degrees; in other words,

that there are such things as angles, and that they are capable of being equal

or unequal. It is assumed that there is such a thing as a circle, and that all its

radii are equal; such things as ellipses, and that the sums of the focal

distances are equal for every point in an ellipse; such things as parallel lines,
                                                            200
and that those lines are everywhere equally distant.

              § 8. It is a matter of more than curiosity to consider, to what

peculiarity of the physical truths which are the subject of geometry, it is

owing that they can all be deduced from so small a number of original

premises; why it is that we can set out from only one characteristic property

of each kind of phenomenon, and with that and two or three general truths

relating to equality, can travel from mark to mark until we obtain a vast body

of derivative truths, to all appearance extremely unlike those elementary

ones.              The explanation of this remarkable fact seems to lie in the following

circumstances. In the first place, all questions of position and figure may be

resolved into questions of magnitude. The position and figure of any object

are determined by determining the position of a sufficient number of points in

it; and the position of any point may be determined by the magnitude of three

rectangular co-ordinates, that is, of the perpendiculars drawn from the point

to three planes at right angles to one another, arbitrarily selected. By this

transformation of all questions of quality into questions only of quantity,

geometry is reduced to the single problem of the measurement of magnitudes,

that is, the ascertainment of the equalities which exist between them. Now

when we consider that by one of the general axioms, any equality, when

ascertained, is proof of as many other equalities as there are other things

equal to either of the two equals; and that by another of those axioms, any

ascertained equality is proof of the equality of as many pairs of magnitudes as

can be formed by the numerous operations which resolve themselves into the

addition of the equals to themselves or to other equals; we cease to wonder

that in proportion as a science is conversant about equality, it should afford a

more copious supply of marks of marks; and that the sciences of number and

extension, which are conversant with little else than equality, should be the

most deductive of all the sciences.

              There are also two or three of the principal laws of space or

extension which are unusually fitted for rendering one position or magnitude

a mark of another, and thereby contributing to render the science largely

deductive. First, the magnitudes of inclosed spaces, whether superficial or

solid, are completely determined by the magnitudes of the lines and angles

which bound them. Secondly, the length of any line, whether straight or

curve, is measured (certain other things being given) by the angle which it

subtends, and vicè versa . Lastly, the angle which any two straight lines make

with each other at an inaccessible point, is measured by the angles they

severally make with any third line we choose to select. By means of these

general laws, the measurement of all lines, angles, and spaces whatsoever

might be accomplished by measuring a single straight line and a sufficient

number of angles; which is the plan actually pursued in the trigonometrical

survey of a country; and fortunate it is that this is practicable, the exact

measurement of long straight lines being always difficult, and often

impossible, but that of angles very easy. Three such generalizations as the

foregoing afford such facilities for the indirect measurement of magnitudes(by supplying us with known lines or angles which are marks of the

magnitude of unknown ones, and thereby of the spaces which they inclose),

that it is easily intelligible how from a few data we can go on to ascertain the

magnitude of an indefinite multitude of lines, angles, and spaces, which we

could not easily, or could not at all, measure by any more direct process.

              § 9. Such are the remarks which it seems necessary to make in this

place, respecting the laws of nature which are the peculiar subject of the

sciences of number and extension. The immense part which those laws take

in giving a deductive character to the other departments of physical science,

is well known; and is not surprising, when we consider that all causes operate

according to mathematical laws. The effect is always dependent on, or is a

function of, the quantity of the agent; and generally of its position also. We

can not, therefore, reason respecting causation, without introducing

considerations of quantity and extension at every step; and if the nature of the

phenomena admits of our obtaining numerical data of sufficient accuracy, the

laws of quantity become the grand instrument for calculating forward to an

effect, or backward to a cause. That in all other sciences, as well as in

geometry, questions of quality are scarcely ever independent of questions of

quantity, may be seen from the most familiar phenomena. Even when several

colors are mixed on a painter’s palette, the comparative quantity of each

entirely determines the color of the mixture.

              With this mere suggestion of the general causes which render

mathematical principles and processes so predominant in those deductive

sciences which afford precise numerical data, I must, on the present occasion,

content myself; referring the reader who desires a more thorough

acquaintance with the subject, to the first two volumes of M. Comte’s

systematic work.

              In the same work, and more particularly in the third volume, are also

fully discussed the limits of the applicability of mathematical principles to the

improvement of other sciences. Such principles are manifestly inapplicable,

where the causes on which any class of phenomena depend are so imperfectly

accessible to our observation, that we can not ascertain, by a proper

induction, their numerical laws; or where the causes are so numerous, and

intermixed in so complex a manner with one another, that even supposing

their laws known, the computation of the aggregate effect transcends the

powers of the calculus as it is, or is likely to be; or, lastly, where the causesthemselves are in a state of perpetual fluctuation; as in physiology, and still

more, if possible, in the social science. The mathematical solutions of

physical questions become progressively more difficult and imperfect, in

proportion as the questions divest themselves of their abstract and

hypothetical character, and approach nearer to the degree of complication

actually existing in nature; insomuch that beyond the limits of astronomical

phenomena, and of those most nearly analogous to them, mathematical

accuracy is generally obtained “at the expense of the reality of the inquiry:”

while even in astronomical questions, “notwithstanding the admirable

simplicity of their mathematical elements, our feeble intelligence becomes

incapable of following out effectually the logical combinations of the laws on

which the phenomena are dependent, as soon as we attempt to take into
                                                                                      201
simultaneous consideration more than two or three essential influences.”

Of this, the problem of the Three Bodies has already been cited, more than

once, as a remarkable instance; the complete solution of so comparatively

simple a question having vainly tried the skill of the most profound

mathematicians. We may conceive, then, how chimerical would be the hope

that mathematical principles could be advantageously applied to phenomena

dependent on the mutual action of the innumerable minute particles of

bodies, as those of chemistry, and still more, of physiology; and for similar

reasons those principles remain inapplicable to the still more complex

inquiries, the subjects of which are phenomena of society and government.

              The value of mathematical instruction as a preparation for those

more difficult investigations, consists in the applicability not of its doctrines,

but of its method. Mathematics will ever remain the most perfect type of the

Deductive Method in general; and the applications of mathematics to the

deductive branches of physics, furnish the only school in which philosophers

can effectually learn the most difficult and important portion of their art, the

employment of the laws of simpler phenomena for explaining and predicting

those of the more complex. These grounds are quite sufficient for deeming

mathematical training an indispensable basis of real scientific education, and

regarding (according to the dictum which an old but unauthentic tradition

ascribes to Plato) one who is ἀγεωμέτρητος, as wanting in one of the most

essential qualifications for the successful cultivation of the higher branches of

philosophy.

  

                 Chapter XXV. – Of The Grounds Of Disbelief.

 

 

              § 1. The method of arriving at general truths, or general propositions

fit to be believed, and the nature of the evidence on which they are grounded,

have been discussed, as far as space and the writer’s faculties permitted, in

the twenty-four preceding chapters. But the result of the examination of

evidence is not always belief, nor even suspension of judgment; it is

sometimes disbelief. The philosophy, therefore, of induction and

experimental inquiry is incomplete, unless the grounds not only of belief, but

of disbelief, are treated of; and to this topic we shall devote one, and the final,

chapter.

              By disbelief is not here to be understood the mere absence of belief.

The ground for abstaining from belief is simply the absence or insufficiency

of proof; and in considering what is sufficient evidence to support any given

conclusion, we have already, by implication, considered what evidence is not

sufficient for the same purpose. By disbelief is here meant, not the state of

mind in which we form no opinion concerning a subject, but that in which we

are fully persuaded that some opinion is not true; insomuch that if evidence,

even of great apparent strength (whether grounded on the testimony of others

or on our own supposed perceptions), were produced in favor of the opinion,

we should believe that the witnesses spoke falsely, or that they, or we

ourselves if we were the direct percipients, were mistaken.

              That there are such cases, no one is likely to dispute. Assertions for

which there is abundant positive evidence are often disbelieved, on account

of what is called their improbability, or impossibility. And the question for

consideration is what, in the present case, these words mean, and how far and

in what circumstances the properties which they express are sufficient

grounds for disbelief.

              § 2. It is to be remarked, in the first place, that the positive evidence

produced in support of an assertion which is nevertheless rejected on the

score of impossibility or improbability, is never such as amounts to full

proof. It is always grounded on some approximate generalization. The fact

may have been asserted by a hundred witnesses; but there are manyexceptions to the universality of the generalization that what a hundred

witnesses affirm is true. We may seem to ourselves to have actually seen the

fact; but that we really see what we think we see, is by no means a universal

truth; our organs may have been in a morbid state; or we may have inferred

something, and imagined that we perceived it. The evidence, then, in the

affirmative being never more than an approximate generalization, all will

depend on what the evidence in the negative is. If that also rests on an

approximate generalization, it is a case for comparison of probabilities. If the

approximate generalizations leading to the affirmative are, when added

together, less strong, or, in other words, farther from being universal, than the

approximate generalizations which support the negative side of the question,

the proposition is said to be improbable, and is to be disbelieved

provisionally. If, however, an alleged fact be in contradiction, not to any

number of approximate generalizations, but to a completed generalization

grounded on a rigorous induction, it is said to be impossible, and is to be

disbelieved totally.

              This last principle, simple and evident as it appears, is the doctrine

which, on the occasion of an attempt to apply it to the question of the

credibility of miracles, excited so violent a controversy. Hume’s celebrated

doctrine, that nothing is credible which is contradictory to experience, or at

variance with laws of nature, is merely this very plain and harmless

proposition, that whatever is contradictory to a complete induction is

incredible. That such a maxim as this should either be accounted a dangerous

heresy, or mistaken for a great and recondite truth, speaks ill for the state of

philosophical speculation on such subjects.

              But does not (it may be asked) the very statement of the proposition

imply a contradiction? An alleged fact, according to this theory, is not to be

believed if it contradict a complete induction. But it is essential to the

completeness of an induction that it shall not contradict any known fact. Is it

not, then, a petitio principii to say, that the fact ought to be disbelieved

because the induction opposed to it is complete? How can we have a right to

declare the induction complete, while facts, supported by credible evidence,

present themselves in opposition to it?

              I answer, we have that right whenever the scientific canons of

induction give it to us; that is, whenever the induction can be complete. We

have it, for example, in a case of causation in which there has been anexperimentum crucis . If an antecedent A, superadded to a set of antecedents

in all other respects unaltered, is followed by an effect B which did not exist

before, A is, in that instance at least, the cause of B, or an indispensable part

of its cause; and if A be tried again with many totally different sets of

antecedents and B still follows, then it is the whole cause. If these

observations or experiments have been repeated so often, and by so many

persons, as to exclude all supposition of error in the observer, a law of nature

is established; and so long as this law is received as such, the assertion that

on any particular occasion A took place, and yet B did not follow, without

any counteracting cause , must be disbelieved. Such an assertion is not to be

credited on any less evidence than what would suffice to overturn the law.

The general truths, that whatever has a beginning has a cause, and that when

none but the same causes exist, the same effects follow, rest on the strongest

inductive evidence possible; the proposition that things affirmed by even a

crowd of respectable witnesses are true, is but an approximate generalization;

and — even if we fancy we actually saw or felt the fact which is in

contradiction to the law — what a human being can see is no more than a set

of appearances; from which the real nature of the phenomenon is merely an

inference, and in this inference approximate generalizations usually have a

large share. If, therefore, we make our election to hold by the law, no

quantity of evidence whatever ought to persuade us that there has occurred

any thing in contradiction to it. If, indeed, the evidence produced is such that

it is more likely that the set of observations and experiments on which the

law rests should have been inaccurately performed or incorrectly interpreted,

than that the evidence in question should be false, we may believe the

evidence; but then we must abandon the law. And since the law was received

on what seemed a complete induction, it can only be rejected on evidence

equivalent; namely, as being inconsistent not with any number of

approximate generalizations, but with some other and better established law

of nature. This extreme case, of a conflict between two supposed laws of

nature, has probably never actually occurred where, in the process of

investigating both the laws, the true canons of scientific induction had been

kept in view; but if it did occur, it must terminate in the total rejection of one

of the supposed laws. It would prove that there must be a flaw in the logical

process by which either one or the other was established; and if there be so,

that supposed general truth is no truth at all. We can not admit a proposition

as a law of nature, and yet believe a fact in real contradiction to it. We mustdisbelieve the alleged fact, or believe that we were mistaken in admitting the

supposed law.

              But in order that any alleged fact should be contradictory to a law of

causation, the allegation must be, not simply that the cause existed without

being followed by the effect, for that would be no uncommon occurrence; but

that this happened in the absence of any adequate counteracting cause. Now

in the case of an alleged miracle, the assertion is the exact opposite of this. It

is, that the effect was defeated, not in the absence, but in consequence of a

counteracting cause, namely, a direct interposition of an act of the will of

some being who has power over nature; and in particular of a Being, whose

will being assumed to have endowed all the causes with the powers by which

they produce their effects, may well be supposed able to counteract them. A
                                                  202
miracle (as was justly remarked by Brown) is no contradiction to the law of

cause and effect; it is a new effect, supposed to be produced by the

introduction of a new cause. Of the adequacy of that cause, if present, there

can be no doubt; and the only antecedent improbability which can be ascribed

to the miracle, is the improbability that any such cause existed.

              All, therefore, which Hume has made out, and this he must be

considered to have made out, is, that (at least in the imperfect state of our

knowledge of natural agencies, which leaves it always possible that some of

the physical antecedents may have been hidden from us) no evidence can

prove a miracle to any one who did not previously believe the existence of a

being or beings with supernatural power; or who believes himself to have full

proof that the character of the Being whom he recognizes is inconsistent with

his having seen fit to interfere on the occasion in question.

              If we do not already believe in supernatural agencies, no miracle can

prove to us their existence. The miracle itself, considered merely as an

extraordinary fact, may be satisfactorily certified by our senses or by

testimony; but nothing can ever prove that it is a miracle; there is still another

possible hypothesis, that of its being the result of some unknown natural

cause; and this possibility can not be so completely shut out, as to leave no

alternative but that of admitting the existence and intervention of a being

superior to nature. Those, however, who already believe in such a being have

two hypotheses to choose from, a supernatural and an unknown natural

agency; and they have to judge which of the two is the most probable in the

particular case. In forming this judgment, an important element of thequestion will be the conformity of the result to the laws of the supposed

agent, that is, to the character of the Deity as they conceive it. But with the

knowledge which we now possess of the general uniformity of the course of

nature, religion, following in the wake of science, has been compelled to

acknowledge the government of the universe as being on the whole carried

on by general laws, and not by special interpositions. To whoever holds this

belief, there is a general presumption against any supposition of divine

agency not operating through general laws, or, in other words, there is an

antecedent improbability in every miracle, which, in order to outweigh it,

requires an extraordinary strength of antecedent probability derived from the

special circumstances of the case.

              § 3. It appears from what has been said, that the assertion that a

cause has been defeated of an effect which is connected with it by a

completely ascertained law of causation, is to be disbelieved or not,

according to the probability or improbability that there existed in the

particular instance an adequate counteracting cause. To form an estimate of

this, is not more difficult than of other probabilities. With regard to all known

causes capable of counteracting the given causes, we have generally some

previous knowledge of the frequency or rarity of their occurrence, from

which we may draw an inference as to the antecedent improbability of their

having been present in any particular case. And neither in respect to known

nor unknown causes are we required to pronounce on the probability of their

existing in nature, but only of their having existed at the time and place at

which the transaction is alleged to have happened. We are seldom, therefore,

without the means (when the circumstances of the case are at all known to us)

of judging how far it is likely that such a cause should have existed at that

time and place without manifesting its presence by some other marks, and (in

the case of an unknown cause) without having hitherto manifested its

existence in any other instance. According as this circumstance, or the falsity

of the testimony, appears more improbable — that is, conflicts with an

approximate generalization of a higher order — we believe the testimony, or

disbelieve it; with a stronger or a weaker degree of conviction, according to

the preponderance; at least until we have sifted the matter further.

              So much, then, for the case in which the alleged fact conflicts, or

appears to conflict, with a real law of causation. But a more common case,

perhaps, is that of its conflicting with uniformities of mere co-existence, notproved to be dependent on causation; in other words, with the properties of

Kinds. It is with these uniformities principally that the marvelous stories

related by travelers are apt to be at variance; as of men with tails, or with

wings, and (until confirmed by experience) of flying fish; or of ice, in the

celebrated anecdote of the Dutch travelers and the King of Siam. Facts of this

description, facts previously unheard of, but which could not from any known

law of causation be pronounced impossible, are what Hume characterizes as

not contrary to experience, but merely unconformable to it; and Bentham, in

his treatise on Evidence, denominates them facts disconformable in specie ,

as distinguished from such as are disconformable in toto or in degree

              In a case of this description, the fact asserted is the existence of a

new Kind; which in itself is not in the slightest degree incredible, and only to

be rejected if the improbability that any variety of object existing at the

particular place and time should not have been discovered sooner, be greater

than that of error or mendacity in the witnesses. Accordingly, such assertions,

when made by credible persons, and of unexplored places, are not

disbelieved, but at most regarded as requiring confirmation from subsequent

observers; unless the alleged properties of the supposed new Kind are at

variance with known properties of some larger kind which includes it; or, in

other words, unless, in the new Kind which is asserted to exist, some

properties are said to have been found disjoined from others which have

always been known to accompany them; as in the case of Pliny’s men, or any

other kind of animal of a structure different from that which has always been

found to co-exist with animal life. On the mode of dealing with any such

case, little needs be added to what has been said on the same topic in the
                          203
twenty-second chapter. When the uniformities of co-existence which the

alleged fact would violate, are such as to raise a strong presumption of their

being the result of causation, the fact which conflicts with them is to be

disbelieved; at least provisionally, and subject to further investigation. When

the presumption amounts to a virtual certainty, as in the case of the general

structure of organized beings, the only question requiring consideration is

whether, in phenomena so little understood, there may not be liabilities to

counteraction from causes hitherto unknown; or whether the phenomena may

not be capable of originating in some other way, which would produce a

different set of derivative uniformities. Where (as in the case of the flying

fish, or the ornithorhynchus) the generalization to which the alleged fact

would be an exception is very special and of limited range, neither of theabove suppositions can be deemed very improbable; and it is generally, in the

case of such alleged anomalies, wise to suspend our judgment, pending the

subsequent inquiries which will not fail to confirm the assertion if it be true.

But when the generalization is very comprehensive, embracing a vast number

and variety of observations, and covering a considerable province of the

domain of nature; then, for reasons which have been fully explained, such an

empirical law comes near to the certainty of an ascertained law of causation;

and any alleged exception to it can not be admitted, unless on the evidence of

some law of causation proved by a still more complete induction.

              Such uniformities in the course of nature as do not bear marks of

being the results of causation are, as we have already seen, admissible as

universal truths with a degree of credence proportioned to their generality.

Those which are true of all things whatever, or at least which are totally

independent of the varieties of Kinds, namely, the laws of number and

extension, to which we may add the law of causation itself, are probably the

only ones, an exception to which is absolutely and permanently incredible.

Accordingly, it is to assertions supposed to be contradictory to these laws, or

to some others coming near to them in generality, that the word impossibility

(at least total impossibility) seems to be generally confined. Violations of

other laws, of special laws of causation, for instance, are said, by persons

studious of accuracy in expression, to be impossible in the circumstances of

the case ; or impossible unless some cause had existed which did not exist in
                    204
the particular case. Of no assertion, not in contradiction to some of these

very general laws, will more than improbability be asserted by any cautious

person; and improbability not of the highest degree, unless the time and place

in which the fact is said to have occurred, render it almost certain that the

anomaly, if real, could not have been overlooked by other observers.

Suspension of judgment is in all other cases the resource of the judicious

inquirer; provided the testimony in favor of the anomaly presents, when well

sifted, no suspicious circumstances.

              But the testimony is scarcely ever found to stand that test, in cases in

which the anomaly is not real. In the instances on record in which a great

number of witnesses, of good reputation and scientific acquirements, have

testified to the truth of something which has turned out untrue, there have

almost always been circumstances which, to a keen observer who had taken

due pains to sift the matter, would have rendered the testimonyuntrustworthy. There have generally been means of accounting for the

impression on the senses or minds of the alleged percipients, by fallacious

appearances; or some epidemic delusion, propagated by the contagious

influence of popular feeling, has been concerned in the case; or some strong

interest has been implicated — religious zeal, party feeling, vanity, or at least

the passion for the marvelous, in persons strongly susceptible of it. When

none of these or similar circumstances exist to account for the apparent

strength of the testimony; and where the assertion is not in contradiction

either to those universal laws which know no counteraction or anomaly, or to

the generalizations next in comprehensiveness to them, but would only

amount, if admitted, to the existence of an unknown cause or an anomalous

Kind, in circumstances not so thoroughly explored but that it is credible that

things hitherto unknown may still come to light; a cautious person will

neither admit nor reject the testimony, but will wait for confirmation at other

times and from other unconnected sources. Such ought to have been the

conduct of the King of Siam when the Dutch travelers affirmed to him the

existence of ice. But an ignorant person is as obstinate in his contemptuous

incredulity as he is unreasonably credulous. Any thing unlike his own narrow

experience he disbelieves, if it flatters no propensity; any nursery tale is

swallowed implicitly by him if it does.

              § 4. I shall now advert to a very serious misapprehension of the

principles of the subject, which has been committed by some of the writers

against Hume’s Essay on Miracles, and by Bishop Butler before them, in

their anxiety to destroy what appeared to them a formidable weapon of

assault against the Christian religion; and the effect of which is entirely to

confound the doctrine of the Grounds of Disbelief. The mistake consists in

overlooking the distinction between (what may be called) improbability

before the fact and improbability after it; or (since, as Mr. Venn remarks, the

distinction of past and future is not the material circumstance) between the

improbability of a mere guess being right, and the improbability of an alleged

fact being true.

              Many events are altogether improbable to us, before they have

happened, or before we are informed of their happening, which are not in the

least incredible when we are informed of them, because not contrary to any,

even approximate, induction. In the cast of a perfectly fair die, the chances

are five to one against throwing ace, that is, ace will be thrown on an averageonly once in six throws. But this is no reason against believing that ace was

thrown on a given occasion, if any credible witness asserts it; since though

ace is only thrown once in six times, some number which is only thrown once

in six times must have been thrown if the die was thrown at all. The

improbability, then, or, in other words, the unusualness, of any fact, is no

reason for disbelieving it, if the nature of the case renders it certain that either

that or something equally improbable, that is, equally unusual, did happen.

Nor is this all; for even if the other five sides of the die were all twos, or all

threes, yet as ace would still, on the average, come up once in every six

throws, its coming up in a given throw would be not in any way contradictory

to experience. If we disbelieved all facts which had the chances against them

beforehand, we should believe hardly any thing. We are told that A. B. died

yesterday; the moment before we were so told, the chances against his having

died on that day may have been ten thousand to one; but since he was certain

to die at some time or other, and when he died must necessarily die on some

particular day, while the preponderance of chances is very great against every

day in particular, experience affords no ground for discrediting any testimony

which may be produced to the event’s having taken place on a given day.

              Yet it has been considered by Dr. Campbell and others, as a

complete answer to Hume’s doctrine (that things are incredible which are

contrary to the uniform course of experience), that we do not disbelieve,

merely because the chances were against them, things in strict conformity to

the uniform course of experience; that we do not disbelieve an alleged fact

merely because the combination of causes on which it depends occurs only

once in a certain number of times. It is evident that whatever is shown by

observation, or can be proved from laws of nature, to occur in a certain

proportion (however small) of the whole number of possible cases, is not

contrary to experience; though we are right in disbelieving it, if some other

supposition respecting the matter in question involves, on the whole, a less

departure from the ordinary course of events. Yet on such grounds as this

have able writers been led to the extraordinary conclusion, that nothing

supported by credible testimony ought ever to be disbelieved.

              § 5. We have considered two species of events, commonly said to be

improbable; one kind which are in no way extraordinary, but which, having

an immense preponderance of chances against them, are improbable until

they are affirmed, but no longer; another kind which, being contrary to somerecognized law of nature, are incredible on any amount of testimony except

such as would be sufficient to shake our belief in the law itself. But between

these two classes of events, there is an intermediate class, consisting of what

are commonly termed Coincidences: in other words, those combinations of

chances which present some peculiar and unexpected regularity, assimilating

them, in so far, to the results of law. As if, for example, in a lottery of a

thousand tickets, the numbers should be drawn in the exact order of what are

called the natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, etc. We have still to consider the

principles of evidence applicable to this case: whether there is any difference

between coincidences and ordinary events, in the amount of testimony or

other evidence necessary to render them credible.

              It is certain that on every rational principle of expectation, a

combination of this peculiar sort may be expected quite as often as any other

given series of a thousand numbers; that with perfectly fair dice, sixes will be

thrown twice, thrice, or any number of times in succession, quite as often in a

thousand or a million throws, as any other succession of numbers fixed upon

beforehand; and that no judicious player would give greater odds against the

one series than against the other. Notwithstanding this, there is a general

disposition to regard the one as much more improbable than the other, and as

requiring much stronger evidence to make it credible. Such is the force of this

impression, that it has led some thinkers to the conclusion, that nature has

greater difficulty in producing regular combinations than irregular ones; or in

other words, that there is some general tendency of things, some law, which

prevents regular combinations from occurring, or at least from occurring so

often as others. Among these thinkers may be numbered D’Alembert; who, in

an Essay on Probabilities to be found in the fifth volume of his Mélanges ,

contends that regular combinations, though equally probable according to the

mathematical theory with any others, are physically less probable. He appeals

to common sense, or, in other words, to common impressions; saying, if dice

thrown repeatedly in our presence gave sixes every time, should we not,

before the number of throws had reached ten (not to speak of thousands of

millions), be ready to affirm, with the most positive conviction, that the dice

were false?

              The common and natural impression is in favor of D’Alembert: the

regular series would be thought much more unlikely than an irregular. But

this common impression is, I apprehend, merely grounded on the fact, thatscarcely any body remembers to have ever seen one of these peculiar

coincidences: the reason of which is simply that no one’s experience extends

to any thing like the number of trials, within which that or any other given

combination of events can be expected to happen. The chance of sixes on a

single throw of two dice being 1/36, the chance of sixes ten times in

succession is 1 divided by the tenth power of 36; in other words, such a

concurrence is only likely to happen once in 3,656,158,440,062,976 trials, a

number which no dice-player’s experience comes up to a millionth part of.

But if, instead of sixes ten times, any other given succession of ten throws

had been fixed upon, it would have been exactly as unlikely that in any

individual’s experience that particular succession had ever occurred; although

this does not seem equally improbable, because no one would be likely to

have remembered whether it had occurred or not, and because the

comparison is tacitly made, not between sixes ten times and any one

particular series of throws, but between all regular and all irregular

successions taken together.

              That (as D’Alembert says) if the succession of sixes was actually

thrown before our eyes, we should ascribe it not to chance, but to unfairness

in the dice, is unquestionably true. But this arises from a totally different

principle. We should then be considering, not the probability of the fact in

itself, but the comparative probability with which, when it is known to have

happened, it may be referred to one or to another cause. The regular series is

not at all less likely than the irregular one to be brought about by chance, but

it is much more likely than the irregular one to be produced by design; or by

some general cause operating through the structure of the dice. It is the nature

of casual combinations to produce a repetition of the same event, as often and

no oftener than any other series of events. But it is the nature of general

causes to reproduce, in the same circumstances, always the same event.

Common sense and science alike dictate that, all other things being the same,

we should rather attribute the effect to a cause which if real would be very

likely to produce it, than to a cause which would be very unlikely to produce

it. According to Laplace’s sixth theorem, which we demonstrated in a former

chapter, the difference of probability arising from the superior efficacy of the

constant cause, unfairness in the dice, would after a very few throws far

outweigh any antecedent probability which there could be against its

existence.              D’Alembert should have put the question in another manner. He

should have supposed that we had ourselves previously tried the dice, and

knew by ample experience that they were fair. Another person then tries them

in our absence, and assures us that he threw sixes ten times in succession. Is

the assertion credible or not? Here the effect to be accounted for is not the

occurrence itself, but the fact of the witness’s asserting it. This may arise

either from its having really happened, or from some other cause. What we

have to estimate is the comparative probability of these two suppositions.

              If the witness affirmed that he had thrown any other series of

numbers, supposing him to be a person of veracity, and tolerable accuracy,

and to profess that he took particular notice, we should believe him. But the

ten sixes are exactly as likely to have been really thrown as the other series.

If, therefore, this assertion is less credible than the other, the reason must be,

not that it is less likely than the other to be made truly, but that it is more

likely than the other to be made falsely.

              One reason obviously presents itself why what is called a

coincidence, should be oftener asserted falsely than an ordinary combination.

It excites wonder. It gratifies the love of the marvelous. The motives,

therefore, to falsehood, one of the most frequent of which is the desire to

astonish, operate more strongly in favor of this kind of assertion than of the

other kind. Thus far there is evidently more reason for discrediting an alleged

coincidence, than a statement in itself not more probable, but which if made

would not be thought remarkable. There are cases, however, in which the

presumption on this ground would be the other way. There are some

witnesses who, the more extraordinary an occurrence might appear, would be

the more anxious to verify it by the utmost carefulness of observation before

they would venture to believe it, and still more before they would assert it to

others.

              § 6. Independently, however, of any peculiar chances of mendacity

arising from the nature of the assertion, Laplace contends, that merely on the

general ground of the fallibility of testimony, a coincidence is not credible on

the same amount of testimony on which we should be warranted in believing

an ordinary combination of events. In order to do justice to his argument, it is

necessary to illustrate it by the example chosen by himself.

              If, says Laplace, there were one thousand tickets in a box, and oneonly has been drawn out, then if an eye-witness affirms that the number

drawn was 79, this, though the chances were 999 in 1000 against it, is not on

that account the less credible; its credibility is equal to the antecedent

probability of the witness’s veracity. But if there were in the box 999 black

balls and only one white, and the witness affirms that the white ball was

drawn, the case according to Laplace is very different: the credibility of his

assertion is but a small fraction of what it was in the former case; the reason

of the difference being as follows:

              The witnesses of whom we are speaking must, from the nature of the

case, be of a kind whose credibility falls materially short of certainty; let us

suppose, then, the credibility of the witness in the case in question to be 9/10;

that is, let us suppose that in every ten statements which the witness makes,

nine on an average are correct, and one incorrect. Let us now suppose that

there have taken place a sufficient number of drawings to exhaust all the

possible combinations, the witness deposing in every one. In one case out of

every ten in all these drawings he will actually have made a false

announcement. But in the case of the thousand tickets these false

announcements will have been distributed impartially over all the numbers,

and of the 999 cases in which No. 79 was not drawn, there will have been

only one case in which it was announced. On the contrary, in the case of the

thousand balls (the announcement being always either “black” or “white”), if

white was not drawn, and there was a false announcement, that false

announcement must have been white; and since by the supposition there was

a false announcement once in every ten times, white will have been

announced falsely in one-tenth part of all the cases in which it was not drawn,

that is, in one-tenth part of 999 cases out of every thousand. White, then, is

drawn, on an average, exactly as often as No. 79, but it is announced, without

having been really drawn, 999 times as often as No. 79; the announcement,

therefore, requires a much greater amount of testimony to render it
        205
credible.

              To make this argument valid it must of course be supposed, that the

announcements made by the witness are average specimens of his general

veracity and accuracy; or, at least, that they are neither more nor less so in the

case of the black and white balls, than in the case of the thousand tickets.

This assumption, however, is not warranted. A person is far less likely to

mistake, who has only one form of error to guard against, than if he had 999different errors to avoid. For instance, in the example chosen, a messenger

who might make a mistake once in ten times in reporting the number drawn

in a lottery, might not err once in a thousand times if sent simply to observe

whether a ball was black or white. Laplace’s argument, therefore, is faulty

even as applied to his own case. Still less can that case be received as

completely representing all cases of coincidence. Laplace has so contrived his

example, that though black answers to 999 distinct possibilities, and white

only to one, the witness has nevertheless no bias which can make him prefer

black to white. The witness did not know that there were 999 black balls in

the box and only one white; or if he did, Laplace has taken care to make all

the 999 cases so undistinguishably alike, that there is hardly a possibility of

any cause of falsehood or error operating in favor of any of them, which

would not operate in the same manner if there were only one. Alter this

supposition, and the whole argument falls to the ground. Let the balls, for

instance, be numbered, and let the white ball be No. 79. Considered in respect

of their color, there are but two things which the witness can be interested in

asserting, or can have dreamed or hallucinated, or has to choose from if he

answers at random, viz., black and white; but considered in respect of the

numbers attached to them, there are a thousand; and if his interest or error

happens to be connected with the numbers, though the only assertion he

makes is about the color, the case becomes precisely assimilated to that of the

thousand tickets. Or instead of the balls suppose a lottery, with 1000 tickets

and but one prize, and that I hold No. 79, and being interested only in that,

ask the witness not what was the number drawn, but whether it was 79 or

some other. There are now only two cases, as in Laplace’s example; yet he

surely would not say that if the witness answered 79, the assertion would be

in an enormous proportion less credible, than if he made the same answer to

the same question asked in the other way. If, for instance (to put a case

supposed by Laplace himself), he has staked a large sum on one of the

chances, and thinks that by announcing its occurrence he shall increase his

credit; he is equally likely to have betted on any one of the 999 numbers

which are attached to black balls, and so far as the chances of mendacity from

this cause are concerned, there will be 999 times as many chances of his

announcing black falsely as white.

              Or suppose a regiment of 1000 men, 999 Englishmen and one

Frenchman, and that of these one man has been killed, and it is not known

which. I ask the question, and the witness answers, the Frenchman. This wasnot only as improbable a priori , but is in itself as singular a circumstance, as

remarkable a coincidence, as the drawing of the white ball; yet we should

believe the statement as readily, as if the answer had been John Thompson.

Because, though the 999 Englishmen were all alike in the point in which they

differed from the Frenchman, they were not, like the 999 black balls,

undistinguishable in every other respect; but being all different, they admitted

as many chances of interest or error, as if each man had been of a different

nation; and if a lie was told or a mistake made, the misstatement was as likely

to fall on any Jones or Thompson of the set, as on the Frenchman.

              The example of a coincidence selected by D’Alembert, that of sixes

thrown on a pair of dice ten times in succession, belongs to this sort of cases

rather than to such as Laplace’s. The coincidence is here far more

remarkable, because of far rarer occurrence, than the drawing of the white

ball. But though the improbability of its really occurring is greater, the

superior probability of its being announced falsely can not be established

with the same evidence. The announcement “black” represented 999 cases,

but the witness may not have known this, and if he did, the 999 cases are so

exactly alike, that there is really only one set of possible causes of mendacity

corresponding to the whole. The announcement “sixes not drawn ten times,”

represents, and is known by the witness to represent, a great multitude of

contingencies, every one of which being unlike every other, there may be a

different and a fresh set of causes of mendacity corresponding to each.

              It appears to me, therefore, that Laplace’s doctrine is not strictly true

of any coincidences, and is wholly inapplicable to most; and that to know

whether a coincidence does or does not require more evidence to render it

credible than an ordinary event, we must refer, in every instance, to first

principles, and estimate afresh what is the probability that the given

testimony would have been delivered in that instance, supposing the fact

which it asserts not to be true.

              With these remarks we close the discussion of the Grounds of

Disbelief; and along with it, such exposition as space admits, and as the

writer has it in his power to furnish, of the Logic of Induction.

 

            Book IV: Of operations subsidiary to induction.

 

 

              “Clear and distinct ideas are terms which, though familiar and

frequent in men’s mouths, I have reason to think every one who uses does not

perfectly understand. And possibly it is but here and there one who gives

himself the trouble to consider them so far as to know what he himself or

others precisely mean by them; I have, therefore, in most places, chose to put

determinate or determined, instead of clear and distinct, as more likely to

direct men’s thoughts to my meaning in this matter.” — LOCKE’S Essay on

the Human Understanding ; Epistle to the Reader.

              “Il ne peut y avoir qu’une méthode parfaite, qui est la méthode

naturelle ; on nomme ainsi un arrangement dans lequel les êtres du même

genre seraient plus voisins entre eux que ceux de tous les autres genres; les

genres du même ordre, plus que ceux de tous les autres ordres; et ainsi de

suite. Cette méthode est l’idéal auquel l’histoire naturelle doit tendre; car il

est évident que si l’on y parvenait, l’on aurait l’expression exacte et complète

de la nature entière.” — CUVIER, Règne Animal , Introduction.

              “Deux grandes notions philosophiques dominent la théorie

fondamentale de la méthode naturelle proprement dite, savoir la formation

des groupes naturels, et ensuite leur succession hiérarchique.” — COMTE,

Cours de Philosophie Positive , 42me leçon.

 

 

                 Chapter I. – Of Observation And Description.

 

 

              § 1. The inquiry which occupied us in the two preceding Books, has

conducted us to what appears a satisfactory solution of the principal problem

of Logic, according to the conception I have formed of the science. We have

found, that the mental process with which Logic is conversant, the operation

of ascertaining truths by means of evidence, is always, even when

appearances point to a different theory of it, a process of induction. And we

have particularized the various modes of induction, and obtained a clear view

of the principles to which it must conform, in order to lead to results which

can be relied on.

              The consideration of Induction, however, does not end with the

direct rules for its performance. Something must be said of those other

operations of the mind, which are either necessarily presupposed in all

induction, or are instrumental to the more difficult and complicated inductive

processes. The present Book will be devoted to the consideration of these

subsidiary operations; among which our attention must first be given to those,

which are indispensable preliminaries to all induction whatsoever.

              Induction being merely the extension to a class of cases, of

something which has been observed to be true in certain individual instances

of the class; the first place among the operations subsidiary to induction, is

claimed by Observation. This is not, however, the place to lay down rules for

making good observers; nor is it within the competence of Logic to do so, but

of the art of intellectual Education. Our business with observation is only in

its connection with the appropriate problem of logic, the estimation of

evidence. We have to consider, not how or what to observe, but under what

conditions observation is to be relied on; what is needful, in order that the

fact, supposed to be observed, may safely be received as true.

              § 2. The answer to this question is very simple, at least in its first

aspect. The sole condition is, that what is supposed to have been observed

shall really have been observed; that it be an observation, not an inference.

For in almost every act of our perceiving faculties, observation and inference

are intimately blended. What we are said to observe is usually a compoundresult, of which one-tenth may be observation, and the remaining nine-tenths

inference.

              I affirm, for example, that I hear a man’s voice. This would pass, in

common language, for a direct perception. All, however, which is really

perception, is that I hear a sound. That the sound is a voice, and that voice the

voice of a man, are not perceptions but inferences. I affirm, again, that I saw

my brother at a certain hour this morning. If any proposition concerning a

matter of fact would commonly be said to be known by the direct testimony

of the senses, this surely would be so. The truth, however, is far otherwise. I

only saw a certain colored surface; or rather I had the kind of visual

sensations which are usually produced by a colored surface; and from these

as marks, known to be such by previous experience, I concluded that I saw

my brother. I might have had sensations precisely similar, when my brother

was not there. I might have seen some other person so nearly resembling him

in appearance, as, at the distance, and, with the degree of attention which I

bestowed, to be mistaken for him. I might have been asleep, and have

dreamed that I saw him; or in a state of nervous disorder, which brought his

image before me in a waking hallucination. In all these modes, many have

been led to believe that they saw persons well known to them, who were dead

or far distant. If any of these suppositions had been true, the affirmation that I

saw my brother would have been erroneous; but whatever was matter of

direct perception, namely the visual sensations, would have been real. The

inference only would have been ill grounded; I should have ascribed those

sensations to a wrong cause.

              Innumerable instances might be given, and analyzed in the same

manner, of what are vulgarly called errors of sense. There are none of them

properly errors of sense; they are erroneous inferences from sense. When I

look at a candle through a multiplying glass, I see what seems a dozen

candles instead of one; and if the real circumstances of the case were

skillfully disguised, I might suppose that there were really that number; there

would be what is called an optical deception. In the kaleidoscope there really

is that deception; when I look through the instrument, instead of what is

actually there, namely a casual arrangement of colored fragments, the

appearance presented is that of the same combination several times repeated

in symmetrical arrangement round a point. The delusion is of course effected

by giving me the same sensations which I should have had if such asymmetrical combination had really been presented to me. If I cross two of

my fingers, and bring any small object, a marble for instance, into contact

with both, at points not usually touched simultaneously by one object, I can

hardly, if my eyes are shut, help believing that there are two marbles instead

of one. But it is not my touch in this case, nor my sight in the other, which is

deceived; the deception, whether durable or only momentary, is in my

judgment. From my senses I have only the sensations, and those are genuine.

Being accustomed to have those or similar sensations when, and only when, a

certain arrangement of outward objects is present to my organs, I have the

habit of instantly, when I experience the sensations, inferring the existence of

that state of outward things. This habit has become so powerful, that the

inference, performed with the speed and certainty of an instinct, is

confounded with intuitive perceptions. When it is correct, I am unconscious

that it ever needed proof; even when I know it to be incorrect, I can not

without considerable effort abstain from making it. In order to be aware that

it is not made by instinct but by an acquired habit, I am obliged to reflect on

the slow process through which I learned to judge by the eye of many things

which I now appear to perceive directly by sight; and on the reverse operation

performed by persons learning to draw, who with difficulty and labor divest

themselves of their acquired perceptions, and learn afresh to see things as

they appear to the eye.

              It would be easy to prolong these illustrations, were there any need

to expatiate on a topic so copiously exemplified in various popular works.

From the examples already given, it is seen sufficiently, that the individual

facts from which we collect our inductive generalizations are scarcely ever

obtained by observation alone. Observation extends only to the sensations by

which we recognize objects; but the propositions which we make use of,

either in science or in common life, relate mostly to the objects themselves.

In every act of what is called observation, there is at least one inference —

from the sensations to the presence of the object; from the marks or

diagnostics, to the entire phenomenon. And hence, among other

consequences, follows the seeming paradox, that a general proposition

collected from particulars is often more certainly true than any one of the

particular propositions from which, by an act of induction, it was inferred.

For, each of those particular (or rather singular) propositions involved an

inference, from the impression on the senses to the fact which caused that

impression; and this inference may have been erroneous in any one of theinstances, but can not well have been erroneous in all of them, provided their

number was sufficient to eliminate chance. The conclusion, therefore, that is,

the general proposition, may deserve more complete reliance than it would be

safe to repose in any one of the inductive premises.

              The logic of observation, then, consists solely in a correct

discrimination between that, in a result of observation, which has really been

perceived, and that which is an inference from the perception. Whatever

portion is inference, is amenable to the rules of induction already treated of,

and requires no further notice here; the question for us in this place is, when

all which is inference is taken away what remains? There remains, in the first

place, the mind’s own feelings or states of consciousness, namely, its

outward feelings or sensations, and its inward feelings — its thoughts,

emotions, and volitions. Whether any thing else remains, or all else is

inference from this; whether the mind is capable of directly perceiving or

apprehending any thing except states of its own consciousness — is a

problem of metaphysics not to be discussed in this place. But after excluding

all questions on which metaphysicians differ, it remains true, that for most

purposes the discrimination we are called upon practically to exercise is that

between sensations or other feelings, of our own or of other people, and

inferences drawn from them. And on the theory of Observation this is all

which seems necessary to be said for the purposes of the present work.

              § 3. If, in the simplest observation, or in what passes for such, there

is a large part which is not observation but something else; so in the simplest

description of an observation, there is, and must always be, much more

asserted than is contained in the perception itself. We can not describe a fact,

without implying more than the fact. The perception is only of one individual

thing; but to describe it is to affirm a connection between it and every other

thing which is either denoted or connoted by any of the terms used. To begin

with an example, than which none can be conceived more elementary: I have

a sensation of sight, and I endeavor to describe it by saying that I see

something white. In saying this, I do not solely affirm my sensation; I also

class it. I assert a resemblance between the thing I see, and all things which I

and others are accustomed to call white. I assert that it resembles them in the

circumstance in which they all resemble one another, in that which is the

ground of their being called by the name. This is not merely one way of

describing an observation, but the only way. If I would either register myobservation for my own future use, or make it known for the benefit of

others, I must assert a resemblance between the fact which I have observed

and something else. It is inherent in a description, to be the statement of a

resemblance, or resemblances.

              We thus see that it is impossible to express in words any result of

observation, without performing an act possessing what Dr. Whewell

considers to be characteristic of Induction. There is always something

introduced which was not included in the observation itself; some conception

common to the phenomenon with other phenomena to which it is compared.

An observation can not be spoken of in language at all without declaring

more than that one observation; without assimilating it to other phenomena

already observed and classified. But this identification of an object — this

recognition of it as possessing certain known characteristics — has never

been confounded with Induction. It is an operation which precedes all

induction, and supplies it with its materials. It is a perception of

resemblances, obtained by comparison.

              These resemblances are not always apprehended directly, by merely

comparing the object observed with some other present object, or with our

recollection of an object which is absent. They are often ascertained through

intermediate marks, that is, deductively. In describing some new kind of

animal, suppose me to say that it measures ten feet in length, from the

forehead to the extremity of the tail. I did not ascertain this by the unassisted

eye. I had a two-foot rule which I applied to the object, and, as we commonly

say, measured it; an operation which was not wholly manual, but partly also

mathematical, involving the two propositions, Five times two is ten, and

Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another. Hence, the

fact that the animal is ten feet long is not an immediate perception, but a

conclusion from reasoning; the minor premises alone being furnished by

observation of the object. Nevertheless, this is called an observation, or a

description of the animal, not an induction respecting it.

              To pass at once from a very simple to a very complex example: I

affirm that the earth is globular. The assertion is not grounded on direct

perception; for the figure of the earth can not, by us, be directly perceived,

though the assertion would not be true unless circumstances could be

supposed under which its truth could be so perceived. That the form of the

earth is globular is inferred from certain marks, as for instance from this, thatits shadow thrown upon the moon is circular; or this, that on the sea, or any

extensive plain, our horizon is always a circle; either of which marks is

incompatible with any other than a globular form. I assert further, that the

earth is that particular kind of a globe which is termed an oblate spheroid;

because it is found by measurement in the direction of the meridian, that the

length on the surface of the earth which subtends a given angle at its centre,

diminishes as we recede from the equator and approach the poles. But these

propositions, that the earth is globular, and that it is an oblate spheroid, assert,

each of them, an individual fact; in its own nature capable of being perceived

by the senses when the requisite organs and the necessary position are

supposed, and only not actually perceived because those organs and that

position are wanting. This identification of the earth, first as a globe, and next

as an oblate spheroid, which, if the fact could have been seen, would have

been called a description of the figure of the earth, may without impropriety

be so called when, instead of being seen, it is inferred. But we could not

without impropriety call either of these assertions an induction from facts

respecting the earth. They are not general propositions collected from

particular facts, but particular facts deduced from general propositions. They

are conclusions obtained deductively, from premises originating in induction:

but of these premises some were not obtained by observation of the earth, nor

had any peculiar reference to it.

              If, then, the truth respecting the figure of the earth is not an

induction, why should the truth respecting the figure of the earth’s orbit be

so? The two cases only differ in this, that the form of the orbit was not, like

the form of the earth itself, deduced by ratiocination from facts which were

marks of ellipticity, but was got at by boldly guessing that the path was an

ellipse, and finding afterward, on examination, that the observations were in

harmony with the hypothesis. According to Dr. Whewell, however, this

process of guessing and verifying our guesses is not only induction, but the

whole of induction: no other exposition can be given of that logical operation.

That he is wrong in the latter assertion, the whole of the preceding book has, I

hope, sufficiently proved; and that the process by which the ellipticity of the

planetary orbits was ascertained, is not induction at all, was attempted to be
                                                      206
shown in the second chapter of the same Book. We are now, however,

prepared to go more into the heart of the matter than at that earlier period of

our inquiry, and to show, not merely what the operation in question is not, but

what it is.              § 4. We observed, in the second chapter, that the proposition “the

earth moves in an ellipse,” so far as it only serves for the colligation or

connecting together of actual observations (that is, as it only affirms that the

observed positions of the earth may be correctly represented by as many

points in the circumference of an imaginary ellipse), is not an induction, but a

description: it is an induction, only when it affirms that the intermediate

positions, of which there has been no direct observation, would be found to

correspond to the remaining points of the same elliptic circumference. Now,

though this real induction is one thing, and the description another, we are in

a very different condition for making the induction before we have obtained

the description, and after it. For inasmuch as the description, like all other

descriptions, contains the assertion of a resemblance between the

phenomenon described and something else; in pointing out something which

the series of observed places of a planet resembles, it points out something in

which the several places themselves agree. If the series of places correspond

to as many points of an ellipse, the places themselves agree in being situated

in that ellipse. We have, therefore, by the same process which gave us the

description, obtained the requisites for an induction by the Method of

Agreement. The successive observed places of the earth being considered as

effects, and its motion as the cause which produces them, we find that those

effects, that is, those places, agree in the circumstance of being in an ellipse.

We conclude that the remaining effects, the places which have not been

observed, agree in the same circumstance, and that the law of the motion of

the earth is motion in an ellipse.

              The Colligation of Facts, therefore, by means of hypotheses, or, as

Dr. Whewell prefers to say, by means of Conceptions, instead of being, as he

supposes, Induction itself, takes its proper place among operations subsidiary

to Induction. All Induction supposes that we have previously compared the

requisite number of individual instances, and ascertained in what

circumstances they agree. The Colligation of Facts is no other than this

preliminary operation. When Kepler, after vainly endeavoring to connect the

observed places of a planet by various hypotheses of circular motion, at last

tried the hypotheses of an ellipse and found it answer to the phenomena; what

he really attempted, first unsuccessfully and at last successfully, was to

discover the circumstance in which all the observed positions of the planet

agreed. And when he in like manner connected another set of observed facts,

the periodic times of the different planets, by the proposition that the squares