which concerns only himself, and that which concerns others, many persons

will refuse to admit. How (it may be asked) can any part of the conduct of a

member of society be a matter of indifference to the other members? No

person is an entirely isolated being; it is impossible for a person to do

anything seriously or permanently hurtful to himself, without mischief

reaching at least to his near connections, and often far beyond them. If he

injures his property, he does harm to those who directly or indirectly derived

support from it, and usually diminishes, by a greater or less amount, the

general resources of the community. If he deteriorates his bodily or mental

faculties, he not only brings evil upon all who depended on him for any

portion of their happiness, but disqualifies himself for rendering the services

which he owes to his fellow-creatures generally; perhaps becomes a burden

on their affection or benevolence; and if such conduct were very frequent,

hardly any offence that is committed would detract more from the general

sum of good. Finally, if by his vices or follies a person does no direct harm to

others, he is nevertheless (it may be said) injurious by his example; and ought

to be compelled to control himself, for the sake of those whom the sight or

knowledge of his conduct might corrupt or mislead.

              And even (it will be added) if the consequences of misconduct could

be confined to the vicious or thoughtless individual, ought society to abandon

to their own guidance those who are manifestly unfit for it? If protection

against themselves is confessedly due to children and persons under age, is

not society equally bound to afford it to persons of mature years who are

equally incapable of self-government? If gambling, or drunkenness, or

incontinence, or idleness, or uncleanliness, are as injurious to happiness, and

as great a hindrance to improvement, as many or most of the acts prohibited

by law, why (it may be asked) should not law, so far as is consistent with

practicability and social convenience, endeavor to repress these also? And as

a supplement to the unavoidable imperfections of law, ought not opinion at

least to organize a powerful police against these vices, and visit rigidly with

social penalties those who are known to practise them? There is no question

here (it may be said) about restricting individuality, or impeding the trial of

new and original experiments in living. The only things it is sought to prevent

are things which have been tried and condemned from the beginning of the

world until now; things which experience has shown not to be useful or

suitable to any person's individuality. There must be some length of time and

amount of experience, after which a moral or prudential truth may beregarded as established, and it is merely desired to prevent generation after

generation from falling over the same precipice which has been fatal to their

predecessors.

              I fully admit that the mischief which a person does to himself, may

seriously affect, both through their sympathies and their interests, those

nearly connected with him, and in a minor degree, society at large. When, by

conduct of this sort, a person is led to violate a distinct and assignable

obligation to any other person or persons, the case is taken out of the self-

regarding class, and becomes amenable to moral disapprobation in the proper

sense of the term. If, for example, a man, through intemperance or

extravagance, becomes unable to pay his debts, or, having undertaken the

moral responsibility of a family, becomes from the same cause incapable of

supporting or educating them, he is deservedly reprobated, and might be

justly punished; but it is for the breach of duty to his family or creditors, not

for the extravagence. If the resources which ought to have been devoted to

them, had been diverted from them for the most prudent investment, the

moral culpability would have been the same. George Barnwell murdered his

uncle to get money for his mistress, but if he had done it to set himself up in

business, he would equally have been hanged. Again, in the frequent case of

a man who causes grief to his family by addiction to bad habits, he deserves

reproach for his unkindness or ingratitude; but so he may for cultivating

habits not in themselves vicious, if they are painful to those with whom he

passes his life, or who from personal ties are dependent on him for their

comfort. Whoever fails in the consideration generally due to the interests and

feelings of others, not being compelled by some more imperative duty, or

justified by allowable self-preference, is a subject of moral disapprobation for

that failure, but not for the cause of it, nor for the errors, merely personal to

himself, which may have remotely led to it. In like manner, when a person

disables himself, by conduct purely self-regarding, from the performance of

some definite duty incumbent on him to the public, he is guilty of a social

offence. No person ought to be punished simply for being drunk; but a soldier

or a policeman should be punished for being drunk on duty. Whenever, in

short, there is a definite damage, or a definite risk of damage, either to an

individual or to the public, the case is taken out of the province of liberty, and

placed in that of morality or law.

              But with regard to the merely contingent or, as it may be called,constructive injury which a person causes to society, by conduct which

neither violates any specific duty to the public, nor occasions perceptible hurt

to any assignable individual except himself; the inconvenience is one which

society can afford to bear, for the sake of the greater good of human freedom.

If grown persons are to be punished for not taking proper care of themselves,

I would rather it were for their own sake, than under pretence of preventing

them from impairing their capacity of rendering to society benefits which

society does not pretend it has a right to exact. But I cannot consent to argue

the point as if society had no means of bringing its weaker members up to its

ordinary standard of rational conduct, except waiting till they do something

irrational, and then punishing them, legally or morally, for it. Society has had

absolute power over them during all the early portion of their existence: it has

had the whole period of childhood and nonage in which to try whether it

could make them capable of rational conduct in life. The existing generation

is master both of the training and the entire circumstances of the generation to

come; it cannot indeed make them perfectly wise and good, because it is itself

so lamentably deficient in goodness and wisdom; and its best efforts are not

always, in individual cases, its most successful ones; but it is perfectly well

able to make the rising generation, as a whole, as good as, and a little better

than, itself. If society lets any considerable number of its members grow up

mere children, incapable of being acted on by rational consideration of distant

motives, society has itself to blame for the consequences. Armed not only

with all the powers of education, but with the ascendency which the authority

of a received opinion always exercises over the minds who are least fitted to

judge for themselves; and aided by the natural penalties which cannot be

prevented from falling on those who incur the distaste or the contempt of

those who know them; let not society pretend that it needs, besides all this,

the power to issue commands and enforce obedience in the personal concerns

of individuals, in which, on all principles of justice and policy, the decision

ought to rest with those who are to abide the consequences. Nor is there

anything which tends more to discredit and frustrate the better means of

influencing conduct, than a resort to the worse. If there be among those

whom it is attempted to coerce into prudence or temperance, any of the

material of which vigorous and independent characters are made, they will

infallibly rebel against the yoke. No such person will ever feel that others

have a right to control him in his concerns, such as they have to prevent him

from injuring them in theirs; and it easily comes to be considered a mark ofspirit and courage to fly in the face of such usurped authority, and do with

ostentation the exact opposite of what it enjoins; as in the fashion of

grossness which succeeded, in the time of Charles II., to the fanatical moral

intolerance of the Puritans. With respect to what is said of the necessity of

protecting society from the bad example set to others by the vicious or the

self-indulgent; it is true that bad example may have a pernicious effect,

especially the example of doing wrong to others with impunity to the wrong-

doer. But we are now speaking of conduct which, while it does no wrong to

others, is supposed to do great harm to the agent himself: and I do not see

how those who believe this, can think otherwise than that the example, on the

whole, must be more salutary than hurtful, since, if it displays the

misconduct, it displays also the painful or degrading consequences which, if

the conduct is justly censured, must be supposed to be in all or most cases

attendant on it.

              But the strongest of all the arguments against the interference of the

public with purely personal conduct, is that when it does interfere, the odds

are that it interferes wrongly, and in the wrong place. On questions of social

morality, of duty to others, the opinion of the public, that is, of an overruling

majority, though often wrong, is likely to be still oftener right; because on

such questions they are only required to judge of their own interests; of the

manner in which some mode of conduct, if allowed to be practised, would

affect themselves. But the opinion of a similar majority, imposed as a law on

the minority, on questions of self-regarding conduct, is quite as likely to be

wrong as right; for in these cases public opinion means, at the best, some

people's opinion of what is good or bad for other people; while very often it

does not even mean that; the public, with the most perfect indifference,

passing over the pleasure or convenience of those whose conduct they

censure, and considering only their own preference. There are many who

consider as an injury to themselves any conduct which they have a distaste

for, and resent it as an outrage to their feelings; as a religious bigot, when

charged with disregarding the religious feelings of others, has been known to

retort that they disregard his feelings, by persisting in their abominable

worship or creed. But there is no parity between the feeling of a person for

his own opinion, and the feeling of another who is offended at his holding it;

no more than between the desire of a thief to take a purse, and the desire of

the right owner to keep it. And a person's taste is as much his own peculiar

concern as his opinion or his purse. It is easy for any one to imagine an idealpublic, which leaves the freedom and choice of individuals in all uncertain

matters undisturbed, and only requires them to abstain from modes of

conduct which universal experience has condemned. But where has there

been seen a public which set any such limit to its censorship? or when does

the public trouble itself about universal experience. In its interferences with

personal conduct it is seldom thinking of anything but the enormity of acting

or feeling differently from itself; and this standard of judgment, thinly

disguised, is held up to mankind as the dictate of religion and philosophy, by

nine tenths of all moralists and speculative writers. These teach that things

are right because they are right; because we feel them to be so. They tell us to

search in our own minds and hearts for laws of conduct binding on ourselves

and on all others. What can the poor public do but apply these instructions,

and make their own personal feelings of good and evil, if they are tolerably

unanimous in them, obligatory on all the world?

              The evil here pointed out is not one which exists only in theory; and

it may perhaps be expected that I should specify the instances in which the

public of this age and country improperly invests its own preferences with the

character of moral laws. I am not writing an essay on the aberrations of

existing moral feeling. That is too weighty a subject to be discussed

parenthetically, and by way of illustration. Yet examples are necessary, to

show that the principle I maintain is of serious and practical moment, and that

I am not endeavoring to erect a barrier against imaginary evils. And it is not

difficult to show, by abundant instances, that to extend the bounds of what

may be called moral police, until it encroaches on the most unquestionably

legitimate liberty of the individual, is one of the most universal of all human

propensities.

              As a first instance, consider the antipathies which men cherish on no

better grounds than that persons whose religious opinions are different from

theirs, do not practise their religious observances, especially their religious

abstinences. To cite a rather trivial example, nothing in the creed or practice

of Christians does more to envenom the hatred of Mahomedans against them,

than the fact of their eating pork. There are few acts which Christians and

Europeans regard with more unaffected disgust, than Mussulmans regard this

particular mode of satisfying hunger. It is, in the first place, an offence

against their religion; but this circumstance by no means explains either the

degree or the kind of their repugnance; for wine also is forbidden by theirreligion, and to partake of it is by all Mussulmans accounted wrong, but not

disgusting. Their aversion to the flesh of the "unclean beast" is, on the

contrary, of that peculiar character, resembling an instinctive antipathy,

which the idea of uncleanness, when once it thoroughly sinks into the

feelings, seems always to excite even in those whose personal habits are

anything but scrupulously cleanly and of which the sentiment of religious

impurity, so intense in the Hindoos, is a remarkable example. Suppose now

that in a people, of whom the majority were Mussulmans, that majority

should insist upon not permitting pork to be eaten within the limits of the
                                                                        1
country. This would be nothing new in Mahomedan countries. Would it be a

legitimate exercise of the moral authority of public opinion? and if not, why

not? The practice is really revolting to such a public. They also sincerely

think that it is forbidden and abhorred by the Deity. Neither could the

prohibition be censured as religious persecution. It might be religious in its

origin, but it would not be persecution for religion, since nobody's religion

makes it a duty to eat pork. The only tenable ground of condemnation would

be, that with the personal tastes and self-regarding concerns of individuals the

public has no business to interfere.

              To come somewhat nearer home: the majority of Spaniards consider

it a gross impiety, offensive in the highest degree to the Supreme Being, to

worship him in any other manner than the Roman Catholic; and no other

public worship is lawful on Spanish soil. The people of all Southern Europe

look upon a married clergy as not only irreligious, but unchaste, indecent,

gross, disgusting. What do Protestants think of these perfectly sincere

feelings, and of the attempt to enforce them against non-Catholics? Yet, if

mankind are justified in interfering with each other's liberty in things which

do not concern the interests of others, on what principle is it possible

consistently to exclude these cases? or who can blame people for desiring to

suppress what they regard as a scandal in the sight of God and man?

              No stronger case can be shown for prohibiting anything which is

regarded as a personal immorality, than is made out for suppressing these

practices in the eyes of those who regard them as impieties; and unless we are

willing to adopt the logic of persecutors, and to say that we may persecute

others because we are right, and that they must not persecute us because they

are wrong, we must beware of admitting a principle of which we should

resent as a gross injustice the application to ourselves.              The preceding instances may be objected to, although unreasonably,

as drawn from contingencies impossible among us: opinion, in this country,

not being likely to enforce abstinence from meats, or to interfere with people

for worshipping, and for either marrying or not marrying, according to their

creed or inclination. The next example, however, shall be taken from an

interference with liberty which we have by no means passed all danger of.

Wherever the Puritans have been sufficiently powerful, as in New England,

and in Great Britain at the time of the Commonwealth, they have endeavored,

with considerable success, to put down all public, and nearly all private,

amusements: especially music, dancing, public games, or other assemblages

for purposes of diversion, and the theatre. There are still in this country large

bodies of persons by whose notions of morality and religion these recreations

are condemned; and those persons belonging chiefly to the middle class, who

are the ascendant power in the present social and political condition of the

kingdom, it is by no means impossible that persons of these sentiments may

at some time or other command a majority in Parliament. How will the

remaining portion of the community like to have the amusements that shall

be permitted to them regulated by the religious and moral sentiments of the

stricter Calvinists and Methodists? Would they not, with considerable

peremptoriness, desire these intrusively pious members of society to mind

their own business? This is precisely what should be said to every

government and every public, who have the pretension that no person shall

enjoy any pleasure which they think wrong. But if the principle of the

pretension be admitted, no one can reasonably object to its being acted on in

the sense of the majority, or other preponderating power in the country; and

all persons must be ready to conform to the idea of a Christian

commonwealth, as understood by the early settlers in New England, if a

religious profession similar to theirs should ever succeed in regaining its lost

ground, as religions supposed to be declining have so often been known to

do.

              To imagine another contingency, perhaps more likely to be realized

than the one last mentioned. There is confessedly a strong tendency in the

modern world towards a democratic constitution of society, accompanied or

not by popular political institutions. It is affirmed that in the country where

this tendency is most completely realized — where both society and the

government are most democratic — the United States — the feeling of the

majority, to whom any appearance of a more showy or costly style of livingthan they can hope to rival is disagreeable, operates as a tolerably effectual

sumptuary law, and that in many parts of the Union it is really difficult for a

person possessing a very large income, to find any mode of spending it,

which will not incur popular disapprobation. Though such statements as these

are doubtless much exaggerated as a representation of existing facts, the state

of things they describe is not only a conceivable and possible, but a probable

result of democratic feeling, combined with the notion that the public has a

right to a veto on the manner in which individuals shall spend their incomes.

We have only further to suppose a considerable diffusion of Socialist

opinions, and it may become infamous in the eyes of the majority to possess

more property than some very small amount, or any income not earned by

manual labor. Opinions similar in principle to these, already prevail widely

among the artisan class, and weigh oppressively on those who are amenable

to the opinion chiefly of that class, namely, its own members. It is known that

the bad workmen who form the majority of the operatives in many branches

of industry, are decidedly of opinion that bad workmen ought to receive the

same wages as good, and that no one ought to be allowed, through piecework

or otherwise, to earn by superior skill or industry more than others can

without it. And they employ a moral police, which occasionally becomes a

physical one, to deter skilful workmen from receiving, and employers from

giving, a larger remuneration for a more useful service. If the public have any

jurisdiction over private concerns, I cannot see that these people are in fault,

or that any individual's particular public can be blamed for asserting the same

authority over his individual conduct, which the general public asserts over

people in general.

              But, without dwelling upon supposititious cases, there are, in our

own day, gross usurpations upon the liberty of private life actually practised,

and still greater ones threatened with some expectation of success, and

opinions proposed which assert an unlimited right in the public not only to

prohibit by law everything which it thinks wrong, but in order to get at what

it thinks wrong, to prohibit any number of things which it admits to be

innocent.

              Under the name of preventing intemperance the people of one

English colony, and of nearly half the United States, have been interdicted by

law from making any use whatever of fermented drinks, except for medical

purposes: for prohibition of their sale is in fact, as it is intended to be,prohibition of their use. And though the impracticability of executing the law

has caused its repeal in several of the States which had adopted it, including

the one from which it derives its name, an attempt has notwithstanding been

commenced, and is prosecuted with considerable zeal by many of the

professed philanthropists, to agitate for a similar law in this country. The

association, or "Alliance" as it terms itself, which has been formed for this

purpose, has acquired some notoriety through the publicity given to a

correspondence between its Secretary and one of the very few English public

men who hold that a politician's opinions ought to be founded on principles.

Lord Stanley's share in this correspondence is calculated to strengthen the

hopes already built on him, by those who know how rare such qualities as are

manifested in some of his public appearances, unhappily are among those

who figure in political life. The organ of the Alliance, who would "deeply

deplore the recognition of any principle which could be wrested to justify

bigotry and persecution," undertakes to point out the "broad and impassable

barrier" which divides such principles from those of the association. "All

matters relating to thought, opinion, conscience, appear to me," he says, "to

be without the sphere of legislation; all pertaining to social act, habit,

relation, subject only to a discretionary power vested in the State itself, and

not in the individual, to be within it." No mention is made of a third class,

different from either of these, viz., acts and habits which are not social, but

individual; although it is to this class, surely, that the act of drinking

fermented liquors belongs. Selling fermented liquors, however, is trading,

and trading is a social act. But the infringement complained of is not on the

liberty of the seller, but on that of the buyer and consumer; since the State

might just as well forbid him to drink wine, as purposely make it impossible

for him to obtain it. The Secretary, however, says, "I claim, as a citizen, a

right to legislate whenever my social rights are invaded by the social act of

another." And now for the definition of these "social rights." "If anything

invades my social rights, certainly the traffic in strong drink does. It destroys

my primary right of security, by constantly creating and stimulating social

disorder. It invades my right of equality, by deriving a profit from the

creation of a misery, I am taxed to support. It impedes my right to free moral

and intellectual development, by surrounding my path with dangers, and by

weakening and demoralizing society, from which I have a right to claim

mutual aid and intercourse." A theory of "social rights," the like of which

probably never before found its way into distinct language — being nothingshort of this — that it is the absolute social right of every individual, that

every other individual shall act in every respect exactly as he ought; that

whosoever fails thereof in the smallest particular, violates my social right,

and entitles me to demand from the legislature the removal of the grievance.

So monstrous a principle is far more dangerous than any single interference

with liberty; there is no violation of liberty which it would not justify; it

acknowledges no right to any freedom whatever, except perhaps to that of

holding opinions in secret, without ever disclosing them; for the moment an

opinion which I consider noxious, passes any one's lips, it invades all the

"social rights" attributed to me by the Alliance. The doctrine ascribes to all

mankind a vested interest in each other's moral, intellectual, and even

physical perfection, to be defined by each claimant according to his own

standard.

              Another important example of illegitimate interference with the

rightful liberty of the individual, not simply threatened, but long since carried

into triumphant effect, is Sabbatarian legislation. Without doubt, abstinence

on one day in the week, so far as the exigencies of life permit, from the usual

daily occupation, though in no respect religiously binding on any except

Jews, is a highly beneficial custom. And inasmuch as this custom cannot be

observed without a general consent to that effect among the industrious

classes, therefore, in so far as some persons by working may impose the same

necessity on others, it may be allowable and right that the law should

guarantee to each, the observance by others of the custom, by suspending the

greater operations of industry on a particular day. But this justification,

grounded on the direct interest which others have in each individual's

observance of the practice, does not apply to the self-chosen occupations in

which a person may think fit to employ his leisure; nor does it hold good, in

the smallest degree, for legal restrictions on amusements. It is true that the

amusement of some is the day's work of others; but the pleasure, not to say

the useful recreation, of many, is worth the labor of a few, provided the

occupation is freely chosen, and can be freely resigned. The operatives are

perfectly right in thinking that if all worked on Sunday, seven days' work

would have to be given for six days' wages: but so long as the great mass of

employments are suspended, the small number who for the enjoyment of

others must still work, obtain a proportional increase of earnings; and they

are not obliged to follow those occupations, if they prefer leisure to

emolument. If a further remedy is sought, it might be found in theestablishment by custom of a holiday on some other day of the week for

those particular classes of persons. The only ground, therefore, on which

restrictions on Sunday amusements can be defended, must be that they are

religiously wrong; a motive of legislation which never can be too earnestly

protested against. "Deorum injuriae Diis curae." It remains to be proved that

society or any of its officers holds a commission from on high to avenge any

supposed offence to Omnipotence, which is not also a wrong to our fellow-

creatures. The notion that it is one man's duty that another should be

religious, was the foundation of all the religious persecutions ever

perpetrated, and if admitted, would fully justify them. Though the feeling

which breaks out in the repeated attempts to stop railway travelling on

Sunday, in the resistance to the opening of Museums, and the like, has not the

cruelty of the old persecutors, the state of mind indicated by it is

fundamentally the same. It IS a determination not to tolerate others in doing

what is permitted by their religion, because it is not permitted by the

persecutor's religion. It is a belief that God not only abominates the act of the

misbeliever, but will not hold us guiltless if we leave him unmolested.

              I cannot refrain from adding to these examples of the little account

commonly made of human liberty, the language of downright persecution

which breaks out from the press of this country, whenever it feels called on to

notice the remarkable phenomenon of Mormonism. Much might be said on

the unexpected and instructive fact, that an alleged new revelation, and a

religion, founded on it, the product of palpable imposture, not even supported

by the prestige of extraordinary qualities in its founder, is believed by

hundreds of thousands, and has been made the foundation of a society, in the

age of newspapers, railways, and the electric telegraph. What here concerns

us is, that this religion, like other and better religions, has its martyrs; that its

prophet and founder was, for his teaching, put to death by a mob; that others

of its adherents lost their lives by the same lawless violence; that they were

forcibly expelled, in a body, from the country in which they first grew up;

while, now that they have been chased into a solitary recess in the midst of a

desert, many in this country openly declare that it would be right (only that it

is not convenient) to send an expedition against them, and compel them by

force to conform to the opinions of other people. The article of the

Mormonite doctrine which is the chief provocative to the antipathy which

thus breaks through the ordinary restraints of religious tolerance, is its

sanction of polygamy; which, though permitted to Mahomedans, andHindoos, and Chinese, seems to excite unquenchable animosity when

practised by persons who speak English, and profess to be a kind of

Christians. No one has a deeper disapprobation than I have of this Mormon

institution; both for other reasons, and because, far from being in any way

countenanced by the principle of liberty, it is a direct infraction of that

principle, being a mere riveting of the chains of one half of the community,

and an emancipation of the other from reciprocity of obligation towards

them. Still, it must be remembered that this relation is as much voluntary on

the part of the women concerned in it, and who may be deemed the sufferers

by it, as is the case with any other form of the marriage institution; and

however surprising this fact may appear, it has its explanation in the common

ideas and customs of the world, which teaching women to think marriage the

one thing needful, make it intelligible that many a woman should prefer being

one of several wives, to not being a wife at all. Other countries are not asked

to recognize such unions, or release any portion of their inhabitants from their

own laws on the score of Mormonite opinions. But when the dissentients

have conceded to the hostile sentiments of others, far more than could justly

be demanded; when they have left the countries to which their doctrines were

unacceptable, and established themselves in a remote corner of the earth,

which they have been the first to render habitable to human beings; it is

difficult to see on what principles but those of tyranny they can be prevented

from living there under what laws they please, provided they commit no

aggression on other nations, and allow perfect freedom of departure to those

who are dissatisfied with their ways. A recent writer, in some respects of

considerable merit, proposes (to use his own words,) not a crusade, but a

civilizade, against this polygamous community, to put an end to what seems

to him a retrograde step in civilization. It also appears so to me, but I am not

aware that any community has a right to force another to be civilized. So long

as the sufferers by the bad law do not invoke assistance from other

communities, I cannot admit that persons entirely unconnected with them

ought to step in and require that a condition of things with which all who are

directly interested appear to be satisfied, should be put an end to because it is

a scandal to persons some thousands of miles distant, who have no part or

concern in it. Let them send missionaries, if they please, to preach against it;

and let them, by any fair means, (of which silencing the teachers is not one,)

oppose the progress of similar doctrines among their own people. If

civilization has got the better of barbarism when barbarism had the world toitself, it is too much to profess to be afraid lest barbarism, after having been

fairly got under, should revive and conquer civilization. A civilization that

can thus succumb to its vanquished enemy must first have become so

degenerate, that neither its appointed priests and teachers, nor anybody else,

has the capacity, or will take the trouble, to stand up for it. If this be so, the

sooner such a civilization receives notice to quit, the better. It can only go on

from bad to worse, until destroyed and regenerated (like the Western Empire)

by energetic barbarians.

        1
               The case of the Bombay Parsees is a curious instance in point.

When this industrious and enterprising tribe, the descendants of the Persian

fireworshippers, flying from their native country before the Caliphs, arrived

in Western India, they were admitted to toleration by the Hindoo sovereigns,

on condition of not eating beef. When those regions afterwards fell under the

dominion of Mahomedan conquerors, the Parsees obtained from them a

continuance of indulgence, on condition of refraining from pork. What was at

first obedience to authority became a second nature, and the Parsees to this

day abstain both from beef and pork. Though not required by their religion,

the double abstinence has had time to grow into a custom of their tribe; and

custom, in the East, is a religion.

 

 

                                       Chapter 5

 

 

                                      Applications

 

 

              THE principles asserted in these pages must be more generally

admitted as the basis for discussion of details, before a consistent application

of them to all the various departments of government and morals can be

attempted with any prospect of advantage. The few observations I propose to

make on questions of detail, are designed to illustrate the principles, rather

than to follow them out to their consequences. I offer, not so much

applications, as specimens of application; which may serve to bring into

greater clearness the meaning and limits of the two maxims which together

form the entire doctrine of this Essay and to assist the judgment in holding

the balance between them, in the cases where it appears doubtful which of

them is applicable to the case.

              The maxims are, first, that the individual is not accountable to

society for his actions, in so far as these concern the interests of no person but

himself. Advice, instruction, persuasion, and avoidance by other people, if

thought necessary by them for their own good, are the only measures by

which society can justifiably express its dislike or disapprobation of his

conduct. Secondly, that for such actions as are prejudicial to the interests of

others, the individual is accountable, and may be subjected either to social or

to legal punishments, if society is of opinion that the one or the other is

requisite for its protection.

              In the first place, it must by no means be supposed, because damage,

or probability of damage, to the interests of others, can alone justify the

interference of society, that therefore it always does justify such interference.

In many cases, an individual, in pursuing a legitimate object, necessarily and

therefore legitimately causes pain or loss to others, or intercepts a good which

they had a reasonable hope of obtaining. Such oppositions of interest between

individuals often arise from bad social institutions, but are unavoidable while

those institutions last; and some would be unavoidable under any institutions.Whoever succeeds in an overcrowded profession, or in a competitive

examination; whoever is preferred to another in any contest for an object

which both desire, reaps benefit from the loss of others, from their wasted

exertion and their disappointment. But it is, by common admission, better for

the general interest of mankind, that persons should pursue their objects

undeterred by this sort of consequences. In other words, society admits no

right, either legal or moral, in the disappointed competitors, to immunity

from this kind of suffering; and feels called on to interfere, only when means

of success have been employed which it is contrary to the general interest to

permit — namely, fraud or treachery, and force.

              Again, trade is a social act. Whoever undertakes to sell any

description of goods to the public, does what affects the interest of other

persons, and of society in general; and thus his conduct, in principle, comes

within the jurisdiction of society: accordingly, it was once held to be the duty

of governments, in all cases which were considered of importance, to fix

prices, and regulate the processes of manufacture. But it is now recognized,

though not till after a long struggle, that both the cheapness and the good

quality of commodities are most effectually provided for by leaving the

producers and sellers perfectly free, under the sole check of equal freedom to

the buyers for supplying themselves elsewhere. This is the so-called doctrine

of Free Trade, which rests on grounds different from, though equally solid

with, the principle of individual liberty asserted in this Essay. Restrictions on

trade, or on production for purposes of trade, are indeed restraints; and all

restraint, qua restraint, is an evil: but the restraints in question affect only that

part of conduct which society is competent to restrain, and are wrong solely

because they do not really produce the results which it is desired to produce

by them. As the principle of individual liberty is not involved in the doctrine

of Free Trade so neither is it in most of the questions which arise respecting

the limits of that doctrine: as for example, what amount of public control is

admissible for the prevention of fraud by adulteration; how far sanitary

precautions, or arrangements to protect work-people employed in dangerous

occupations, should be enforced on employers. Such questions involve

considerations of liberty, only in so far as leaving people to themselves is

always better, caeteris paribus, than controlling them: but that they may be

legitimately controlled for these ends, is in principle undeniable. On the other

hand, there are questions relating to interference with trade which are

essentially questions of liberty; such as the Maine Law, already touchedupon; the prohibition of the importation of opium into China; the restriction

of the sale of poisons; all cases, in short, where the object of the interference

is to make it impossible or difficult to obtain a particular commodity. These

interferences are objectionable, not as infringements on the liberty of the

producer or seller, but on that of the buyer.

              One of these examples, that of the sale of poisons, opens a new

question; the proper limits of what may be called the functions of police; how

far liberty may legitimately be invaded for the prevention of crime, or of

accident. It is one of the undisputed functions of government to take

precautions against crime before it has been committed, as well as to detect

and punish it afterwards. The preventive function of government, however, is

far more liable to be abused, to the prejudice of liberty, than the punitory

function; for there is hardly any part of the legitimate freedom of action of a

human being which would not admit of being represented, and fairly too, as

increasing the facilities for some form or other of delinquency. Nevertheless,

if a public authority, or even a private person, sees any one evidently

preparing to commit a crime, they are not bound to look on inactive until the

crime is committed, but may interfere to prevent it. If poisons were never

bought or used for any purpose except the commission of murder, it would be

right to prohibit their manufacture and sale. They may, however, be wanted

not only for innocent but for useful purposes, and restrictions cannot be

imposed in the one case without operating in the other. Again, it is a proper

office of public authority to guard against accidents. If either a public officer

or any one else saw a person attempting to cross a bridge which had been

ascertained to be unsafe, and there were no time to warn him of his danger,

they might seize him and turn him back without any real infringement of his

liberty; for liberty consists in doing what one desires, and he does not desire

to fall into the river. Nevertheless, when there is not a certainty, but only a

danger of mischief, no one but the person himself can judge of the

sufficiency of the motive which may prompt him to incur the risk: in this

case, therefore, (unless he is a child, or delirious, or in some state of

excitement or absorption incompatible with the full use of the reflecting

faculty,) he ought, I conceive, to be only warned of the danger; not forcibly

prevented from exposing himself to it. Similar considerations, applied to such

a question as the sale of poisons, may enable us to decide which among the

possible modes of regulation are or are not contrary to principle. Such a

precaution, for example, as that of labelling the drug with some wordexpressive of its dangerous character, may be enforced without violation of

liberty: the buyer cannot wish not to know that the thing he possesses has

poisonous qualities. But to require in all cases the certificate of a medical

practitioner, would make it sometimes impossible, always expensive, to

obtain the article for legitimate uses. The only mode apparent to me, in which

difficulties may be thrown in the way of crime committed through this

means, without any infringement, worth taking into account, Upon the liberty

of those who desire the poisonous substance for other purposes, consists in

providing what, in the apt language of Bentham, is called "preappointed

evidence." This provision is familiar to every one in the case of contracts. It

is usual and right that the law, when a contract is entered into, should require

as the condition of its enforcing performance, that certain formalities should

be observed, such as signatures, attestation of witnesses, and the like, in order

that in case of subsequent dispute, there may be evidence to prove that the

contract was really entered into, and that there was nothing in the

circumstances to render it legally invalid: the effect being, to throw great

obstacles in the way of fictitious contracts, or contracts made in

circumstances which, if known, would destroy their validity. Precautions of a

similar nature might be enforced in the sale of articles adapted to be

instruments of crime. The seller, for example, might be required to enter in a

register the exact time of the transaction, the name and address of the buyer,

the precise quality and quantity sold; to ask the purpose for which it was

wanted, and record the answer he received. When there was no medical

prescription, the presence of some third person might be required, to bring

home the fact to the purchaser, in case there should afterwards be reason to

believe that the article had been applied to criminal purposes. Such

regulations would in general be no material impediment to obtaining the

article, but a very considerable one to making an improper use of it without

detection.

              The right inherent in society, to ward off crimes against itself by

antecedent precautions, suggests the obvious limitations to the maxim, that

purely self-regarding misconduct cannot properly be meddled with in the way

of prevention or punishment. Drunkennesses, for example, in ordinary cases,

is not a fit subject for legislative interference; but I should deem it perfectly

legitimate that a person, who had once been convicted of any act of violence

to others under the influence of drink, should be placed under a special legal

restriction, personal to himself; that if he were afterwards found drunk, heshould be liable to a penalty, and that if when in that state he committed

another offence, the punishment to which he would be liable for that other

offence should be increased in severity. The making himself drunk, in a

person whom drunkenness excites to do harm to others, is a crime against

others. So, again, idleness, except in a person receiving support from the

public, or except when it constitutes a breach of contract, cannot without

tyranny be made a subject of legal punishment; but if either from idleness or

from any other avoidable cause, a man fails to perform his legal duties to

others, as for instance to support his children, it is no tyranny to force him to

fulfil that obligation, by compulsory labor, if no other means are available.

              Again, there are many acts which, being directly injurious only to

the agents themselves, ought not to be legally interdicted, but which, if done

publicly, are a violation of good manners, and coming thus within the

category of offences against others, may rightfully be prohibited. Of this kind

are offences against decency; on which it is unnecessary to dwell, the rather

as they are only connected indirectly with our subject, the objection to

publicity being equally strong in the case of many actions not in themselves

condemnable, nor supposed to be so.

              There is another question to which an answer must be found,

consistent with the principles which have been laid down. In cases of

personal conduct supposed to be blameable, but which respect for liberty

precludes society from preventing or punishing, because the evil directly

resulting falls wholly on the agent; what the agent is free to do, ought other

persons to be equally free to counsel or instigate? This question is not free

from difficulty. The case of a person who solicits another to do an act, is not

strictly a case of self-regarding conduct. To give advice or offer inducements

to any one, is a social act, and may therefore, like actions in general which

affect others, be supposed amenable to social control. But a little reflection

corrects the first impression, by showing that if the case is not strictly within

the definition of individual liberty, yet the reasons on which the principle of

individual liberty is grounded, are applicable to it. If people must be allowed,

in whatever concerns only themselves, to act as seems best to themselves at

their own peril, they must equally be free to consult with one another about

what is fit to be so done; to exchange opinions, and give and receive

suggestions. Whatever it is permitted to do, it must be permitted to advise to

do. The question is doubtful, only when the instigator derives a personalbenefit from his advice; when he makes it his occupation, for subsistence, or

pecuniary gain, to promote what society and the State consider to be an evil.

Then, indeed, a new element of complication is introduced; namely, the

existence of classes of persons with an interest opposed to what is considered

as the public weal, and whose mode of living is grounded on the

counteraction of it. Ought this to be interfered with, or not? Fornication, for

example, must be tolerated, and so must gambling; but should a person be

free to be a pimp, or to keep a gambling-house? The case is one of those

which lie on the exact boundary line between two principles, and it is not at

once apparent to which of the two it properly belongs. There are arguments

on both sides. On the side of toleration it may be said, that the fact of

following anything as an occupation, and living or profiting by the practice of

it, cannot make that criminal which would otherwise be admissible; that the

act should either be consistently permitted or consistently prohibited; that if

the principles which we have hitherto defended are true, society has no

business, as society, to decide anything to be wrong which concerns only the

individual; that it cannot go beyond dissuasion, and that one person should be

as free to persuade, as another to dissuade. In opposition to this it may be

contended, that although the public, or the State, are not warranted in

authoritatively deciding, for purposes of repression or punishment, that such

or such conduct affecting only the interests of the individual is good or bad,

they are fully justified in assuming, if they regard it as bad, that its being so

or not is at least a disputable question: That, this being supposed, they cannot

be acting wrongly in endeavoring to exclude the influence of solicitations

which are not disinterested, of instigators who cannot possibly be impartial

— who have a direct personal interest on one side, and that side the one

which the State believes to be wrong, and who confessedly promote it for

personal objects only. There can surely, it may be urged, be nothing lost, no

sacrifice of good, by so ordering matters that persons shall make their

election, either wisely or foolishly, on their own prompting, as free as

possible from the arts of persons who stimulate their inclinations for

interested purposes of their own. Thus (it may be said) though the statutes

respecting unlawful games are utterly indefensible — though all persons

should be free to gamble in their own or each other's houses, or in any place

of meeting established by their own subscriptions, and open only to the

members and their visitors — yet public gambling-houses should not be

permitted. It is true that the prohibition is never effectual, and that whateveramount of tyrannical power is given to the police, gamblinghouses can

always be maintained under other pretences; but they may be compelled to

conduct their operations with a certain degree of secrecy and mystery, so that

nobody knows anything about them but those who seek them; and more than

this society ought not to aim at. There is considerable force in these

arguments. I will not venture to decide whether they are sufficient to justify

the moral anomaly of punishing the accessary, when the principal is (and

must be) allowed to go free; of fining or imprisoning the procurer, but not the

fornicator, the gambling-house keeper, but not the gambler. Still less ought

the common operations of buying and selling to be interfered with on

analogous grounds. Almost every article which is bought and sold may be

used in excess, and the sellers have a pecuniary interest in encouraging that

excess; but no argument can be founded on this, in favor, for instance, of the

Maine Law; because the class of dealers in strong drinks, though interested in

their abuse, are indispensably required for the sake of their legitimate use.

The interest, however, of these dealers in promoting intemperance is a real

evil, and justifies the State in imposing restrictions and requiring guarantees,

which but for that justification would be infringements of legitimate liberty.

              A further question is, whether the State while it permits, should

nevertheless indirectly discourage conduct which it deems contrary to the

best interests of the agent; whether, for example, it should take measures to

render the means of drunkenness more costly, or add to the difficulty of

procuring them, by limiting the number of the places of sale. On this as on

most other practical questions, many distinctions require to be made. To tax

stimulants for the sole purpose of making them more difficult to be obtained,

is a measure differing only in degree from their entire prohibition; and would

be justifiable only if that were justifiable. Every increase of cost is a

prohibition, to those whose means do not come up to the augmented price;

and to those who do, it is a penalty laid on them for gratifying a particular

taste. Their choice of pleasures, and their mode of expending their income,

after satisfying their legal and moral obligations to the State and to

individuals, are their own concern, and must rest with their own judgment.

These considerations may seem at first sight to condemn the selection of

stimulants as special subjects of taxation for purposes of revenue. But it must

be remembered that taxation for fiscal purposes is absolutely inevitable; that

in most countries it is necessary that a considerable part of that taxation

should be indirect; that the State, therefore, cannot help imposing penalties,which to some persons may be prohibitory, on the use of some articles of

consumption. It is hence the duty of the State to consider, in the imposition of

taxes, what commodities the consumers can best spare; and a fortiori, to

select in preference those of which it deems the use, beyond a very moderate

quantity, to be positively injurious. Taxation, therefore, of stimulants, up to

the point which produces the largest amount of revenue (supposing that the

State needs all the revenue which it yields) is not only admissible, but to be

approved of.

              The question of making the sale of these commodities a more or less

exclusive privilege, must be answered differently, according to the purposes

to which the restriction is intended to be subservient. All places of public

resort require the restraint of a police, and places of this kind peculiarly,

because offences against society are especially apt to originate there. It is,

therefore, fit to confine the power of selling these commodities (at least for

consumption on the spot) to persons of known or vouched-for respectability

of conduct; to make such regulations respecting hours of opening and closing

as may be requisite for public surveillance, and to withdraw the license if

breaches of the peace repeatedly take place through the connivance or

incapacity of the keeper of the house, or if it becomes a rendezvous for

concocting and preparing offences against the law. Any further restriction I

do not conceive to be, in principle, justifiable. The limitation in number, for

instance, of beer and spirit-houses, for the express purpose of rendering them

more difficult of access, and diminishing the occasions of temptation, not

only exposes all to an inconvenience because there are some by whom the

facility would be abused, but is suited only to a state of society in which the

laboring classes are avowedly treated as children or savages, and placed

under an education of restraint, to fit them for future admission to the

privileges of freedom. This is not the principle on which the laboring classes

are professedly governed in any free country; and no person who sets due

value on freedom will give his adhesion to their being so governed, unless

after all efforts have been exhausted to educate them for freedom and govern

them as freemen, and it has been definitively proved that they can only be

governed as children. The bare statement of the alternative shows the

absurdity of supposing that such efforts have been made in any case which

needs be considered here. It is only because the institutions of this country

are a mass of inconsistencies, that things find admittance into our practice

which belong to the system of despotic, or what is called paternal,government, while the general freedom of our institutions precludes the

exercise of the amount of control necessary to render the restraint of any real

efficacy as a moral education.

              It was pointed out in an early part of this Essay, that the liberty of

the individual, in things wherein the individual is alone concerned, implies a

corresponding liberty in any number of individuals to regulate by mutual

agreement such things as regard them jointly, and regard no persons but

themselves. This question presents no difficulty, so long as the will of all the

persons implicated remains unaltered; but since that will may change, it is

often necessary, even in things in which they alone are concerned, that they

should enter into engagements with one another; and when they do, it is fit,

as a general rule, that those engagements should be kept. Yet in the laws

probably, of every country, this general rule has some exceptions. Not only

persons are not held to engagements which violate the rights of third parties,

but it is sometimes considered a sufficient reason for releasing them from an

engagement, that it is injurious to themselves. In this and most other civilized

countries, for example, an engagement by which a person should sell himself,

or allow himself to be sold, as a slave, would be null and void; neither

enforced by law nor by opinion. The ground for thus limiting his power of

voluntarily disposing of his own lot in life, is apparent, and is very clearly

seen in this extreme case. The reason for not interfering, unless for the sake

of others, with a person's voluntary acts, is consideration for his liberty. His

voluntary choice is evidence that what he so chooses is desirable, or at the

least endurable, to him, and his good is on the whole best provided for by

allowing him to take his own means of pursuing it. But by selling himself for

a slave, he abdicates his liberty; he foregoes any future use of it, beyond that

single act. He therefore defeats, in his own case, the very purpose which is

the justification of allowing him to dispose of himself. He is no longer free;

but is thenceforth in a position which has no longer the presumption in its

favor, that would be afforded by his voluntarily remaining in it. The principle

of freedom cannot require that he should be free not to be free. It is not

freedom, to be allowed to alienate his freedom. These reasons, the force of

which is so conspicuous in this peculiar case, are evidently of far wider

application; yet a limit is everywhere set to them by the necessities of life,

which continually require, not indeed that we should resign our freedom, but

that we should consent to this and the other limitation of it. The principle,

however, which demands uncontrolled freedom of action in all that concernsonly the agents themselves, requires that those who have become bound to

one another, in things which concern no third party, should be able to release

one another from the engagement: and even without such voluntary release,

there are perhaps no contracts or engagements, except those that relate to

money or money's worth, of which one can venture to say that there ought to

be no liberty whatever of retractation. Baron Wilhelm von Humboldt, in the

excellent Essay from which I have already quoted, states it as his conviction,

that engagements which involve personal relations or services, should never

be legally binding beyond a limited duration of time; and that the most

important of these engagements, marriage, having the peculiarity that its

objects are frustrated unless the feelings of both the parties are in harmony

with it, should require nothing more than the declared will of either party to

dissolve it. This subject is too important, and too complicated, to be discussed

in a parenthesis, and I touch on it only so far as is necessary for purposes of

illustration. If the conciseness and generality of Baron Humboldt's

dissertation had not obliged him in this instance to content himself with

enunciating his conclusion without discussing the premises, he would

doubtless have recognized that the question cannot be decided on grounds so

simple as those to which he confines himself. When a person, either by

express promise or by conduct, has encouraged another to rely upon his

continuing to act in a certain way — to build expectations and calculations,

and stake any part of his plan of life upon that supposition, a new series of

moral obligations arises on his part towards that person, which may possibly

be overruled, but can not be ignored. And again, if the relation between two

contracting parties has been followed by consequences to others; if it has

placed third parties in any peculiar position, or, as in the case of marriage, has

even called third parties into existence, obligations arise on the part of both

the contracting parties towards those third persons, the fulfilment of which, or

at all events, the mode of fulfilment, must be greatly affected by the

continuance or disruption of the relation between the original parties to the

contract. It does not follow, nor can I admit, that these obligations extend to

requiring the fulfilment of the contract at all costs to the happiness of the

reluctant party; but they are a necessary element in the question; and even if,

as Von Humboldt maintains, they ought to make no difference in the legal

freedom of the parties to release themselves from the engagement (and I also

hold that they ought not to make much difference), they necessarily make a

great difference in the moral freedom. A person is bound to take all thesecircumstances into account, before resolving on a step which may affect such

important interests of others; and if he does not allow proper weight to those

interests, he is morally responsible for the wrong. I have made these obvious

remarks for the better illustration of the general principle of liberty, and not

because they are at all needed on the particular question, which, on the

contrary, is usually discussed as if the interest of children was everything,

and that of grown persons nothing.

              I have already observed that, owing to the absence of any recognized

general principles, liberty is often granted where it should be withheld, as

well as withheld where it should be granted; and one of the cases in which, in

the modern European world, the sentiment of liberty is the strongest, is a case

where, in my view, it is altogether misplaced. A person should be free to do

as he likes in his own concerns; but he ought not to be free to do as he likes in

acting for another under the pretext that the affairs of another are his own

affairs. The State, while it respects the liberty of each in what specially

regards himself, is bound to maintain a vigilant control over his exercise of

any power which it allows him to possess over others. This obligation is

almost entirely disregarded in the case of the family relations, a case, in its

direct influence on human happiness, more important than all the others taken

together. The almost despotic power of husbands over wives needs not be

enlarged upon here, because nothing more is needed for the complete

removal of the evil, than that wives should have the same rights, and should

receive the protection of law in the same manner, as all other persons; and

because, on this subject, the defenders of established injustice do not avail

themselves of the plea of liberty, but stand forth openly as the champions of

power. It is in the case of children, that misapplied notions of liberty are a

real obstacle to the fulfilment by the State of its duties. One would almost

think that a man's children were supposed to be literally, and not

metaphorically, a part of himself, so jealous is opinion of the smallest

interference of law with his absolute and exclusive control over them; more

jealous than of almost any interference with his own freedom of action: so

much less do the generality of mankind value liberty than power. Consider,

for example, the case of education. Is it not almost a selfevident axiom, that

the State should require and compel the education, up to a certain standard, of

every human being who is born its citizen? Yet who is there that is not afraid

to recognize and assert this truth? Hardly any one indeed will deny that it is

one of the most sacred duties of the parents (or, as law and usage now stand,the father), after summoning a human being into the world, to give to that

being an education fitting him to perform his part well in life towards others

and towards himself. But while this is unanimously declared to be the father's

duty, scarcely anybody, in this country, will bear to hear of obliging him to

perform it. Instead of his being required to make any exertion or sacrifice for

securing education to the child, it is left to his choice to accept it or not when

it is provided gratis! It still remains unrecognized, that to bring a child into

existence without a fair prospect of being able, not only to provide food for

its body, but instruction and training for its mind, is a moral crime, both

against the unfortunate offspring and against society; and that if the parent

does not fulfil this obligation, the State ought to see it fulfilled, at the charge,

as far as possible, of the parent.

              Were the duty of enforcing universal education once admitted, there

would be an end to the difficulties about what the State should teach, and

how it should teach, which now convert the subject into a mere battle-field

for sects and parties, causing the time and labor which should have been

spent in educating, to be wasted in quarrelling about education. If the

government would make up its mind to require for every child a good

education, it might save itself the trouble of providing one. It might leave to

parents to obtain the education where and how they pleased, and content

itself with helping to pay the school fees of the poorer classes of children, and

defraying the entire school expenses of those who have no one else to pay for

them. The objections which are urged with reason against State education, do

not apply to the enforcement of education by the State, but to the State's

taking upon itself to direct that education: which is a totally different thing.

That the whole or any large part of the education of the people should be in

State hands, I go as far as any one in deprecating. All that has been said of the

importance of individuality of character, and diversity in opinions and modes

of conduct, involves, as of the same unspeakable importance, diversity of

education. A general State education is a mere contrivance for moulding

people to be exactly like one another: and as the mould in which it casts them

is that which pleases the predominant power in the government, whether this

be a monarch, a priesthood, an aristocracy, or the majority of the existing

generation, in proportion as it is efficient and successful, it establishes a

despotism over the mind, leading by natural tendency to one over the body.

An education established and controlled by the State, should only exist, if it

exist at all, as one among many competing experiments, carried on for thepurpose of example and stimulus, to keep the others up to a certain standard

of excellence. Unless, indeed, when society in general is in so backward a

state that it could not or would not provide for itself any proper institutions of

education, unless the government undertook the task; then, indeed, the

government may, as the less of two great evils, take upon itself the business

of schools and universities, as it may that of joint-stock companies, when

private enterprise, in a shape fitted for undertaking great works of industry

does not exist in the country. But in general, if the country contains a

sufficient number of persons qualified to provide education under

government auspices, the same persons would be able and willing to give an

equally good education on the voluntary principle, under the assurance of

remuneration afforded by a law rendering education compulsory, combined

with State aid to those unable to defray the expense.

              The instrument for enforcing the law could be no other than public

examinations, extending to all children, and beginning at an early age. An age

might be fixed at which every child must be examined, to ascertain if he (or

she) is able to read. If a child proves unable, the father, unless he has some

sufficient ground of excuse, might be subjected to a moderate fine, to be

worked out, if necessary, by his labor, and the child might be put to school at

his expense. Once in every year the examination should be renewed, with a

gradually extending range of subjects, so as to make the universal acquisition,

and what is more, retention, of a certain minimum of general knowledge,

virtually compulsory. Beyond that minimum, there should be voluntary

examinations on all subjects, at which all who come up to a certain standard

of proficiency might claim a certificate. To prevent the State from exercising

through these arrangements, an improper influence over opinion, the

knowledge required for passing an examination (beyond the merely

instrumental parts of knowledge, such as languages and their use) should,

even in the higher class of examinations, be confined to facts and positive

science exclusively. The examinations on religion, politics, or other disputed

topics, shouLd not turn on the truth or falsehood of opinions, but on the

matter of fact that such and such an opinion is held, on such grounds, by such

authors, or schools, or churches. Under this system, the rising generation

would be no worse off in regard to all disputed truths, than they are at

present; they would be brought up either churchmen or dissenters as they

now are, the State merely taking care that they should be instructed

churchmen, or instructed dissenters. There would be nothing to hinder themfrom being taught religion, if their parents chose, at the same schools where

they were taught other things. All attempts by the State to bias the

conclusions of its citizens on disputed subjects, are evil; but it may very

properly offer to ascertain and certify that a person possesses the knowledge

requisite to make his conclusions, on any given subject, worth attending to. A

student of philosophy would be the better for being able to stand an

examination both in Locke and in Kant, whichever of the two he takes up

with, or even if with neither: and there is no reasonable objection to

examining an atheist in the evidences of Christianity, provided he is not

required to profess a belief in them. The examinations, however, in the higher

branches of knowledge should, I conceive, be entirely voluntary. It would be

giving too dangerous a power to governments, were they allowed to exclude

any one from professions, even from the profession of teacher, for alleged

deficiency of qualifications: and I think, with Wilhelm von Humboldt, that

degrees, or other public certificates of scientific or professional acquirements,

should be given to all who present themselves for examination, and stand the

test; but that such certificates should confer no advantage over competitors,

other than the weight which may be attached to their testimony by public

opinion.

              It is not in the matter of education only that misplaced notions of

liberty prevent moral obligations on the part of parents from being

recognized, and legal obligations from being imposed, where there are the

strongest grounds for the former always, and in many cases for the latter also.

The fact itself, of causing the existence of a human being, is one of the most

responsible actions in the range of human life. To undertake this

responsibility — to bestow a life which may be either a curse or a blessing —

unless the being on whom it is to be bestowed will have at least the ordinary

chances of a desirable existence, is a crime against that being. And in a

country either over-peopled or threatened with being so, to produce children,

beyond a very small number, with the effect of reducing the reward of labor

by their competition, is a serious offence against all who live by the

remuneration of their labor. The laws which, in many countries on the

Continent, forbid marriage unless the parties can show that they have the

means of supporting a family, do not exceed the legitimate powers of the

State: and whether such laws be expedient or not (a question mainly

dependent on local circumstances and feelings), they are not objectionable as

violations of liberty. Such laws are interferences of the State to prohibit amischievous act — an act injurious to others, which ought to be a subject of

reprobation, and social stigma, even when it is not deemed expedient to

superadd legal punishment. Yet the current ideas of liberty, which bend so

easily to real infringements of the freedom of the individual, in things which

concern only himself, would repel the attempt to put any restraint upon his

inclinations when the consequence of their indulgence is a life, or lives, of

wretchedness and depravity to the offspring, with manifold evils to those

sufficiently within reach to be in any way affected by their actions. When we

compare the strange respect of mankind for liberty, with their strange want of

respect for it, we might imagine that a man had an indispensable right to do

harm to others, and no right at all to please himself without giving pain to any

one.

              I have reserved for the last place a large class of questions respecting

the limits of government interference, which, though closely connected with

the subject of this Essay, do not, in strictness, belong to it. These are cases in

which the reasons against interference do not turn upon the principle of

liberty: the question is not about restraining the actions of individuals, but

about helping them: it is asked whether the government should do, or cause

to be done, something for their benefit, instead of leaving it to be done by

themselves, individually, or in voluntary combination.

              The objections to government interference, when it is not such as to

involve infringement of liberty, may be of three kinds.

              The first is, when the thing to be done is likely to be better done by

individuals than by the government. Speaking generally, there is no one so fit

to conduct any business, or to determine how or by whom it shall be

conducted, as those who are personally interested in it. This principle

condemns the interferences, once so common, of the legislature, or the

officers of government, with the ordinary processes of industry. But this part

of the subject has been sufficiently enlarged upon by political economists,

and is not particularly related to the principles of this Essay.

              The second objection is more nearly allied to our subject. In many

cases, though individuals may not do the particular thing so well, on the

average, as the officers of government, it is nevertheless desirable that it

should be done by them, rather than by the government, as a means to their

own mental education — a mode of strengthening their active faculties,exercising their judgment, and giving them a familiar knowledge of the

subjects with which they are thus left to deal. This is a principal, though not

the sole, recommendation of jury trial (in cases not political); of free and

popular local and municipal institutions; of the conduct of industrial and

philanthropic enterprises by voluntary associations. These are not questions

of liberty, and are connected with that subject only by remote tendencies; but

they are questions of development. It belongs to a different occasion from the

present to dwell on these things as parts of national education; as being, in

truth, the peculiar training of a citizen, the practical part of the political

education of a free people, taking them out of the narrow circle of personal

and family selfishness, and accustoming them to the comprehension of joint

interests, the management of joint concerns — habituating them to act from

public or semipublic motives, and guide their conduct by aims which unite

instead of isolating them from one another. Without these habits and powers,

a free constitution can neither be worked nor preserved, as is exemplified by

the too-often transitory nature of political freedom in countries where it does

not rest upon a sufficient basis of local liberties. The management of purely

local business by the localities, and of the great enterprises of industry by the

union of those who voluntarily supply the pecuniary means, is further

recommended by all the advantages which have been set forth in this Essay

as belonging to individuality of development, and diversity of modes of

action. Government operations tend to be everywhere alike. With individuals

and voluntary associations, on the contrary, there are varied experiments, and

endless diversity of experience. What the State can usefully do, is to make

itself a central depository, and active circulator and diffuser, of the

experience resulting from many trials. Its business is to enable each

experimentalist to benefit by the experiments of others, instead of tolerating

no experiments but its own.

              The third, and most cogent reason for restricting the interference of

government, is the great evil of adding unnecessarily to its power. Every

function superadded to those already exercised by the government, causes its

influence over hopes and fears to be more widely diffused, and converts,

more and more, the active and ambitious part of the public into hangers-on of

the government, or of some party which aims at becoming the government. If

the roads, the railways, the banks, the insurance offices, the great joint-stock

companies, the universities, and the public charities, were all of them

branches of the government; if, in addition, the municipal corporations andlocal boards, with all that now devolves on them, became departments of the

central administration; if the employes of all these different enterprises were

appointed and paid by the government, and looked to the government for

every rise in life; not all the freedom of the press and popular constitution of

the legislature would make this or any other country free otherwise than in

name. And the evil would be greater, the more efficiently and scientifically

the administrative machinery was constructed — the more skilful the

arrangements for obtaining the best qualified hands and heads with which to

work it. In England it has of late been proposed that all the members of the

civil service of government should be selected by competitive examination,

to obtain for those employments the most intelligent and instructed persons

procurable; and much has been said and written for and against this proposal.

One of the arguments most insisted on by its opponents is that the occupation

of a permanent official servant of the State does not hold out sufficient

prospects of emolument and importance to attract the highest talents, which

will always be able to find a more inviting career in the professions, or in the

service of companies and other public bodies. One would not have been

surprised if this argument had been used by the friends of the proposition, as

an answer to its principal difficulty. Coming from the opponents it is strange

enough. What is urged as an objection is the safety-valve of the proposed

system. If indeed all the high talent of the country could be drawn into the

service of the government, a proposal tending to bring about that result might

well inspire uneasiness. If every part of the business of society which

required organized concert, or large and comprehensive views, were in the

hands of the government, and if government offices were universally filled

by the ablest men, all the enlarged culture and practised intelligence in the

country, except the purely speculative, would be concentrated in a numerous

bureaucracy, to whom alone the rest of the community would look for all

things: the multitude for direction and dictation in all they had to do; the able

and aspiring for personal advancement. To be admitted into the ranks of this

bureaucracy, and when admitted, to rise therein, would be the sole objects of

ambition. Under this regime, not only is the outside public ill-qualified, for

want of practical experience, to criticize or check the mode of operation of

the bureaucracy, but even if the accidents of despotic or the natural working

of popular institutions occasionally raise to the summit a ruler or rulers of

reforming inclinations, no reform can be effected which is contrary to the

interest of the bureaucracy. Such is the melancholy condition of the Russianempire, as is shown in the accounts of those who have had sufficient

opportunity of observation. The Czar himself is powerless against the

bureaucratic body: he can send any one of them to Siberia, but he cannot

govern without them, or against their will. On every decree of his they have a

tacit veto, by merely refraining from carrying it into effect. In countries of

more advanced civilization and of a more insurrectionary spirit the public,

accustomed to expect everything to be done for them by the State, or at least

to do nothing for themselves without asking from the State not only leave to

do it, but even how it is to be done, naturally hold the State responsible for all

evil which befalls them, and when the evil exceeds their amount of patience,

they rise against the government and make what is called a revolution;

whereupon somebody else, with or without legitimate authority from the

nation, vaults into the seat, issues his orders to the bureaucracy, and

everything goes on much as it did before; the bureaucracy being unchanged,

and nobody else being capable of taking their place.

              A very different spectacle is exhibited among a people accustomed

to transact their own business. In France, a large part of the people having

been engaged in military service, many of whom have held at least the rank

of noncommissioned officers, there are in every popular insurrection several

persons competent to take the lead, and improvise some tolerable plan of

action. What the French are in military affairs, the Americans are in every

kind of civil business; let them be left without a government, every body of

Americans is able to improvise one, and to carry on that or any other public

business with a sufficient amount of intelligence, order and decision. This is

what every free people ought to be: and a people capable of this is certain to

be free; it will never let itself be enslaved by any man or body of men

because these are able to seize and pull the reins of the central administration.

No bureaucracy can hope to make such a people as this do or undergo

anything that they do not like. But where everything is done through the

bureaucracy, nothing to which the bureaucracy is really adverse can be done

at all. The constitution of such countries is an organization of the experience

and practical ability of the nation, into a disciplined body for the purpose of

governing the rest; and the more perfect that organization is in itself, the more

successful in drawing to itself and educating for itself the persons of greatest

capacity from all ranks of the community, the more complete is the bondage

of all, the members of the bureaucracy included. For the governors are as

much the slaves of their organization and discipline, as the governed are ofthe governors. A Chinese mandarin is as much the tool and creature of a

despotism as the humblest cultivator. An individual Jesuit is to the utmost

degree of abasement the slave of his order though the order itself exists for

the collective power and importance of its members.

              It is not, also, to be forgotten, that the absorption of all the principal

ability of the country into the governing body is fatal, sooner or later, to the

mental activity and progressiveness of the body itself. Banded together as

they are — working a system which, like all systems, necessarily proceeds in

a great measure by fixed rules — the official body are under the constant

temptation of sinking into indolent routine, or, if they now and then desert

that mill-horse round, of rushing into some half-examined crudity which has

struck the fancy of some leading member of the corps: and the sole check to

these closely allied, though seemingly opposite, tendencies, the only stimulus

which can keep the ability of the body itself up to a high standard, is liability

to the watchful criticism of equal ability outside the body. It is indispensable,

therefore, that the means should exist, independently of the government, of

forming such ability, and furnishing it with the opportunities and experience

necessary for a correct judgment of great practical affairs. If we would

possess permanently a skilful and efficient body of functionaries — above

all, a body able to originate and willing to adopt improvements; if we would

not have our bureaucracy degenerate into a pedantocracy, this body must not

engross all the occupations which form and cultivate the faculties required for

the government of mankind.

              To determine the point at which evils, so formidable to human

freedom and advancement begin, or rather at which they begin to

predominate over the benefits attending the collective application of the force

of society, under its recognized chiefs, for the removal of the obstacles which

stand in the way of its well-being, to secure as much of the advantages of

centralized power and intelligence, as can be had without turning into

governmental channels too great a proportion of the general activity, is one of

the most difficult and complicated questions in the art of government. It is, in

a great measure, a question of detail, in which many and various

considerations must be kept in view, and no absolute rule can be laid down.

But I believe that the practical principle in which safety resides, the ideal to

be kept in view, the standard by which to test all arrangements intended for

overcoming the difficulty, may be conveyed in these words: the greatestdissemination of power consistent with efficiency; but the greatest possible

centralization of information, and diffusion of it from the centre. Thus, in

municipal administration, there would be, as in the New England States, a

very minute division among separate officers, chosen by the localities, of all

business which is not better left to the persons directly interested; but besides

this, there would be, in each department of local affairs, a central

superintendence, forming a branch of the general government. The organ of

this superintendence would concentrate, as in a focus, the variety of

information and experience derived from the conduct of that branch of public

business in all the localities, from everything analogous which is done in

foreign countries, and from the general principles of political science. This

central organ should have a right to know all that is done, and its special duty

should be that of making the knowledge acquired in one place available for

others. Emancipated from the petty prejudices and narrow views of a locality

by its elevated position and comprehensive sphere of observation, its advice

would naturally carry much authority; but its actual power, as a permanent

institution, should, I conceive, be limited to compelling the local officers to

obey the laws laid down for their guidance. In all things not provided for by

general rules, those officers should be left to their own judgment, under

responsibility to their constituents. For the violation of rules, they should be

responsible to law, and the rules themselves should be laid down by the

legislature; the central administrative authority only watching over their

execution, and if they were not properly carried into effect, appealing,

according to the nature of the case, to the tribunal to enforce the law, or to the

constituencies to dismiss the functionaries who had not executed it according

to its spirit. Such, in its general conception, is the central superintendence

which the Poor Law Board is intended to exercise over the administrators of

the Poor Rate throughout the country. Whatever powers the Board exercises

beyond this limit, were right and necessary in that peculiar case, for the cure

of rooted habits of mal- administration in matters deeply affecting not the

localities merely, but the whole community; since no locality has a moral

right to make itself by mismanagement a nest of pauperism, necessarily

overflowing into other localities, and impairing the moral and physical

condition of the whole laboring community. The powers of administrative

coercion and subordinate legislation possessed by the Poor Law Board (but

which, owing to the state of opinion on the subject, are very scantily

exercised by them), though perfectly justifiable in a case of a first-ratenational interest, would be wholly out of place in the superintendence of

interests purely local. But a central organ of information and instruction for

all the localities, would be equally valuable in all departments of

administration. A government cannot have too much of the kind of activity

which does not impede, but aids and stimulates, individual exertion and

development. The mischief begins when, instead of calling forth the activity

and powers of individuals and bodies, it substitutes its own activity for theirs;

when, instead of informing, advising, and upon occasion denouncing, it

makes them work in fetters or bids them stand aside and does their work

instead of them. The worth of a State, in the long run, is the worth of the

individuals composing it; and a State which postpones the interests of their

mental expansion and elevation, to a little more of administrative skill or that

semblance of it which practice gives, in the details of business; a State, which

dwarfs its men, in order that they may be more docile instruments in its hands

even for beneficial purposes, will find that with small men no great thing can

really be accomplished; and that the perfection of machinery to which it has

sacrificed everything, will in the end avail it nothing, for want of the vital

power which, in order that the machine might work more smoothly, it has

preferred to banish.

 

 

 

 

                       Representative Government

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

PREFACE.
CHAPTER 1
TO WHAT EXTENT FORMS OF GOVERNMENT ARE A MATTER OF CHOICE.
CHAPTER 2
THE CRITERION OF A GOOD FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
CHAPTER 3
THAT THE IDEALLY BEST FORM OF GOVERNMENT IS REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
CHAPTER 4
UNDER WHAT SOCIAL CONDITIONS REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT IS INAPPLICABLE.
CHAPTER 5
OF THE PROPER FUNCTIONS OF REPRESENTATIVE BODIES.
CHAPTER 6
OF THE INFIRMITIES AND DANGERS TO WHICH REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT IS LIABLE.
CHAPTER 7
OF TRUE AND FALSE DEMOCRACY; REPRESENTATION OF ALL, AND REPRESENTATION OF THE MAJORITY ONLY.
CHAPTER 8
OF THE EXTENSION OF THE SUFFRAGE.
CHAPTER 9
SHOULD THERE BE TWO STAGES OF ELECTION?
CHAPTER 10
OF THE MODE OF VOTING.
CHAPTER 11
OF THE DURATION OF PARLIAMENTS.
CHAPTER 12
OUGHT PLEDGES TO BE REQUIRED FROM MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT?
CHAPTER 13
OF A SECOND CHAMBER.
CHAPTER 14
OF THE EXECUTIVE IN A REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
CHAPTER 15
OF LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE BODIES.
CHAPTER 16
OF NATIONALITY, AS CONNECTED WITH REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT.
CHAPTER 17
OF FEDERAL REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENTS.
CHAPTER 18
OF THE GOVERNMENT OF DEPENDENCIES BY A FREE STATE.                                        Preface.

 

 

              THOSE who have done me the honour of reading my previous

writings will probably receive no strong impression of novelty from the

present volume; for the principles are those to which I have been working up

during the greater part of my life, and most of the practical suggestions have

been anticipated by others or by myself. There is novelty, however, in the

fact of bringing them together, and exhibiting them in their connection; and

also, I believe, in much that is brought forward in their support. Several of the

opinions at all events, if not new, are for the present as little likely to meet

with general acceptance as if they were.

              It seems to me, however, from various indications, and from none

more than the recent debates on Reform of Parliament, that both

Conservatives and Liberals (if I may continue to call them what they still call

themselves) have lost confidence in the political creeds which they nominally

profess, while neither side appears to have made any progress in providing

itself with a better. Yet such a better doctrine must be possible; not a mere

compromise, by splitting the difference between the two, but something

wider than either, which, in virtue of its superior comprehensiveness, might

be adopted by either Liberal or Conservative without renouncing anything

which he really feels to be valuable in his own creed. When so many feel

obscurely the want of such a doctrine, and so few even flatter themselves that

they have attained it, any one may without presumption offer what his own

thoughts, and the best that he knows of those of others, are able to contribute

towards its formation.

 

 

                                       Chapter 1

 

 

      To what extent Forms of Government are a Matter of Choice.

 

 

              ALL SPECULATIONS concerning forms of government bear the

impress, more or less exclusive, of two conflicting theories respecting

political institutions; or, to speak more properly, conflicting conceptions of

what political institutions are.

              By some minds, government is conceived as strictly a practical art,

giving rise to no questions but those of means and an end. Forms of

government are assimilated to any other expedients for the attainment of

human objects. They are regarded as wholly an affair of invention and

contrivance. Being made by man, it is assumed that man has the choice either

to make them or not, and how or on what pattern they shall be made.

Government, according to this conception, is a problem, to be worked like

any other question of business. The first step is to define the purposes which

governments are required to promote. The next, is to inquire what form of

government is best fitted to fulfil those purposes. Having satisfied ourselves

on these two points, and ascertained the form of government which combines

the greatest amount of good with the least of evil, what further remains is to

obtain the concurrence of our countrymen, or those for whom the institutions

are intended, in the opinion which we have privately arrived at. To find the

best form of government; to persuade others that it is the best; and having

done so, to stir them up to insist on having it, is the order of ideas in the

minds of those who adopt this view of political philosophy. They look upon a

constitution in the same light (difference of scale being allowed for) as they

would upon a steam plough, or a threshing machine.

              To these stand opposed another kind of political reasoners, who are

so far from assimilating a form of government to a machine, that they regard

it as a sort of spontaneous product, and the science of government as a branch

(so to speak) of natural history. According to them, forms of government are

not a matter of choice. We must take them, in the main, as we find them.Governments cannot be constructed by premeditated design. They "are not

made, but grow." Our business with them, as with the other facts of the

universe, is to acquaint ourselves with their natural properties, and adapt

ourselves to them. The fundamental political institutions of a people are

considered by this school as a sort of organic growth from the nature and life

of that people: a product of their habits, instincts, and unconscious wants and

desires, scarcely at all of their deliberate purposes. Their will has had no part

in the matter but that of meeting the necessities of the moment by the

contrivances of the moment, which contrivances, if in sufficient conformity

to the national feelings and character, commonly last, and by successive

aggregation constitute a polity, suited to the people who possess it, but which

it would be vain to attempt to superduce upon any people whose nature and

circumstances had not spontaneously evolved it.

              It is difficult to decide which of these doctrines would be the most

absurd, if we could suppose either of them held as an exclusive theory. But

the principles which men profess, on any controverted subject, are usually a

very incomplete exponent of the opinions they really hold. No one believes

that every people is capable of working every sort of institutions. Carry the

analogy of mechanical contrivances as far as we will, a man does not choose

even an instrument of timber and iron on the sole ground that it is in itself the

best. He considers whether he possesses the other requisites which must be

combined with it to render its employment advantageous, and in particular

whether those by whom it will have to be worked possess the knowledge and

skill necessary for its management. On the other hand, neither are those who

speak of institutions as if they were a kind of living organisms really the

political fatalists they give themselves out to be. They do not pretend that

mankind have absolutely no range of choice as to the government they will

live under, or that a consideration of the consequences which flow from

different forms of polity is no element at all in deciding which of them should

be preferred. But though each side greatly exaggerates its own theory, out of

opposition to the other, and no one holds without modification to either, the

two doctrines correspond to a deep-seated difference between two modes of

thought; and though it is evident that neither of these is entirely in the right,

yet it being equally evident that neither is wholly in the wrong, we must

endeavour to get down to what is at the root of each, and avail ourselves of

the amount of truth which exists in either.              Let us remember, then, in the first place, that political institutions

(however the proposition may be at times ignored) are the work of men; owe

their origin and their whole existence to human will. Men did not wake on a

summer morning and find them sprung up. Neither do they resemble trees,

which, once planted, "are aye growing" while men "are sleeping." In every

stage of their existence they are made what they are by human voluntary

agency. Like all things, therefore, which are made by men, they may be either

well or ill made; judgment and skill may have been exercised in their

production, or the reverse of these. And again, if a people have omitted, or

from outward pressure have not had it in their power, to give themselves a

constitution by the tentative process of applying a corrective to each evil as it

arose, or as the sufferers gained strength to resist it, this retardation of

political progress is no doubt a great disadvantage to them, but it does not

prove that what has been found good for others would not have been good

also for them, and will not be so still when they think fit to adopt it.

              On the other hand, it is also to be borne in mind that political

machinery does not act of itself. As it is first made, so it has to be worked, by

men, and even by ordinary men. It needs, not their simple acquiescence, but

their active participation; and must be adjusted to the capacities and qualities

of such men as are available. This implies three conditions. The people for

whom the form of government is intended must be willing to accept it; or at

least not so unwilling as to oppose an insurmountable obstacle to its

establishment. They must be willing and able to do what is necessary to keep

it standing. And they must be willing and able to do what it requires of them

to enable it to fulfil its purposes. The word "do" is to be understood as

including forbearances as well as acts. They must be capable of fulfilling the

conditions of action, and the conditions of self-restraint, which are necessary

either for keeping the established polity in existence, or for enabling it to

achieve the ends, its conduciveness to which forms its recommendation.

              The failure of any of these conditions renders a form of government,

whatever favourable promise it may otherwise hold out, unsuitable to the

particular case.

              The first obstacle, the repugnance of the people to the particular

form of government, needs little illustration, because it never can in theory

have been overlooked. The case is of perpetual occurrence. Nothing but

foreign force would induce a tribe of North American Indians to submit to therestraints of a regular and civilised government. The same might have been

said, though somewhat less absolutely, of the barbarians who overran the

Roman Empire. It required centuries of time, and an entire change of

circumstances, to discipline them into regular obedience even to their own

leaders, when not actually serving under their banner. There are nations who

will not voluntarily submit to any government but that of certain families,

which have from time immemorial had the privilege of supplying them with

chiefs. Some nations could not, except by foreign conquest, be made to

endure a monarchy; others are equally averse to a republic. The hindrance

often amounts, for the time being, to impracticability.

              But there are also cases in which, though not averse to a form of

government — possibly even desiring it — a people may be unwilling or

unable to fulfil its conditions. They may be incapable of fulfilling such of

them as are necessary to keep the government even in nominal existence.

Thus a people may prefer a free government, but if, from indolence, or

carelessness, or cowardice, or want of public spirit, they are unequal to the

exertions necessary for preserving it; if they will not fight for it when it is

directly attacked; if they can be deluded by the artifices used to cheat them

out of it; if by momentary discouragement, or temporary panic, or a fit of

enthusiasm for an individual, they can be induced to lay their liberties at the

feet even of a great man, or trust him with powers which enable him to

subvert their institutions; in all these cases they are more or less unfit for

liberty: and though it may be for their good to have had it even for a short

time, they are unlikely long to enjoy it. Again, a people may be unwilling or

unable to fulfil the duties which a particular form of government requires of

them. A rude people, though in some degree alive to the benefits of civilised

society, may be unable to practise the forbearance which it demands: their

passions may be too violent, or their personal pride too exacting, to forego

private conflict, and leave to the laws the avenging of their real or supposed

wrongs. In such a case, a civilised government, to be really advantageous to

them, will require to be in a considerable degree despotic: to be one over

which they do not themselves exercise control, and which imposes a great

amount of forcible restraint upon their actions.

              Again, a people must be considered unfit for more than a limited and

qualified freedom, who will not co-operate actively with the law and the

public authorities in the repression of evil-doers. A people who are moredisposed to shelter a criminal than to apprehend him; who, like the Hindoos,

will perjure themselves to screen the man who has robbed them, rather than

take trouble or expose themselves to vindictiveness by giving evidence

against him; who, like some nations of Europe down to a recent date, if a man

poniards another in the public street, pass by on the other side, because it is

the business of the police to look to the matter, and it is safer not to interfere

in what does not concern them; a people who are revolted by an execution,

but not shocked at an assassination — require that the public authorities

should be armed with much sterner powers of repression than elsewhere,

since the first indispensable requisites of civilised life have nothing else to

rest on. These deplorable states of feeling, in any people who have emerged

from savage life, are, no doubt, usually the consequence of previous bad

government, which has taught them to regard the law as made for other ends

than their good, and its administrators as worse enemies than those who

openly violate it. But however little blame may be due to those in whom

these mental habits have grown up, and however the habits may be ultimately

conquerable by better government, yet while they exist a people so disposed

cannot be governed with as little power exercised over them as a people

whose sympathies are on the side of the law, and who are willing to give

active assistance in its enforcement. Again, representative institutions are of

little value, and may be a mere instrument of tyranny or intrigue, when the

generality of electors are not sufficiently interested in their own government

to give their vote, or, if they vote at all, do not bestow their suffrages on

public grounds, but sell them for money, or vote at the beck of some one who

has control over them, or whom for private reasons they desire to propitiate.

Popular election thus practised, instead of a security against misgovernment,

is but an additional wheel in its machinery.

              Besides these moral hindrances, mechanical difficulties are often an

insuperable impediment to forms of government. In the ancient world, though

there might be, and often was, great individual or local independence, there

could be nothing like a regulated popular government beyond the bounds of a

single city-community; because there did not exist the physical conditions for

the formation and propagation of a public opinion, except among those who

could be brought together to discuss public matters in the same agora. This

obstacle is generally thought to have ceased by the adoption of the

representative system. But to surmount it completely, required the press, and

even the newspaper press, the real equivalent, though not in all respects anadequate one, of the Pnyx and the Forum. There have been states of society

in which even a monarchy of any great territorial extent could not subsist, but

unavoidably broke up into petty principalities, either mutually independent,

or held together by a loose tie like the feudal: because the machinery of

authority was not perfect enough to carry orders into effect at a great distance

from the person of the ruler. He depended mainly upon voluntary fidelity for

the obedience even of his army, nor did there exist the means of making the

people pay an amount of taxes sufficient for keeping up the force necessary

to compel obedience throughout a large territory. In these and all similar

cases, it must be understood that the amount of the hindrance may be either

greater or less. It may be so great as to make the form of government work

very ill, without absolutely precluding its existence, or hindering it from

being practically preferable to any other which can be had. This last question

mainly depends upon a consideration which we have not yet arrived at — the

tendencies of different forms of government to promote Progress.

              We have now examined the three fundamental conditions of the

adaptation of forms of government to the people who are to be governed by

them. If the supporters of what may be termed the naturalistic theory of

politics, mean but to insist on the necessity of these three conditions; if they

only mean that no government can permanently exist which does not fulfil

the first and second conditions, and, in some considerable measure, the third;

their doctrine, thus limited, is incontestable. Whatever they mean more than

this appears to me untenable. All that we are told about the necessity of an

historical basis for institutions, of their being in harmony with the national

usages and character, and the like, means either this, or nothing to the

purpose. There is a great quantity of mere sentimentality connected with

these and similar phrases, over and above the amount of rational meaning

contained in them. But, considered practically, these alleged requisites of

political institutions are merely so many facilities for realising the three

conditions. When an institution, or a set of institutions, has the way prepared

for it by the opinions, tastes, and habits of the people, they are not only more

easily induced to accept it, but will more easily learn, and will be, from the

beginning, better disposed, to do what is required of them both for the

preservation of the institutions, and for bringing them into such action as

enables them to produce their best results. It would be a great mistake in any

legislator not to shape his measures so as to take advantage of such pre-

existing habits and feelings when available. On the other hand, it is anexaggeration to elevate these mere aids and facilities into necessary

conditions. People are more easily induced to do, and do more easily, what

they are already used to; but people also learn to do things new to them.

Familiarity is a great help; but much dwelling on an idea will make it

familiar, even when strange at first. There are abundant instances in which a

whole people have been eager for untried things. The amount of capacity

which a people possess for doing new things, and adapting themselves to new

circumstances; is itself one of the elements of the question. It is a quality in

which different nations, and different stages of civilisation, differ much from

one another. The capability of any given people for fulfilling the conditions

of a given form of government cannot be pronounced on by any sweeping

rule. Knowledge of the particular people, and general practical judgment and

sagacity, must be the guides.

              There is also another consideration not to be lost sight of. A people

may be unprepared for good institutions; but to kindle a desire for them is a

necessary part of the preparation. To recommend and advocate a particular

institution or form of government, and set its advantages in the strongest

light, is one of the modes, often the only mode within reach, of educating the

mind of the nation not only for accepting or claiming, but also for working,

the institution. What means had Italian patriots, during the last and present

generation, of preparing the Italian people for freedom in unity, but by

inciting them to demand it? Those, however, who undertake such a task, need

to be duly impressed, not solely with the benefits of the institution or polity

which they recommend, but also with the capacities, moral, intellectual, and

active, required for working it; that they may avoid, if possible, stirring up a

desire too much in advance of the capacity.

              The result of what has been said is, that, within the limits set by the

three conditions so often adverted to, institutions and forms of government

are a matter of choice. To inquire into the best form of government in the

abstract (as it is called) is not a chimerical, but a highly practical employment

of scientific intellect; and to introduce into any country the best institutions

which, in the existing state of that country, are capable of, in any tolerable

degree, fulfilling the conditions, is one of the most rational objects to which

practical effort can address itself. Everything which can be said by way of

disparaging the efficacy of human will and purpose in matters of government

might be said of it in every other of its applications. In all things there arevery strict limits to human power. It can only act by wielding some one or

more of the forces of nature. Forces, therefore, that can be applied to the

desired use must exist; and will only act according to their own laws. We

cannot make the river run backwards; but we do not therefore say that

watermills "are not made, but grow." In politics, as in mechanics, the power

which is to keep the engine going must be sought for outside the machinery;

and if it is not forthcoming, or is insufficient to surmount the obstacles which

may reasonably be expected, the contrivance will fail. This is no peculiarity

of the political art; and amounts only to saying that it is subject to the same

limitations and conditions as all other arts.

              At this point we are met by another objection, or the same objection

in a different form. The forces, it is contended, on which the greater political

phenomena depend, are not amenable to the direction of politicians or

philosophers. The government of a country, it is affirmed, is, in all substantial

respects, fixed and determined beforehand by the state of the country in

regard to the distribution of the elements of social power. Whatever is the

strongest power in society will obtain the governing authority; and a change

in the political constitution cannot be durable unless preceded or

accompanied by an altered distribution of power in society itself. A nation,

therefore, cannot choose its form of government. The mere details, and

practical organisation, it may choose; but the essence of the whole, the seat of

the supreme power, is determined for it by social circumstances.

              That there is a portion of truth in this doctrine I at once admit; but to

make it of any use, it must be reduced to a distinct expression and proper

limits. When it is said that the strongest power in society will make itself

strongest in the government, what is meant by power? Not thews and sinews;

otherwise pure democracy would be the only form of polity that could exist.

To mere muscular strength, add two other elements, property and

intelligence, and we are nearer the truth, but far from having yet reached it.

Not only is a greater number often kept down by a less, but the greater

number may have a preponderance in property, and individually in

intelligence, and may yet be held in subjection, forcibly or otherwise, by a

minority in both respects inferior to it. To make these various elements of

power politically influential they must be organised; and the advantage in

organisation is necessarily with those who are in possession of the

government. A much weaker party in all other elements of power may greatlypreponderate when the powers of government are thrown into the scale; and

may long retain its predominance through this alone: though, no doubt, a

government so situated is in the condition called in mechanics unstable

equilibrium, like a thing balanced on its smaller end, which, if once

disturbed, tends more and more to depart from, instead of reverting to, its

previous state.

              But there are still stronger objections to this theory of government in

the terms in which it is usually stated. The power in society which has any

tendency to convert itself into political power is not power quiescent, power

merely passive, but active power; in other words, power actually exerted; that

is to say, a very small portion of all the power in existence. Politically

speaking, a great part of all power consists in will. How is it possible, then, to

compute the elements of political power, while we omit from the computation

anything which acts on the will? To think that because those who wield the

power in society wield in the end that of government, therefore it is of no use

to attempt to influence the constitution of the government by acting on

opinion, is to forget that opinion is itself one of the greatest active social

forces. One person with a belief is a social power equal to ninety-nine who

have only interests. They who can succeed in creating a general persuasion

that a certain form of government, or social fact of any kind, deserves to be

preferred, have made nearly the most important step which can possibly be

taken towards ranging the powers of society on its side. On the day when the

proto-martyr was stoned to death at Jerusalem, while he who was to be the

Apostle of the Gentiles stood by "consenting unto his death," would any one

have supposed that the party of that stoned man were then and there the

strongest power in society? And has not the event proved that they were so?

Because theirs was the most powerful of then existing beliefs. The same

element made a monk of Wittenberg, at the meeting of the Diet of Worms, a

more powerful social force than the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and all the

princes there assembled. But these, it may be said, are cases in which religion

was concerned, and religious convictions are something peculiar in their

strength. Then let us take a case purely political, where religion, so far as

concerned at all, was chiefly on the losing side. If any one requires to be

convinced that speculative thought is one of the chief elements of social

power, let him bethink himself of the age in which there was scarcely a

throne in Europe which was not filled by a liberal and reforming king, a

liberal and reforming emperor, or, strangest of all, a liberal and reformingpope; the age of Frederic the Great, of Catherine the Second, of Joseph the

Second, of Peter Leopold, of Benedict XIV., of Ganganelli, of Pombal, of

Aranda; when the very Bourbons of Naples were liberals and reformers, and

all the active minds among the noblesse of France were filled with the ideas

which were soon after to cost them so dear. Surely a conclusive example how

far mere physical and economic power is from being the whole of social

power.

              It was not by any change in the distribution of material interests, but

by the spread of moral convictions, that negro slavery has been put an end to

in the British Empire and elsewhere. The serfs in Russia owe their

emancipation, if not to a sentiment of duty, at least to the growth of a more

enlightened opinion respecting the true interest of the State. It is what men

think that determines how they act; and though the persuasions and

convictions of average men are in a much greater degree determined by their

personal position than by reason, no little power is exercised over them by

the persuasions and convictions of those whose personal position is different,

and by the united authority of the instructed. When, therefore, the instructed

in general can be brought to recognise one social arrangement, or political or

other institution, as good, and another as bad, one as desirable, another as

condemnable, very much has been done towards giving to the one, or

withdrawing from the other, that preponderance of social force which enables

it to subsist. And the maxim, that the government of a country is what the

social forces in existence compel it to be, is true only in the sense in which it

favours, instead of discouraging, the attempt to exercise, among all forms of

government practicable in the existing condition of society, a rational choice.

 

 

                                       Chapter 2

 

 

              The Criterion of a Good Form of Government.

 

 

              THE FORM of government for any given country being (within

certain definite conditions) amenable to choice, it is now to be considered by

what test the choice should be directed; what are the distinctive

characteristics of the form of government best fitted to promote the interests

of any given society.

              Before entering into this inquiry, it may seem necessary to decide

what are the proper functions of government; for, government altogether

being only a means, the eligibility of the means must depend on their

adaptation to the end. But this mode of stating the problem gives less aid to

its investigation than might be supposed, and does not even bring the whole

of the question into view. For, in the first place, the proper functions of a

government are not a fixed thing, but different in different states of society;

much more extensive in a backward than in an advanced state. And,

secondly, the character of a government or set of political institutions cannot

be sufficiently estimated while we confine our attention to the legitimate

sphere of governmental functions. For though the goodness of a government

is necessarily circumscribed within that sphere, its badness unhappily is not.

Every kind and degree of evil of which mankind are susceptible may be

inflicted on them by their government; and none of the good which social

existence is capable of can be any further realised than as the constitution of

the government is compatible with, and allows scope for, its attainment. Not

to speak of indirect effects, the direct meddling of the public authorities has

no necessary limits but those of human existence; and the influence of

government on the well-being of society can be considered or estimated in

reference to nothing less than the whole of the interests of humanity.

              Being thus obliged to place before ourselves, as the test of good and

bad government, so complex an object as the aggregate interests of society,

we would willingly attempt some kind of classification of those interests,which, bringing them before the mind in definite groups, might give

indication of the qualities by which a form of government is fitted to promote

those various interests respectively. It would be a great facility if we could

say the good of society consists of such and such elements; one of these

elements requires such conditions, another such others; the government, then,

which unites in the greatest degree all these conditions, must be the best. The

theory of government would thus be built up from the separate theorems of

the elements which compose a good state of society.

              Unfortunately, to enumerate and classify the constituents of social

well-being, so as to admit of the formation of such theorems, is no easy task.

Most of those who, in the last or present generation, have applied themselves

to the philosophy of politics in any comprehensive spirit, have felt the

importance of such a classification; but the attempts which have been made

towards it are as yet limited, so far as I am aware, to a single step. The

classification begins and ends with a partition of the exigencies of society

between the two heads of Order and Progress (in the phraseology of French

thinkers); Permanence and Progression in the words of Coleridge. This

division is plausible and seductive, from the apparently clean-cut opposition

between its two members, and the remarkable difference between the

sentiments to which they appeal. But I apprehend that (however admissible

for purposes of popular discourse) the distinction between Order, or

Permanence, and Progress, employed to define the qualities necessary in a

government, is unscientific and incorrect.

              For, first, what are Order and Progress? Concerning Progress there is

no difficulty, or none which is apparent at first sight. When Progress is

spoken of as one of the wants of human society, it may be supposed to mean

Improvement. That is a tolerably distinct idea. But what is Order? Sometimes

it means more, sometimes less, but hardly ever the whole of what human

society needs except improvement.

              In its narrowest acceptation Order means Obedience. A government

is said to preserve order if it succeeds in getting itself obeyed. But there are

different degrees of obedience, and it is not every degree that is

commendable. Only an unmitigated despotism demands that the individual

citizen shall obey unconditionally every mandate of persons in authority. We

must at least limit the definition to such mandates as are general and issued in

the deliberate form of laws. Order, thus understood, expresses, doubtless, anindispensable attribute of government. Those who are unable to make their

ordinances obeyed, cannot be said to govern. But though a necessary

condition, this is not the object of government. That it should make itself

obeyed is requisite, in order that it may accomplish some other purpose. We

are still to seek what is this other purpose, which government ought to fulfil,

abstractedly from the idea of improvement, and which has to be fulfilled in

every society, whether stationary or progressive.

              In a sense somewhat more enlarged, Order means the preservation of

peace by the cessation of private violence. Order is said to exist where the

people of the country have, as a general rule, ceased to prosecute their

quarrels by private force, and acquired the habit of referring the decision of

their disputes and the redress of their injuries to the public authorities. But in

this larger use of the term, as well as in the former narrow one, Order

expresses rather one of the conditions of government, than either its purpose

or the criterion of its excellence. For the habit may be well established of

submitting to the government, and referring all disputed matters to its

authority, and yet the manner in which the government deals with those

disputed matters, and with the other things about which it concerns itself,

may differ by the whole interval which divides the best from the worst

possible.

              If we intend to comprise in the idea of Order all that society requires

from its government which is not included in the idea of Progress, we must

define Order as the preservation of all kinds and amounts of good which

already exist, and Progress as consisting in the increase of them. This

distinction does comprehend in one or the other section everything which a

government can be required to promote. But, thus understood, it affords no

basis for a philosophy of government. We cannot say that, in constituting a

polity, certain provisions ought to be made for Order and certain others for

Progress; since the conditions of Order, in the sense now indicated, and those

of Progress, are not opposite, but the same. The agencies which tend to

preserve the social good which already exists are the very same which

promote the increase of it, and vice versa: the sole difference being, that a

greater degree of those agencies is required for the latter purpose than for the

former.

              What, for example, are the qualities in the citizens individually

which conduce most to keep up the amount of good conduct, of goodmanagement, of success and prosperity, which already exist in society?

Everybody will agree that those qualities are industry, integrity, justice, and

prudence. But are not these, of all qualities, the most conducive to

improvement? and is not any growth of these virtues in the community in

itself the greatest of improvements? If so, whatever qualities in the

government are promotive of industry, integrity, justice, and prudence,

conduce alike to permanence and to progression; only there is needed more

of those qualities to make the society decidedly progressive than merely to

keep it permanent.

              What, again, are the particular attributes in human beings which

seem to have a more especial reference to Progress, and do not so directly

suggest the ideas of Order and Preservation? They are chiefly the qualities of

mental activity, enterprise, and courage. But are not all these qualities fully as

much required for preserving the good we have, as for adding to it? If there is

anything certain in human affairs, it is that valuable acquisitions are only to

be retained by the continuation of the same energies which gained them.

Things left to take care of themselves inevitably decay. Those whom success

induces to relax their habits of care and thoughtfulness, and their willingness

to encounter disagreeables, seldom long retain their good fortune at its height.

The mental attribute which seems exclusively dedicated to Progress, and is

the culmination of the tendencies to it, is Originality, or Invention. Yet this is

no less necessary for Permanence; since, in the inevitable changes of human

affairs, new inconveniences and dangers continually grow up, which must be

encountered by new resources and contrivances, in order to keep things going

on even only as well as they did before. Whatever qualities, therefore, in a

government, tend to encourage activity, energy, courage, originality, are

requisites of Permanence as well as of Progress; only a somewhat less degree

of them will on the average suffice for the former purpose than for the latter.

              To pass now from the mental to the outward and objective requisites

of society; it is impossible to point out any contrivance in politics, or

arrangement of social affairs, which conduces to Order only, or to Progress

only; whatever tends to either promotes both. Take, for instance, the common

institution of a police. Order is the object which seems most immediately

interested in the efficiency of this part of the social organisation. Yet if it is

effectual to promote Order, that is, if it represses crime, and enables every

one to feel his person and property secure, can any state of things be moreconducive to Progress? The greater security of property is one of the main

conditions and causes of greater production, which is Progress in its most

familiar and vulgarest aspect. The better repression of crime represses the

dispositions which tend to crime, and this is Progress in a somewhat higher

sense. The release of the individual from the cares and anxieties of a state of

imperfect protection, sets his faculties free to be employed in any new effort

for improving his own state and that of others: while the same cause, by

attaching him to social existence, and making him no longer see present or

prospective enemies in his fellow creatures, fosters all those feelings of

kindness and fellowship towards others, and interest in the general well-being

of the community, which are such important parts of social improvement.

              Take, again, such a familiar case as that of a good system of taxation

and finance. This would generally be classed as belonging to the province of

Order. Yet what can be more conducive to Progress? A financial system

which promotes the one, conduces, by the very same excellences, to the

other. Economy, for example, equally preserves the existing stock of national

wealth, and favours the creation of more. A just distribution of burthens, by

holding up to every citizen an example of morality and good conscience

applied to difficult adjustments, and an evidence of the value which the

highest authorities attach to them, tends in an eminent degree to educate the

moral sentiments of the community, both in respect of strength and of

discrimination. Such a mode of levying the taxes as does not impede the

industry, or unnecessarily interfere with the liberty, of the citizen, promotes,

not the preservation only, but the increase of the national wealth, and

encourages a more active use of the individual faculties. And vice versa, all

errors in finance and taxation which obstruct the improvement of the people

in wealth and morals tend also, if of sufficiently serious amount, positively to

impoverish and demoralise them. It holds, in short, universally, that when

Order and Permanence are taken in their widest sense, for the stability of

existing advantages, the requisites of Progress are but the requisites of Order

in a greater degree; those of Permanence merely those of Progress in a

somewhat smaller measure.

              In support of the position that Order is intrinsically different from

Progress, and that preservation of existing and acquisition of additional good

are sufficiently distinct to afford the basis of a fundamental classification, we

shall perhaps be reminded that Progress may be at the expense of Order; thatwhile we are acquiring, or striving to acquire, good of one kind, we may be

losing ground in respect to others: thus there may be progress in wealth,

while there is deterioration in virtue. Granting this, what it proves is not that

Progress is generically a different thing from Permanence, but that wealth is a

different thing from virtue. Progress is permanence and something more; and

it is no answer to this to say that Progress in one thing does not imply

Permanence in everything. No more does Progress in one thing imply

Progress in everything. Progress of any kind includes Permanence in that

same kind; whenever Permanence is sacrificed to some particular kind of

Progress, other Progress is still more sacrificed to it; and if it be not worth the

sacrifice, not the interest of Permanence alone has been disregarded, but the

general interest of Progress has been mistaken.

              If these improperly contrasted ideas are to be used at all in the

attempt to give a first commencement of scientific precision to the notion of

good government, it would be more philosophically correct to leave out of

the definition the word Order, and to say that the best government is that

which is most conducive to Progress. For Progress includes Order, but Order

does not include Progress. Progress is a greater degree of that of which Order

is a less. Order, in any other sense, stands only for a part of the pre-requisites

of good government, not for its idea and essence. Order would find a more

suitable place among the conditions of Progress; since, if we would increase

our sum of good, nothing is more indispensable than to take due care of what

we already have. If we are endeavouring after more riches, our very first rule

should be not to squander uselessly our existing means. Order, thus

considered, is not an additional end to be reconciled with Progress, but a part

and means of Progress itself. If a gain in one respect is purchased by a more

than equivalent loss in the same or in any other, there is not Progress.

Conduciveness to Progress, thus understood, includes the whole excellence of

a government.

              But, though metaphysically defensible, this definition of the criterion

of good government is not appropriate, because, though it contains the whole

of the truth, it recalls only a part. What is suggested by the term Progress is

the idea of moving onward, whereas the meaning of it here is quite as much

the prevention of falling back. The very same social causes — the same

beliefs, feelings, institutions, and practices — are as much required to prevent

society from retrograding, as to produce a further advance. Were there noimprovement to be hoped for, life would not be the less an unceasing struggle

against causes of deterioration; as it even now is. Politics, as conceived by the

ancients, consisted wholly in this. The natural tendency of men and their

works was to degenerate, which tendency, however, by good institutions

virtuously administered, it might be possible for an indefinite length of time

to counteract. Though we no longer hold this opinion; though most men in

the present age profess the contrary creed, believing that the tendency of

things, on the whole, is towards improvement; we ought not to forget that

there is an incessant and ever-flowing current of human affairs towards the

worse, consisting of all the follies, all the vices, all the negligences,

indolences, and supinenesses of mankind; which is only controlled, and kept

from sweeping all before it, by the exertions which some persons constantly,

and others by fits, put forth in the direction of good and worthy objects. It

gives a very insufficient idea of the importance of the strivings which take

place to improve and elevate human nature and life, to suppose that their

chief value consists in the amount of actual improvement realised by their

means, and that the consequence of their cessation would merely be that we

should remain as we are. A very small diminution of those exertions would

not only put a stop to improvement, but would turn the general tendency of

things towards deterioration; which, once begun, would proceed with

increasingly rapidity, and become more and more difficult to check, until it

reached a state often seen in history, and in which many large portions of

mankind even now grovel; when hardly anything short of superhuman power

seems sufficient to turn the tide, and give a fresh commencement to the

upward movement.

              These reasons make the word Progress as unapt as the terms Order

and Permanence to become the basis for a classification of the requisites of a

form of government. The fundamental antithesis which these words express

does not lie in the things themselves, so much as in the types of human

character which answer to them. There are, we know, some minds in which

caution, and others in which boldness, predominates: in some, the desire to

avoid imperilling what is already possessed is a stronger sentiment than that

which prompts to improve the old and acquire new advantages; while there

are others who lean the contrary way, and are more eager for future than

careful of present good. The road to the ends of both is the same; but they are

liable to wander from it in opposite directions. This consideration is of

importance in composing the personnel of any political body: persons of bothtypes ought to be included in it, that the tendencies of each may be tempered,

in so far as they are excessive, by a due proportion of the other. There needs

no express provision to ensure this object, provided care is taken to admit

nothing inconsistent with it. The natural and spontaneous admixture of the

old and the young, of those whose position and reputation are made and those

who have them still to make, will in general sufficiently answer the purpose,

if only this natural balance is not disturbed by artificial regulation.

              Since the distinction most commonly adopted for the classification

of social exigencies does not possess the properties needful for that use, we

have to seek for some other leading distinction better adapted to the purpose.

Such a distinction would seem to be indicated by the considerations to which

I now proceed.

              If we ask ourselves on what causes and conditions good government

in all its senses, from the humblest to the most exalted, depends, we find that

the principal of them, the one which transcends all others, is the qualities of

the human beings composing the society over which the government is

exercised.

              We may take, as a first instance, the administration of justice; with

the more propriety, since there is no part of public business in which the mere

machinery, the rules and contrivances for conducting the details of the

operation, are of such vital consequence. Yet even these yield in importance

to the qualities of the human agents employed. Of what efficacy are rules of

procedure in securing the ends of justice, if the moral condition of the people

is such that the witnesses generally lie, and the judges and their subordinates

take bribes? Again, how can institutions provide a good municipal

administration if there exists such indifference to the subject that those who

would administer honestly and capably cannot be induced to serve, and the

duties are left to those who undertake them because they have some private

interest to be promoted? Of what avail is the most broadly popular

representative system if the electors do not care to choose the best member of

parliament, but choose him who will spend most money to be elected? How

can a representative assembly work for good if its members can be bought, or

if their excitability of temperament, uncorrected by public discipline or

private self-control, makes them incapable of calm deliberation, and they

resort to manual violence on the floor of the House, or shoot at one another

with rifles? How, again, can government, or any joint concern, be carried onin a tolerable manner by people so envious that, if one among them seems

likely to succeed in anything, those who ought to cooperate with him form a

tacit combination to make him fail? Whenever the general disposition of the

people is such that each individual regards those only of his interests which

are selfish, and does not dwell on, or concern himself for, his share of the

general interest, in such a state of things good government is impossible. The

influence of defects of intelligence in obstructing all the elements of good

government requires no illustration. Government consists of acts done by

human beings; and if the agents, or those who choose the agents, or those to

whom the agents are responsible, or the lookers-on whose opinion ought to

influence and check all these, are mere masses of ignorance, stupidity, and

baleful prejudice, every operation of government will go wrong; while, in

proportion as the men rise above this standard, so will the government

improve in quality; up to the point of excellence, attainable but nowhere

attained, where the officers of government, themselves persons of superior

virtue and intellect, are surrounded by the atmosphere of a virtuous and

enlightened public opinion.

              The first element of good government, therefore, being the virtue

and intelligence of the human beings composing the community, the most

important point of excellence which any form of government can possess is

to promote the virtue and intelligence of the people themselves. The first

question in respect to any political institutions is, how far they tend to foster

in the members of the community the various desirable qualities, moral and

intellectual; or rather (following Bentham's more complete classification)

moral, intellectual, and active. The government which does this the best has

every likelihood of being the best in all other respects, since it is on these

qualities, so far as they exist in the people, that all possibility of goodness in

the practical operations of the government depends.

              We may consider, then, as one criterion of the goodness of a

government, the degree in which it tends to increase the sum of good

qualities in the governed, collectively and individually; since, besides that

their well-being is the sole object of government, their good qualities supply

the moving force which works the machinery. This leaves, as the other

constituent element of the merit of a government, the quality of the

machinery itself; that is, the degree in which it is adapted to take advantage of

the amount of good qualities which may at any time exist, and make theminstrumental to the right purposes. Let us again take the subject of judicature

as an example and illustration. The judicial system being given, the goodness

of the administration of justice is in the compound ratio of the worth of the

men composing the tribunals, and the worth of the public opinion which

influences or controls them. But all the difference between a good and a bad

system of judicature lies in the contrivances adopted for bringing whatever

moral and intellectual worth exists in the community to bear upon the

administration of justice, and making it duly operative on the result. The

arrangements for rendering the choice of the judges such as to obtain the

highest average of virtue and intelligence; the salutary forms of procedure;

the publicity which allows observation and criticism of whatever is amiss; the

liberty of discussion and censure through the press; the mode of taking

evidence, according as it is well or ill adapted to elicit truth; the facilities,

whatever be their amount, for obtaining access to the tribunals; the

arrangements for detecting crimes and apprehending offenders; — all these

things are not the power, but the machinery for bringing the power into

contact with the obstacle: and the machinery has no action of itself, but

without it the power, let it be ever so ample, would be wasted and of no

effect.

              A similar distinction exists in regard to the constitution of the

executive departments of administration. Their machinery is good, when the

proper tests are prescribed for the qualifications of officers, the proper rules

for their promotion; when the business is conveniently distributed among

those who are to transact it, a convenient and methodical order established for

its transaction, a correct and intelligible record kept of it after being

transacted; when each individual knows for what he is responsible, and is

known to others as responsible for it; when the best-contrived checks are

provided against negligence, favouritism, or jobbery, in any of the acts of the

department. But political checks will no more act of themselves than a bridle

will direct a horse without a rider. If the checking functionaries are as corrupt

or as negligent as those whom they ought to check, and if the public, the

mainspring of the whole checking machinery, are too ignorant, too passive,

or too careless and inattentive, to do their part, little benefit will be derived

from the best administrative apparatus. Yet a good apparatus is always

preferable to a bad. It enables such insufficient moving or checking power as

exists to act at the greatest advantage; and without it, no amount of moving or

checking power would be sufficient. Publicity, for instance, is no impedimentto evil nor stimulus to good if the public will not look at what is done; but

without publicity, how could they either check or encourage what they were

not permitted to see? The ideally perfect constitution of a public office is that

in which the interest of the functionary is entirely coincident with his duty.

No mere system will make it so, but still less can it be made so without a

system, aptly devised for the purpose.

              What we have said of the arrangements for the detailed

administration of the government is still more evidently true of its general

constitution. All government which aims at being good is an organisation of

some part of the good qualities existing in the individual members of the

community for the conduct of its collective affairs. A representative

constitution is a means of bringing the general standard of intelligence and

honesty existing in the community, and the individual intellect and virtue of

its wisest members, more directly to bear upon the government, and investing

them with greater influence in it, than they would in general have under any

other mode of organisation; though, under any, such influence as they do

have is the source of all good that there is in the government, and the

hindrance of every evil that there is not. The greater the amount of these good

qualities which the institutions of a country succeed in organising, and the

better the mode of organisation, the better will be the government.

              We have now, therefore, obtained a foundation for a twofold

division of the merit which any set of political institutions can possess. It

consists partly of the degree in which they promote the general mental

advancement of the community, including under that phrase advancement in

intellect, in virtue, and in practical activity and efficiency; and partly of the

degree of perfection with which they organise the moral, intellectual, and

active worth already existing, so as to operate with the greatest effect on

public affairs. A government is to be judged by its action upon men, and by

its action upon things; by what it makes of the citizens, and what it does with

them; its tendency to improve or deteriorate the people themselves, and the

goodness or badness of the work it performs for them, and by means of them.

Government is at once a great influence acting on the human mind, and a set

of organised arrangements for public business: in the first capacity its

beneficial action is chiefly indirect, but not therefore less vital, while its

mischievous action may be direct.

              The difference between these two functions of a government is not,like that between Order and Progress, a difference merely in degree, but in

kind. We must not, however, suppose that they have no intimate connection

with one another. The institutions which ensure the best management of

public affairs practicable in the existing state of cultivation tend by this alone

to the further improvement of that state. A people which had the most just

laws, the purest and most efficient judicature, the most enlightened

administration, the most equitable and least onerous system of finance,

compatible with the stage it had attained in moral and intellectual

advancement, would be in a fair way to pass rapidly into a higher stage. Nor

is there any mode in which political institutions can contribute more

effectually to the improvement of the people than by doing their more direct

work well. And, reversely, if their machinery is so badly constructed that they

do their own particular business ill, the effect is felt in a thousand ways in

lowering the morality and deadening the intelligence and activity of the

people. But the distinction is nevertheless real, because this is only one of the

means by which political institutions improve or deteriorate the human mind,

and the causes and modes of that beneficial or injurious influence remain a

distinct and much wider subject of study.

              Of the two modes of operation by which a form of government or set

of political institutions affects the welfare of the community — its operation

as an agency of national education, and its arrangements for conducting the

collective affairs of the community in the state of education in which they

already are; the last evidently varies much less, from difference of country

and state of civilisation, than the first. It has also much less to do with the

fundamental constitution of the government. The mode of conducting the

practical business of government, which is best under a free constitution,

would generally be best also in an absolute monarchy: only an absolute

monarchy is not so likely to practise it. The laws of property, for example;

the principles of evidence and judicial procedure; the system of taxation and

of financial administration, need not necessarily be different in different

forms of government. Each of these matters has principles and rules of its

own, which are a subject of separate study. General jurisprudence, civil and

penal legislation, financial and commercial policy, are sciences in

themselves, or rather, separate members of the comprehensive science or art

of government: and the most enlightened doctrines on all these subjects,

though not equally likely to be understood, or acted on under all forms of

government, yet, if understood and acted on, would in general be equallybeneficial under them all. It is true that these doctrines could not be applied

without some modifications to all states of society and of the human mind:

nevertheless, by far the greater number of them would require modifications

solely of details, to adapt them to any state of society sufficiently advanced to

possess rulers capable of understanding them. A government to which they

would be wholly unsuitable must be one so bad in itself, or so opposed to

public feeling, as to be unable to maintain itself in existence by honest means.

              It is otherwise with that portion of the interests of the community

which relate to the better or worse training of the people themselves.

Considered as instrumental to this, institutions need to be radically different,

according to the stage of advancement already reached. The recognition of

this truth, though for the most part empirically rather than philosophically,

may be regarded as the main point of superiority in the political theories of

the present above those of the last age; in which it customary to claim

representative democracy for England or France by arguments which would

equally have proved it the only fit form of government for Bedouins or

Malays. The state of different communities, in point of culture and

development, ranges downwards to a condition very little above the highest

of the beasts. The upward range, too, is considerable, and the future possible

extension vastly greater. A community can only be developed out of one of

these states into a higher by a concourse of influences, among the principal of

which is the government to which they are subject. In all states of human

improvement ever yet attained, the nature and degree of authority exercised

over individuals, the distribution of power, and the conditions of command

and obedience, are the most powerful of the influences, except their religious

belief, which make them what they are, and enable them to become what they

can be. They may be stopped short at any point in their progress by defective

adaptation of their government to that particular stage of advancement. And

the one indispensable merit of a government, in favour of which it may be

forgiven almost any amount of other demerit compatible with progress, is

that its operation on the people is favourable, or not unfavourable, to the next

step which it is necessary for them to take, in order to raise themselves to a

higher level.

              Thus (to repeat a former example), a people in a state of savage

independence, in which every one lives for himself, exempt, unless by fits,

from any external control, is practically incapable of making any progress incivilisation until it has learnt to obey. The indispensable virtue, therefore, in a

government which establishes itself over a people of this sort is, that it make

itself obeyed. To enable it to do this, the constitution of the government must

be nearly, or quite, despotic. A constitution in any degree popular, dependent

on the voluntary surrender by the different members of the community of

their individual freedom of action, would fail to enforce the first lesson which

the pupils, in this stage of their progress, require. Accordingly, the

civilisation of such tribes, when not the result of juxtaposition with others

already civilised, is almost always the work of an absolute ruler, deriving his

power either from religion or military prowess; very often from foreign arms.

              Again, uncivilised races, and the bravest and most energetic still

more than the rest, are averse to continuous labour of an unexciting kind. Yet

all real civilisation is at this price; without such labour, neither can the mind

be disciplined into the habits required by civilised society, nor the material

world prepared to receive it. There needs a rare concurrence of

circumstances, and for that reason often a vast length of time, to reconcile

such a people to industry, unless they are for a while compelled to it. Hence

even personal slavery, by giving a commencement to industrial life, and

enforcing it as the exclusive occupation of the most numerous portion of the

community, may accelerate the transition to a better freedom than that of

fighting and rapine. It is almost needless to say that this excuse for slavery is

only available in a very early state of society. A civilised people have far

other means of imparting civilisation to those under their influence; and

slavery is, in all its details, so repugnant to that government of law, which is

the foundation of all modern life, and so corrupting to the master-class when

they have once come under civilised influences, that its adoption under any

circumstances whatever in modern society is a relapse into worse than

barbarism.

              At some period, however, of their history, almost every people, now

civilised, have consisted, in majority, of slaves. A people in that condition

require to raise them out of it a very different polity from a nation of savages.

If they are energetic by nature, and especially if there be associated with them

in. the same community an industrious class who are neither slaves nor slave-

owners (as was the case in Greece), they need, probably, no more to ensure

their improvement than to make them free: when freed, they may often be fit,

like Roman freedmen, to be admitted at once to the full rights of citizenship.This, however, is not the normal condition of slavery, and is generally a sign

that it is becoming obsolete. A slave, properly so called, is a being who has

not learnt to help himself. He is, no doubt, one step in advance of a savage.

He has not the first lesson of political society still to acquire. He has learnt to

obey. But what he obeys is only a direct command. It is the characteristic of

born slaves to be incapable of conforming their conduct to a rule, or law.

They can only do what they are ordered, and only when they are ordered to

do it. If a man whom they fear is standing over them and threatening them

with punishment, they obey; but when his back is turned, the work remains

undone. The motive determining them must appeal not to their interests, but

to their instincts; immediate hope or immediate terror. A despotism, which

may tame the savage, will, in so far as it is a despotism, only confirm the

slaves in their incapacities. Yet a government under their own control would

be entirely unmanageable by them. Their improvement cannot come from

themselves, but must be superinduced from without. The step which they

have to take, and their only path to improvement, is to be raised from a

government of will to one of law. They have to be taught self-government,

and this, in its initial stage, means the capacity to act on general instructions.

What they require is not a government of force, but one of guidance. Being,

however, in too low a state to yield to the guidance of any but those to whom

they look up as the possessors of force, the sort of government fittest for them

is one which possesses force, but seldom uses it: a parental despotism or

aristocracy, resembling the St. Simonian form of Socialism; maintaining a

general superintendence over all the operations of society, so as to keep

before each the sense of a present force sufficient to compel his obedience to

the rule laid down, but which, owing to the impossibility of descending to

regulate all the minutae of industry and life, necessarily leaves and induces

individuals to do much of themselves. This, which may be termed the

government of leading-strings, seems to be the one required to carry such a

people the most rapidly through the next necessary step in social progress.

Such appears to have been the idea of the government of the Incas of Peru;

and such was that of the Jesuits of Paraguay. I need scarcely remark that

leading-strings are only admissible as a means of gradually training the

people to walk alone.

              It would be out of place to carry the illustration further. To attempt

to investigate what kind of government is suited to every known state of

society would be to compose a treatise, not on representative government, buton political science at large. For our more limited purpose we borrow from

political philosophy only its general principles. To determine the form of

government most suited to any particular people, we must be able, among the

defects and shortcomings which belong to that people, to distinguish those

that are the immediate impediment to progress; to discover what it is which

(as it were) stops the way. The best government for them is the one which

tends most to give them that for want of which they cannot advance, or

advance only in a lame and lopsided manner. We must not, however, forget

the reservation necessary in all things which have for their object

improvement, or Progress; namely, that in seeking the good which is needed,

no damage, or as little as possible, be done to that already possessed. A

people of savages should be taught obedience but not in such a manner as to

convert them into a people of slaves. And (to give the observation a higher

generality) the form of government which is most effectual for carrying a

people through the next stage of progress will still be very improper for them

if it does this in such a manner as to obstruct, or positively unfit them for, the

step next beyond. Such cases are frequent, and are among the most

melancholy facts in history. The Egyptian hierarchy, the paternal despotism

of China, were very fit instruments for carrying those nations up to the point

of civilisation which they attained. But having reached that point, they were

brought to a permanent halt for want of mental liberty and individuality;

requisites of improvement which the institutions that had carried them thus

far entirely incapacitated them from acquiring; and as the institutions did not

break down and give place to others, further improvement stopped.

              In contrast with these nations, let us consider the example of an

opposite character afforded by another and a comparatively insignificant

Oriental people — the Jews. They, too, had an absolute monarchy and a

hierarchy, their organised institutions were as obviously of sacerdotal origin

as those of the Hindoos. These did for them what was done for other Oriental

races by their institutions — subdued them to industry and order, and gave

them a national life. But neither their kings nor their priests ever obtained, as

in those other countries, the exclusive moulding of their character. Their

religion, which enabled persons of genius and a high religious tone to be

regarded and to regard themselves as inspired from heaven, gave existence to

an inestimably precious unorganised institution — the Order (if it may be so

termed) of Prophets. Under the protection, generally though not always

effectual, of their sacred character, the Prophets were a power in the nation,often more than a match for kings and priests, and kept up, in that little corner

of the earth, the antagonism of influences which is the only real security for

continued progress. Religion consequently was not there what it has been in

so many other places — a consecration of all that was once established, and a

barrier against further improvement. The remark of a distinguished Hebrew,

M. Salvador, that the Prophets were, in Church and State, the equivalent of

the modern liberty of the press, gives a just but not an adequate conception of

the part fulfilled in national and universal history by this great element of

Jewish life; by means of which, the canon of inspiration never being

complete, the persons most eminent in genius and moral feeling could not

only denounce and reprobate, with the direct authority of the Almighty,

whatever appeared to them deserving of such treatment, but could give forth

better and higher interpretations of the national religion, which thenceforth

became part of the religion. Accordingly, whoever can divest himself of the

habit of reading the Bible as if it was one book, which until lately was

equally inveterate in Christians and in unbelievers, sees with admiration the

vast interval between the morality and religion of the Pentateuch, or even of

the historical books (the unmistakable work of Hebrew Conservatives of the

sacerdotal order), and the morality and religion of the Prophecies: a distance

as wide as between these last and the Gospels. Conditions more favourable to

Progress could not easily exist: accordingly, the Jews, instead of being

stationary like other Asiatics, were, next to the Greeks, the most progressive

people of antiquity, and, jointly with them, have been the starting-point and

main propelling agency of modern cultivation.

              It is, then, impossible to understand the question of the adaptation of

forms of government to states of society without taking into account not only

the next step, but all the steps which society has yet to make; both those

which can be foreseen, and the far wider indefinite range which is at present

out of sight. It follows, that to judge of the merits of forms of government, an

ideal must be constructed of the form of government most eligible in itself,

that is, which, if the necessary conditions existed for giving effect to its

beneficial tendencies, would, more than all others, favour and promote not

some one improvement, but all forms and degrees of it. This having been

done, we must consider what are the mental conditions of all sorts, necessary

to enable this government to realise its tendencies, and what, therefore, are

the various defects by which a people is made incapable of reaping its

benefits. It would then be possible to construct a theorem of thecircumstances in which that form of government may wisely be introduced;

and also to judge, in cases in which it had better not be introduced, what

inferior forms of polity will best carry those communities through the

intermediate stages which they must traverse before they can become fit for

the best form of government.

              Of these inquiries, the last does not concern us here; but the first is

an essential part of our subject: for we may, without rashness, at once

enunciate a proposition, the proofs and illustrations of which will present

themselves in the ensuing pages; that this ideally best form of government

will be found in some one or other variety of the Representative System.

 

 

                                       Chapter 3

 

 

      That the ideally best Form of Government is Representative

                                      Government.

 

 

              IT HAS long (perhaps throughout the entire duration of British

freedom) been a common saying, that if a good despot could be ensured,

despotic monarchy would be the best form of government. I look upon this as

a radical and most pernicious misconception of what good government is;

which, until it can be got rid of, will fatally vitiate all our speculations on

government.

              The supposition is, that absolute power, in the hands of an eminent

individual, would ensure a virtuous and intelligent performance of all the

duties of government. Good laws would be established and enforced, bad

laws would be reformed; the best men would be placed in all situations of

trust; justice would be as well administered, the public burthens would be as

light and as judiciously imposed, every branch of administration would be as

purely and as intelligently conducted, as the circumstances of the country and

its degree of intellectual and moral cultivation would admit. I am willing, for

the sake of the argument, to concede all this; but I must point out how great

the concession is; how much more is needed to produce even an

approximation to these results than is conveyed in the simple expression, a

good despot. Their realisation would in fact imply, not merely a good

monarch, but an all-seeing one. He must be at all times informed correctly, in

considerable detail, of the conduct and working of every branch of

administration, in every district of the country, and must be able, in the

twenty-four hours per day which are all that is granted to a king as to the

humblest labourer, to give an effective share of attention and superintendence

to all parts of this vast field; or he must at least be capable of discerning and

choosing out, from among the mass of his subjects, not only a large

abundance of honest and able men, fit to conduct every branch of public

administration under supervision and control, but also the small number ofmen of eminent virtues and talents who can be trusted not only to do without

that supervision, but to exercise it themselves over others. So extraordinary

are the faculties and energies required for performing this task in any

supportable manner, that the good despot whom we are supposing can hardly

be imagined as consenting to undertake it, unless as a refuge from intolerable

evils, and a transitional preparation for something beyond. But the argument

can do without even this immense item in the account. Suppose the difficulty

vanquished. What should we then have? One man of superhuman mental

activity managing the entire affairs of a mentally passive people. Their

passivity is implied in the very idea of absolute power. The nation as a whole,

and every individual composing it, are without any potential voice in their

own destiny. They exercise no will in respect to their collective interests. All

is decided for them by a will not their own, which it is legally a crime for

them to disobey.

              What sort of human beings can be formed under such a regimen?

What development can either their thinking or their active faculties attain

under it? On matters of pure theory they might perhaps be allowed to

speculate, so long as their speculations either did not approach politics, or

had not the remotest connection with its practice. On practical affairs they

could at most be only suffered to suggest; and even under the most moderate

of despots, none but persons of already admitted or reputed superiority could

hope that their suggestions would be known to, much less regarded by, those

who had the management of affairs. A person must have a very unusual taste

for intellectual exercise in and for itself, who will put himself to the trouble

of thought when it is to have no outward effect, or qualify himself for

functions which he has no chance of being allowed to exercise. The only

sufficient incitement to mental exertion, in any but a few minds in a

generation, is the prospect of some practical use to be made of its results. It

does not follow that the nation will be wholly destitute of intellectual power.

The common business of life, which must necessarily be performed by each

individual or family for themselves, will call forth some amount of

intelligence and practical ability, within a certain narrow range of ideas.

There may be a select class of savants, who cultivate science with a view to

its physical uses, or for the pleasure of the pursuit. There will be a

bureaucracy, and persons in training for the bureaucracy, who will be taught

at least some empirical maxims of government and public administration.

There may be, and often has been, a systematic organisation of the bestmental power in the country in some special direction (commonly military) to

promote the grandeur of the despot. But the public at large remain without

information and without interest on all greater matters of practice; or, if they

have any knowledge of them, it is but a dilettante knowledge, like that which

people have of the mechanical arts who have never handled a tool.

              Nor is it only in their intelligence that they suffer. Their moral

capacities are equally stunted. Wherever the sphere of action of human beings

is artificially circumscribed, their sentiments are narrowed and dwarfed in the

same proportion. The food of feeling is action: even domestic affection lives

upon voluntary good offices. Let a person have nothing to do for his country,

and he will not care for it. It has been said of old, that in a despotism there is

at most but one patriot, the despot himself; and the saying rests on a just

appreciation of the effects of absolute subjection, even to a good and wise

master. Religion remains: and here at least, it may be thought, is an agency

that may be relied on for lifting men's eyes and minds above the dust at their

feet. But religion, even supposing it to escape perversion for the purposes of

despotism, ceases in these circumstances to be a social concern, and narrows

into a personal affair between an individual and his Maker, in which the issue

at stake is but his private salvation. Religion in this shape is quite consistent

with the most selfish and contracted egoism, and identifies the votary as little

in feeling with the rest of his kind as sensuality itself.

              A good despotism means a government in which, so far as depends

on the despot, there is no positive oppression by officers of state, but in

which all the collective interests of the people are managed for them, all the

thinking that has relation to collective interests done for them, and in which

their minds are formed by, and consenting to, this abdication of their own

energies. Leaving things to the Government, like leaving them to Providence,

is synonymous with caring nothing about them, and accepting their results,

when disagreeable, as visitations of Nature. With the exception, therefore, of

a few studious men who take an intellectual interest in speculation for its own

sake, the intelligence and sentiments of the whole people are given up to the

material interests, and, when these are provided for, to the amusement and

ornamentation, of private life. But to say this is to say, if the whole testimony

of history is worth anything, that the era of national decline has arrived: that

is, if the nation had ever attained anything to decline from. If it has never

risen above the condition of an Oriental people, in that condition it continuesto stagnate. But if, like Greece or Rome, it had realised anything higher,

through the energy, patriotism, and enlargement of mind, which as national

qualities are the fruits solely of freedom, it relapses in a few generations into

the Oriental state. And that state does not mean stupid tranquillity, with

security against change for the worse; it often means being overrun,

conquered, and reduced to domestic slavery, either by a stronger despot, or

by the nearest barbarous people who retain along with their savage rudeness

the energies of freedom.

              Such are not merely the natural tendencies, but the inherent

necessities of despotic government; from which there is no outlet, unless in

so far as the despotism consents not to be despotism; in so far as the supposed

good despot abstains from exercising his power, and, though holding it in

reserve, allows the general business of government to go on as if the people

really governed themselves. However little probable it may be, we may

imagine a despot observing many of the rules and restraints of constitutional

government. He might allow such freedom of the press and of discussion as

would enable a public opinion to form and express itself on national affairs.

He might suffer local interests to be managed, without the interference of

authority, by the people themselves. He might even surround himself with a

council or councils of government, freely chosen by the whole or some

portion of the nation; retaining in his own hands the power of taxation, and

the supreme legislative as well as executive authority. Were he to act thus,

and so far abdicate as a despot, he would do away with a considerable part of

the evils characteristic of despotism. Political activity and capacity for public

affairs would no longer be prevented from growing up in the body of the

nation; and a public opinion would form itself not the mere echo of the

government. But such improvement would be the beginning of new

difficulties. This public opinion, independent of the monarch's dictation, must

be either with him or against him; if not the one, it will be the other. All

governments must displease many persons, and these having now regular

organs, and being able to express their sentiments, opinions adverse to the

measures of government would often be expressed. What is the monarch to

do when these unfavourable opinions happen to be in the majority? Is he to

alter his course? Is he to defer to the nation? If so, he is no longer a despot,

but a constitutional king; an organ or first minister of the people,

distinguished only by being irremovable. If not, he must either put down

opposition by his despotic power, or there will arise a permanent antagonismbetween the people and one man, which can have but one possible ending.

Not even a religious principle of passive obedience and "right divine" would

long ward off the natural consequences of such a position. The monarch

would have to succumb, and conform to the conditions of constitutional

royalty, or give place to some one who would. The despotism, being thus

chiefly nominal, would possess few of the advantages supposed to belong to

absolute monarchy; while it would realise in a very imperfect degree those of

a free government; since however great an amount of liberty the citizens

might practically enjoy, they could never forget that they held it on

sufferance, and by a concession which under the existing constitution of the

state might at any moment be resumed; that they were legally slaves, though

of a prudent, or indulgent, master.

              It is not much to be wondered at if impatient or disappointed

reformers, groaning under the impediments opposed to the most salutary

public improvements by the ignorance, the indifference, the intractableness,

the perverse obstinacy of a people, and the corrupt combinations of selfish

private interests armed with the powerful weapons afforded by free

institutions, should at times sigh for a strong hand to bear down all these

obstacles, and compel a recalcitrant people to be better governed. But (setting

aside the fact, that for one despot who now and then reforms an abuse, there

are ninety-nine who do nothing but create them) those who look in any such

direction for the realisation of their hopes leave out of the idea of good

government its principal element, the improvement of the people themselves.

One of the benefits of freedom is that under it the ruler cannot pass by the

people's minds, and amend their affairs for them without amending them. If it

were possible for the people to be well governed in spite of themselves, their

good government would last no longer than the freedom of a people usually

lasts who have been liberated by foreign arms without their own co-

operation. It is true, a despot may educate the people; and to do so really,

would be the best apology for his despotism. But any education which aims

at making human beings other than machines, in the long run makes them

claim to have the control of their own actions. The leaders of French

philosophy in the eighteenth century had been educated by the Jesuits. Even

Jesuit education, it seems, was sufficiently real to call forth the appetite for

freedom. Whatever invigorates the faculties, in however small a measure,

creates an increased desire for their more unimpeded exercise; and a popular

education is a failure, if it educates the people for any state but that which itwill certainly induce them to desire, and most probably to demand.

              I am far from condemning, in cases of extreme exigency, the

assumption of absolute power in the form of a temporary dictatorship. Free

nations have, in times of old, conferred such power by their own choice, as a

necessary medicine for diseases of the body politic which could not be got rid

of by less violent means. But its acceptance, even for a time strictly limited,

can only be excused, if, like Solon or Pittacus, the dictator employs the whole

power he assumes in removing the obstacles which debar the nation from the

enjoyment of freedom. A good despotism is an altogether false ideal, which

practically (except as a means to some temporary purpose) becomes the most

senseless and dangerous of chimeras. Evil for evil, a good despotism, in a

country at all advanced in civilisation, is more noxious than a bad one; for it

is far more relaxing and enervating to the thoughts, feelings, and energies of

the people. The despotism of Augustus prepared the Romans for Tiberius. If

the whole tone of their character had not first been prostrated by nearly two

generations of that mild slavery, they would probably have had spirit enough

left to rebel against the more odious one.

              There is no difficulty in showing that the ideally best form of

government is that in which the sovereignty, or supreme controlling power in

the last resort, is vested in the entire aggregate of the community; every

citizen not only having a voice in the exercise of that ultimate sovereignty,

but being, at least occasionally, called on to take an actual part in the

government, by the personal discharge of some public function, local or

general.

              To test this proposition, it has to be examined in reference to the two

branches into which, as pointed out in the last chapter, the inquiry into the

goodness of a government conveniently divides itself, namely, how far it

promotes the good management of the affairs of society by means of the

existing faculties, moral, intellectual, and active, of its various members, and

what is its effect in improving or deteriorating those faculties.

              The ideally best form of government, it is scarcely necessary to say,

does not mean one which is practicable or eligible in all states of civilisation,

but the one which, in the circumstances in which it is practicable and eligible,

is attended with the greatest amount of beneficial consequences, immediate

and prospective. A completely popular government is the only polity whichcan make out any claim to this character. It is pre-eminent in both the

departments between which the excellence of a political constitution is

divided. It is both more favourable to present good government, and

promotes a better and higher form of national character, than any other polity

whatsoever.

              Its superiority in reference to present well-being rests upon two

principles, of as universal truth and applicability as any general propositions

which can be laid down respecting human affairs. The first is, that the rights

and interests of every or any person are only secure from being disregarded

when the person interested is himself able, and habitually disposed, to stand

up for them. The second is, that the general prosperity attains a greater height,

and is more widely diffused, in proportion to the amount and variety of the

personal energies enlisted in promoting it.

              Putting these two propositions into a shape more special to their

present application; human beings are only secure from evil at the hands of

others in proportion as they have the power of being, and are, self-protecting;

and they only achieve a high degree of success in their struggle with Nature

in proportion as they are self-dependent, relying on what they themselves can

do, either separately or in concert, rather than on what others do for them.

              The former proposition — that each is the only safe guardian of his

own rights and interests — is one of those elementary maxims of prudence,

which every person, capable of conducting his own affairs, implicitly acts

upon, wherever he himself is interested. Many, indeed, have a great dislike to

it as a political doctrine, and are fond of holding it up to obloquy, as a

doctrine of universal selfishness. To which we may answer, that whenever it

ceases to be true that mankind, as a rule, prefer themselves to others, and

those nearest to them to those more remote, from that moment Communism

is not only practicable, but the only defensible form of society; and will,

when that time arrives, be assuredly carried into effect. For my own part, not

believing in universal selfishness, I have no difficulty in admitting that

Communism would even now be practicable among the elite of mankind, and

may become so among the rest. But as this opinion is anything but popular

with those defenders of existing institutions who find fault with the doctrine

of the general predominance of self-interest, I am inclined to think they do in

reality believe that most men consider themselves before other people. It is

not, however, necessary to affirm even thus much in order to support theclaim of all to participate in the sovereign power. We need not suppose that

when power resides in an exclusive class, that class will knowingly and

deliberately sacrifice the other classes to themselves: it suffices that, in the

absence of its natural defenders, the interest of the excluded is always in

danger of being overlooked; and, when looked at, is seen with very different

eyes from those of the persons whom it directly concerns.

              In this country, for example, what are called the working classes

may be considered as excluded from all direct participation in the

government. I do not believe that the classes who do participate in it have in

general any intention of sacrificing the working classes to themselves. They

once had that intention; witness the persevering attempts so long made to

keep down wages by law. But in the present day their ordinary disposition is

the very opposite: they willingly make considerable sacrifices, especially of

their pecuniary interest, for the benefit of the working classes, and err rather

by too lavish and indiscriminating beneficence; nor do I believe that any

rulers in history have been actuated by a more sincere desire to do their duty

towards the poorer portion of their countrymen. Yet does Parliament, or

almost any of the members composing it, ever for an instant look at any

question with the eyes of a working man? When a subject arises in which the

labourers as such have an interest, is it regarded from any point of view but

that of the employers of labour? I do not say that the working men's view of

these questions is in general nearer to the truth than the other: but it is

sometimes quite as near; and in any case it ought to be respectfully listened

to, instead of being, as it is, not merely turned away from, but ignored. On the

question of strikes, for instance, it is doubtful if there is so much as one

among the leading members of either House who is not firmly convinced that

the reason of the matter is unqualifiedly on the side of the masters, and that

the men's view of it is simply absurd. Those who have studied the question

know well how far this is from being the case; and in how different, and how

infinitely less superficial a manner the point would have to be argued, if the

classes who strike were able to make themselves heard in Parliament.

              It is an adherent condition of human affairs that no intention,

however sincere, of protecting the interests of others can make it safe or

salutary to tie up their own hands. Still more obviously true is it, that by their

own hands only can any positive and durable improvement of their

circumstances in life be worked out. Through the joint influence of these twoprinciples, all free communities have both been more exempt from social

injustice and crime, and have attained more brilliant prosperity, than any

others, or than they themselves after they lost their freedom. Contrast the free

states of the world, while their freedom lasted, with the cotemporary subjects

of monarchical or oligarchical despotism: the Greek cities with the Persian

satrapies; the Italian republics and the free towns of Flanders and Germany,

with the feudal monarchies of Europe; Switzerland, Holland, and England,

with Austria or anterevolutionary France. Their superior prosperity was too

obvious ever to have been gainsaid: while their superiority in good

government and social relations is proved by the prosperity, and is manifest

besides in every page of history. If we compare, not one age with another, but

the different governments which co-existed in the same age, no amount of

disorder which exaggeration itself can pretend to have existed amidst the

publicity of the free states can be compared for a moment with the

contemptuous trampling upon the mass of the people which pervaded the

whole life of the monarchical countries, or the disgusting individual tyranny

which was of more than daily occurrence under the systems of plunder which

they called fiscal arrangements, and in the secrecy of their frightful courts of

justice.

              It must be acknowledged that the benefits of freedom, so far as they

have hitherto been enjoyed, were obtained by the extension of its privileges

to a part only of the community; and that a government in which they are

extended impartially to all is a desideratum still unrealised. But though every

approach to this has an independent value, and in many cases more than an

approach could not, in the existing state of general improvement, be made,

the participation of all in these benefits is the ideally perfect conception of

free government. In proportion as any, no matter who, are excluded from it,

the interests of the excluded are left without the guarantee accorded to the

rest, and they themselves have less scope and encouragement than they might

otherwise have to that exertion of their energies for the good of themselves

and of the community, to which the general prosperity is always

proportioned.

              Thus stands the case as regards present well-being; the good

management of the affairs of the existing generation. If we now pass to the

influence of the form of government upon character, we shall find the

superiority of popular government over every other to be, if possible, stillmore decided and indisputable.

              This question really depends upon a still more fundamental one, viz.,

which of two common types of character, for the general good of humanity, it

is most desirable should predominate — the active, or the passive type; that

which struggles against evils, or that which endures them; that which bends

to circumstances, or that which endeavours to make circumstances bend to

itself.

              The commonplaces of moralists, and the general sympathies of

mankind, are in favour of the passive type. Energetic characters may be

admired, but the acquiescent and submissive are those which most men

personally prefer. The passiveness of our neighbours increases our sense of

security, and plays into the hands of our wilfulness. Passive characters, if we

do not happen to need their activity, seem an obstruction the less in our own

path. A contented character is not a dangerous rival. Yet nothing is more

certain than that improvement in human affairs is wholly the work of the

uncontented characters; and, moreover, that it is much easier for an active

mind to acquire the virtues of patience than for a passive one to assume those

of energy.

              Of the three varieties of mental excellence, intellectual, practical,

and moral, there never could be any doubt in regard to the first two which

side had the advantage. All intellectual superiority is the fruit of active effort.

Enterprise, the desire to keep moving, to be trying and accomplishing new

things for our own benefit or that of others, is the parent even of speculative,

and much more of practical, talent. The intellectual culture compatible with

the other type is of that feeble and vague description which belongs to a mind

that stops at amusement, or at simple contemplation. The test of real and

vigourous thinking, the thinking which ascertains truths instead of dreaming

dreams, is successful application to practice. Where that purpose does not

exist, to give definiteness, precision, and an intelligible meaning to thought, it

generates nothing better than the mystical metaphysics of the Pythagoreans or

the Vedas. With respect to practical improvement, the case is still more

evident. The character which improves human life is that which struggles

with natural powers and tendencies, not that which gives way to them. The

self-benefiting qualities are all on the side of the active and energetic

character: and the habits and conduct which promote the advantage of each

individual member of the community must be at least a part of those whichconduce most in the end to the advancement of the community as a whole.

              But on the point of moral preferability, there seems at first sight to

be room for doubt. I am not referring to the religious feeling which has so

generally existed in favour of the inactive character, as being more in

harmony with the submission due to the divine will. Christianity as well as

other religions has fostered this sentiment; but it is the prerogative of

Christianity, as regards this and many other perversions, that it is able to

throw them off. Abstractedly from religious considerations, a passive

character, which yields to obstacles instead of striving to overcome them,

may not indeed be very useful to others, no more than to itself, but it might

be expected to be at least inoffensive. Contentment is always counted among

the moral virtues. But it is a complete error to suppose that contentment is

necessarily or naturally attendant on passivity of character; and useless it is,

the moral consequences are mischievous. Where there exists a desire for

advantages not possessed, the mind which does not potentially possess them

by means of its own energies is apt to look with hatred and malice on those

who do. The person bestirring himself with hopeful prospects to improve his

circumstances is the one who feels good-will towards others engaged in, or

who have succeeded in, the same pursuit. And where the majority are so

engaged, those who do not attain the object have had the tone given to their

feelings by the general habit of the country, and ascribe their failure to want

of effort or opportunity, or to their personal ill luck. But those who, while

desiring what others possess, put no energy into striving for it, are either

incessantly grumbling that fortune does not do for them what they do not

attempt to do for themselves, or overflowing with envy and ill-will towards

those who possess what they would like to have.

              In proportion as success in life is seen or believed to be the fruit of

fatality or accident, and not of exertion, in that same ratio does envy develop

itself as a point of national character. The most envious of all mankind are the

Orientals. In Oriental moralists, in Oriental tales, the envious man is

remarkably prominent. In real life, he is the terror of all who possess anything

desirable, be it a palace, a handsome child, or even good health and spirits:

the supposed effect of his mere look constitutes the all-pervading superstition

of the evil eye. Next to Orientals in envy, as in activity, are some of the

Southern Europeans. The Spaniards pursued all their great men with it,

embittered their lives, and generally succeeded in putting an early stop to                1
their successes. With the French, who are essentially a southern people, the

double education of despotism and Catholicism has, in spite of their

impulsive temperament, made submission and endurance the common

character of the people, and their most received notion of wisdom and

excellence: and if envy of one another, and of all superiority, is not more rife

among them than it is, the circumstance must be ascribed to the many

valuable counteracting elements in the French character, and most of all to

the great individual energy which, though less persistent and more

intermittent than in the self-helping and struggling Anglo-Saxons, has

nevertheless manifested itself among the French in nearly every direction in

which the operation of their institutions has been favourable to it.

        1
               I limit the expression to past time, because I would say nothing

derogatory of a great, and now at last a free, people, who are entering into the

general movement of European progress with a vigour which bids fair to

make up rapidly the ground they have lost. No one can doubt what Spanish

intellect and energy are capable of; and their faults as a people are chiefly

those for which freedom and industrial ardour are a real specific.

              There are, no doubt, in all countries, really contented characters,

who not merely do not seek, but do not desire, what they do not already

possess, and these naturally bear no ill-will towards such as have apparently a

more favoured lot. But the great mass of seeming contentment is real

discontent, combined with indolence or self-indulgence, which, while taking

no legitimate means of raising itself, delights in bringing others down to its

own level. And if we look narrowly even at the cases of innocent

contentment, we perceive that they only win our admiration when the

indifference is solely to improvement in outward circumstances, and there is

a striving for perpetual advancement in spiritual worth, or at least a

disinterested zeal to benefit others. The contented man, or the contented

family, who have no ambition to make any one else happier, to promote the

good of their country or their neighbourhood, or to improve themselves in

moral excellence, excite in us neither admiration nor approval. We rightly

ascribe this sort of contentment to mere unmanliness and want of spirit. The

content which we approve is an ability to do cheerfully without what cannot

be had, a just appreciation of the comparative value of different objects of

desire, and a willing renunciation of the less when incompatible with the

greater. These, however, are excellences more natural to the character, inproportion as it is actively engaged in the attempt to improve its own or some

other lot. He who is continually measuring his energy against difficulties

learns what are the difficulties insuperable to him, and what are those which,

though he might overcome, the success is not worth the cost. He whose

thoughts and activities are all needed for, and habitually employed in,

practicable and useful enterprises, is the person of all others least likely to let

his mind dwell with brooding discontent upon things either not worth

attaining, or which are not so to him. Thus the active, self-helping character is

not only intrinsically the best, but is the likeliest to acquire all that is really

excellent or desirable in the opposite type.

              The striving, go-ahead character of England and the United States is

only a fit subject of disapproving criticism on account of the very secondary

objects on which it commonly expends its strength. In itself it is the

foundation of the best hopes for the general improvement of mankind. It has

been acutely remarked that whenever anything goes amiss the habitual

impulse of French people is to say, "ll faut de la patience"; and of English

people, "What a shame." The people who think it a shame when anything

goes wrong — who rush to the conclusion that the evil could and ought to

have been prevented, are those who, in the long run, do most to make the

world better. If the desires are low placed, if they extend to little beyond

physical comfort, and the show of riches, the immediate results of the energy

will not be much more than the continual extension of man's power over

material objects; but even this makes room, and prepares the mechanical

appliances, for the greatest intellectual and social achievements; and while

the energy is there, some persons will apply it, and it will be applied more

and more, to the perfecting not of outward circumstances alone, but of man's

inward nature. Inactivity, unaspiringness, absence of desire, are a more fatal

hindrance to improvement than any misdirection of energy; and are that

through which alone, when existing in the mass, any very formidable

misdirection by an energetic few becomes possible. It is this, mainly, which

retains in a savage or semi-savage state the great majority of the human race.

              Now there can be no kind of doubt that the passive type of character

is favoured by the government of one or a few, and the active self-helping

type by that of the Many. Irresponsible rulers need the quiescence of the

ruled more than they need any activity but that which they can compel.

Submissiveness to the prescriptions of men as necessities of nature is thelesson inculcated by all governments upon those who are wholly without

participation in them. The will of superiors, and the law as the will of

superiors, must be passively yielded to. But no men are mere instruments or

materials in the hands of their rulers who have will or spirit or a spring of

internal activity in the rest of their proceedings: and any manifestation of

these qualities, instead of receiving encouragement from despots, has to get

itself forgiven by them. Even when irresponsible rulers are not sufficiently

conscious of danger from the mental activity of their subjects to be desirous

of repressing it, the position itself is a repression. Endeavour is even more

effectually restrained by the certainty of its impotence than by any positive

discouragement. Between subjection to the will of others, and the virtues of

self-help and self-government, there is a natural incompatibility. This is more

or less complete, according as the bondage is strained or relaxed. Rulers

differ very much in the length to which they carry the control of the free

agency of their subjects, or the supersession of it by managing their business

for them. But the difference is in degree, not in principle; and the best despots

often go the greatest lengths in chaining up the free agency of their subjects.

A bad despot, when his own personal indulgences have been provided for,

may sometimes be willing to let the people alone; but a good despot insists

on doing them good, by making them do their own business in a better way

than they themselves know of. The regulations which restricted to fixed

processes all the leading branches of French manufactures were the work of

the great Colbert.

              Very different is the state of the human faculties where a human

being feels himself under no other external restraint than the necessities of

nature, or mandates of society which he has his share in imposing, and which

it is open to him, if he thinks them wrong, publicly to dissent from, and exert

himself actively to get altered. No doubt, under a government partially

popular, this freedom may be exercised even by those who are not partakers

in the full privileges of citizenship. But it is a great additional stimulus to any

one's self-help and self-reliance when he starts from even ground, and has not

to feel that his success depends on the impression he can make upon the

sentiments and dispositions of a body of whom he is not one. It is a great

discouragement to an individual, and a still greater one to a class, to be left

out of the constitution; to be reduced to plead from outside the door to the

arbiters of their destiny, not taken into consultation within. The maximum of

the invigorating effect of freedom upon the character is only obtained whenthe person acted on either is, or is looking forward to becoming, a citizen as

fully privileged as any other.

              What is still more important than even this matter of feeling is the

practical discipline which the character obtains from the occasional demand

made upon the citizens to exercise, for a time and in their turn, some social

function. It is not sufficiently considered how little there is in most men's

ordinary life to give any largeness either to their conceptions or to their

sentiments. Their work is a routine; not a labour of love, but of self-interest in

the most elementary form, the satisfaction of daily wants; neither the thing

done, nor the process of doing it, introduces the mind to thoughts or feelings

extending beyond individuals; if instructive books are within their reach,

there is no stimulus to read them; and in most cases the individual has no

access to any person of cultivation much superior to his own. Giving him

something to do for the public, supplies, in a measure, all these deficiencies.

If circumstances allow the amount of public duty assigned him to be

considerable, it makes him an educated man. Notwithstanding the defects of

the social system and moral ideas of antiquity, the practice of the dicastery

and the ecclesia raised the intellectual standard of an average Athenian

citizen far beyond anything of which there is yet an example in any other

mass of men, ancient or modern. The proofs of this are apparent in every

page of our great historian of Greece; but we need scarcely look further than

to the high quality of the addresses which their great orators deemed best

calculated to act with effect on their understanding and will. A benefit of the

same kind, though far less in degree, is produced on Englishmen of the lower

middle class by their liability to be placed on juries and to serve parish

offices; which, though it does not occur to so many, nor is so continuous, nor

introduces them to so great a variety of elevated considerations, as to admit

of comparison with the public education which every citizen of Athens

obtained from her democratic institutions, must make them nevertheless very

different beings, in range of ideas and development of faculties, from those

who have done nothing in their lives but drive a quill, or sell goods over a

counter.

              Still more salutary is the moral part of the instruction afforded by the

participation of the private citizen, if even rarely, in public functions. He is

called upon, while so engaged, to weigh interests not his own; to be guided,

in case of conflicting claims, by another rule than his private partialities; toapply, at every turn, principles and maxims which have for their reason of

existence the common good: and he usually finds associated with him in the

same work minds more familiarised than his own with these ideas and

operations, whose study it will be to supply reasons to his understanding, and

stimulation to his feeling for the general interest. He is made to feel himself

one of the public, and whatever is for their benefit to be for his benefit.

Where this school of public spirit does not exist, scarcely any sense is

entertained that private persons, in no eminent social situation, owe any

duties to society, except to obey the laws and submit to the government.

There is no unselfish sentiment of identification with the public. Every

thought or feeling, either of interest or of duty, is absorbed in the individual

and in the family. The man never thinks of any collective interest, of any

objects to be pursued jointly with others, but only in competition with them,

and in some measure at their expense. A neighbour, not being an ally or an

associate, since he is never engaged in any common undertaking for joint

benefit, is therefore only a rival. Thus even private morality suffers, while

public is actually extinct. Were this the universal and only possible state of

things, the utmost aspirations of the lawgiver or the moralist could only

stretch to make the bulk of the community a flock of sheep innocently

nibbling the grass side by side.

              From these accumulated considerations it is evident that the only

government which can fully satisfy all the exigencies of the social state is one

in which the whole people participate; that any participation, even in the

smallest public function, is useful; that the participation should everywhere

be as great as the general degree of improvement of the community will

allow; and that nothing less can be ultimately desirable than the admission of

all to a share in the sovereign power of the state. But since all cannot, in a

community exceeding a single small town, participate personally in any but

some very minor portions of the public business, it follows that the ideal type

of a perfect government must be representative.

 

 

                                       Chapter 4

 

 

      Under what Social Conditions Representative Government is

                                      Inapplicable.

 

 

              WE HAVE recognised in representative government the ideal type

of the most perfect polity, for which, in consequence, any portion of mankind

are better adapted in proportion to their degree of general improvement. As

they range lower and lower in development, that form of government will be,

generally speaking, less suitable to them; though this is not true universally:

for the adaptation of a people to representative government does not depend

so much upon the place they occupy in the general scale of humanity as upon

the degree in which they possess certain special requisites; requisites,

however, so closely connected with their degree of general advancement, that

any variation between the two is rather the exception than the rule. Let us

examine at what point in the descending series representative government

ceases altogether to be admissible, either through its own unfitness, or the

superior fitness of some other regimen.

              First, then, representative, like any other government, must be

unsuitable in any case in which it cannot permanently subsist — i.e. in which

it does not fulfil the three fundamental conditions enumerated in the first

chapter. These were — 1. That the people should be willing to receive it. 2.

That they should be willing and able to do what is necessary for its

preservation. 3. That they should be willing and able to fulfil the duties and

discharge the functions which it imposes on them.

              The willingness of the people to accept representative government

only becomes a practical question when an enlightened ruler, or a foreign

nation or nations who have gained power over the country, are disposed to

offer it the boon. To individual reformers the question is almost irrelevant,

since, if no other objection can be made to their enterprise than that the

opinion of the nation is not yet on their side, they have the ready and proper

answer, that to bring it over to their side is the very end they aim at. Whenopinion is really adverse, its hostility is usually to the fact of change, rather

than to representative government in itself. The contrary case is not indeed

unexampled; there has sometimes been a religious repugnance to any

limitation of the power of a particular line of rulers; but, in general, the

doctrine of passive obedience meant only submission to the will of the

powers that be, whether monarchical or popular. In any case in which the

attempt to introduce representative government is at all likely to be made,

indifference to it, and inability to understand its processes and requirements,

rather than positive opposition, are the obstacles to be expected. These,

however, are as fatal, and may be as hard to be got rid of, as actual aversion;

it being easier, in most cases, to change the direction of an active feeling,

than to create one in a state previously passive. When a people have no

sufficient value for, and attachment to, a representative constitution, they

have next to no chance of retaining it. In every country, the executive is the

branch of the government which wields the immediate power, and is in direct

contact with the public; to it, principally, the hopes and fears of individuals

are directed, and by it both the benefits, and the terrors and prestige, of

government are mainly represented to the public eye. Unless, therefore, the

authorities whose office it is to check the executive are backed by an

effective opinion and feeling in the country, the executive has always the

means of setting them aside, or compelling them to subservience, and is sure

to be well supported in doing so. Representative institutions necessarily

depend for permanence upon the readiness of the people to fight for them in

case of their being endangered. If too little valued for this, they seldom obtain

a footing at all, and if they do, are almost sure to be overthrown, as soon as

the head of the government, or any party leader who can muster force for a

coup de main, is willing to run some small risk for absolute power.

              These considerations relate to the first two causes of failure in a

representative government. The third is, when the people want either the will

or the capacity to fulfil the part which belongs to them in a representative

constitution. When nobody, or only some small fraction, feels the degree of

interest in the general affairs of the State necessary to the formation of a

public opinion, the electors will seldom make any use of the right of suffrage

but to serve their private interest, or the interest of their locality, or of some

one with whom they are connected as adherents or dependents. The small

class who, in this state of public feeling, gain the command of the

representative body, for the most part use it solely as a means of seeking theirfortune. if the executive is weak, the country is distracted by mere struggles

for place; if strong, it makes itself despotic, at the cheap price of appeasing

the representatives, or such of them as are capable of giving trouble, by a

share of the spoil; and the only fruit produced by national representation is,

that in addition to those who really govern, there is an assembly quartered on

the public, and no abuse in which a portion of the assembly are interested is

at all likely to be removed. When, however, the evil stops here, the price may

be worth paying, for the publicity and discussion which, though not an

invariable, are a natural accompaniment of any, even nominal, representation.
                                                        2
In the modern Kingdom of Greece, for example, it can hardly be doubted,

that the placehunters who chiefly compose the representative assembly,

though they contribute little or nothing directly to good government, nor even

much temper the arbitrary power of the executive, yet keep up the idea of

popular rights, and conduce greatly to the real liberty of the press which

exists in that country. This benefit, however, is entirely dependent on the co-

existence with the popular body of an hereditary king. If, instead of

struggling for the favours of the chief ruler, these selfish and sordid factions

struggled for the chief place itself, they would certainly, as in Spanish

America, keep the country in a state of chronic revolution and civil war. A

despotism, not even legal, but of illegal violence, would be alternately

exercised by a succession of political adventurers, and the name and forms of

representation would have no effect but to prevent despotism from attaining

the stability and security by which alone its evils can be mitigated, or its few

advantages realised.

        2
               Written before the salutary revolution of 1862, which, provoked by

popular disgust at the system of governing by corruption, and the general

demoralisation of political men, has opened to that rapidly improving people

a new and hopeful chance of real constitutional government.

              The preceding are the cases in which representative government

cannot permanently exist. There are others in which it possibly might exist,

but in which some other form of government would be preferable. These are

principally when the people, in order to advance in civilisation, have some

lesson to learn, some habit not yet acquired, to the acquisition of which

representative government is likely to be an impediment.

              The most obvious of these cases is the one already considered, in

which the people have still to learn the first lesson of civilisation, that ofobedience. A race who have been trained in energy and courage by struggles

with Nature and their neighbours, but who have not yet settled down into

permanent obedience to any common superior, would be little likely to

acquire this habit under the collective government of their own body. A

representative assembly drawn from among themselves would simply reflect

their own turbulent insubordination. It would refuse its authority to all

proceedings which would impose, on their savage independence, any

improving restraint. The mode in which such tribes are usually brought to

submit to the primary conditions of civilised society is through the necessities

of warfare, and the despotic authority indispensable to military command. A

military leader is the only superior to whom they will submit, except

occasionally some prophet supposed to be inspired from above, or conjurer

regarded as possessing miraculous power. These may exercise a temporary

ascendancy, but as it is merely personal, it rarely effects any change in the

general habits of the people, unless the prophet, like Mahomet, is also a

military chief, and goes forth the armed apostle of a new religion; or unless

the military chiefs ally themselves with his influence, and turn it into a prop

for their own government.

              A people are no less unfitted for representative government by the

contrary fault to that last specified; by extreme passiveness, and ready

submission to tyranny. If a people thus prostrated by character and

circumstances could obtain representative institutions, they would inevitably

choose their tyrants as their representatives, and the yoke would be made

heavier on them by the contrivance which prima facie might be expected to

lighten it. On the contrary, many a people has gradually emerged from this

condition by the aid of a central authority, whose position has made it the

rival, and has ended by making it the master, of the local despots, and which,

above all, has been single. French history, from Hugh Capet to Richelieu and

Louis XIV., is a continued example of this course of things. Even when the

King was scarcely so powerful as many of his chief feudatories, the great

advantage which he derived from being but one has been recognised by

French historians. To him the eyes of all the locally oppressed were turned;

he was the object of hope and reliance throughout the kingdom; while each

local potentate was only powerful within a more or less confined space. At

his hands, refuge and protection were sought from every part of the country,

against first one, then another, of the immediate oppressors. His progress to

ascendancy was slow; but it resulted from successively taking advantage ofopportunities which offered themselves only to him. It was, therefore, sure;

and, in proportion as it was accomplished, it abated, in the oppressed portion

of the community, the habit of submitting to oppression. The king's interest

lay in encouraging all partial attempts on the part of the serfs to emancipate

themselves from their masters, and place themselves in immediate

subordination to himself. Under his protection numerous communities were

formed which knew no one above them but the King. Obedience to a distant

monarch is liberty itself compared with the dominion of the lord of the

neighbouring castle: and the monarch was long compelled by necessities of

position to exert his authority as the ally, rather than the master, of the classes

whom he had aided in affecting their liberation. In this manner a central

power, despotic in principle though generally much restricted in practice, was

mainly instrumental in carrying the people through a necessary stage of

improvement, which representative government, if real, would most likely

have prevented them from entering upon. Nothing short of despotic rule, or a

general massacre, could have effected the emancipation of the serfs in the

Russian Empire.

              The same passages of history forcibly illustrate another mode in

which unlimited monarchy overcomes obstacles to the progress of civilisation

which representative government would have had a decided tendency to

aggravate. One of the strongest hindrances to improvement, up to a rather

advanced stage, is an inveterate spirit of locality. Portions of mankind, in

many other respects capable of, and prepared for, freedom, may be

unqualified for amalgamating into even the smallest nation. Not only may

jealousies and antipathies repel them from one another, and bar all possibility

of voluntary union, but they may not yet have acquired any of the feelings or

habits which would make the union real, supposing it to be nominally

accomplished. They may, like the citizens of an ancient community, or those

of an Asiatic village, have had considerable practice in exercising their

faculties on village or town interests, and have even realised a tolerably

effective popular government on that restricted scale, and may yet have but

slender sympathies with anything beyond, and no habit or capacity of dealing

with interests common to many such communities.

              I am not aware that history furnishes any example in which a

number of these political atoms or corpuscles have coalesced into a body, and

learnt to feel themselves one people, except through previous subjection to a                                    3
central authority common to all. It is through the habit of deferring to that

authority, entering into its plans and subserving its purposes, that a people

such as we have supposed receive into their minds the conception of large

interests, common to a considerable geographical extent. Such interests, on

the contrary, are necessarily the predominant consideration in the mind of the

central ruler; and through the relations, more or less intimate, which he

progressively establishes with the localities, they become familiar to the

general mind. The most favourable concurrence of circumstances under

which this step in improvement could be made, would be one which should

raise up representative institutions without representative government; a

representative body, or bodies, drawn from the localities, making itself the

auxiliary and instrument of the central power, but seldom attempting to

thwart or control it. The people being thus taken, as it were, into council,

though not sharing the supreme power, the political education given by the

central authority is carried home, much more effectually than it could

otherwise be, to the local chiefs and to the population generally; while, at the

same time, a tradition is kept up of government by general consent, or at

least, the sanction of tradition is not given to government without it, which,

when consecrated by custom, has so often put a bad end to a good beginning,

and is one of the most frequent causes of the sad fatality which in most

countries has stopped improvement in so early a stage, because the work of

some one period has been so done as to bar the needful work of the ages

following. Meanwhile, it may be laid down as a political truth, that by

irresponsible monarchy rather than by representative government can a

multitude of insignificant political units be welded into a people, with

common feelings of cohesion, power enough to protect itself against conquest

or foreign aggression, and affairs sufficiently various and considerable of its

own to occupy worthily and expand to fit proportions the social and political

intelligence of the population.

        3
               Italy, which alone can be quoted as an exception, is only so in

regard to the final stage of its transformation. The more difficult previous

advance from the city isolation of Florence, Pisa, or Milan, to the provincial

unity of Tuscany or Lombardy, took place in the usual manner.

              For these several reasons, kingly government, free from the control

(though perhaps strengthened by the support) of representative institutions, is

the most suitable form of polity for the earliest stages of any community, notexcepting a city-community like those of ancient Greece: where, accordingly,

the government of kings, under some real but no ostensible or constitutional

control by public opinion, did historically precede by an unknown and

probably great duration all free institutions, and gave place at last, during a

considerable lapse of time, to oligarchies of a few families.

              A hundred other infirmities or short-comings in a people might be

pointed out, which pro tanto disqualify them from making the best use of

representative government; but in regard to these it is not equally obvious

that the government of One or a Few would have any tendency to cure or

alleviate the evil. Strong prejudices of any kind; obstinate adherence to old

habits; positive defects of national character, or mere ignorance, and

deficiency of mental cultivation, if prevalent in a people, will be in general

faithfully reflected in their representative assemblies: and should it happen

that the executive administration, the direct management of public affairs, is

in the hands of persons comparatively free from these defects, more good

would frequently be done by them when not hampered by the necessity of

carrying with them the voluntary assent of such bodies. But the mere position

of the rulers does not in these, as it does in the other cases which we have

examined, of itself invest them with interests and tendencies operating in the

beneficial direction. From the general weaknesses of the people or of the state

of civilisation, the One and his counsellors, or the Few, are not likely to be

habitually exempt; except in the case of their being foreigners, belonging to a

superior people or a more advanced state of society. Then, indeed, the rulers

may be, to almost any extent, superior in civilisation to those over whom they

rule; and subjection to a foreign government of this description,

notwithstanding its inevitable evils, is of ten of the greatest advantage to a

people, carrying them rapidly through several stages of progress, and clearing

away obstacles to improvement which might have lasted indefinitely if the

subject population had been left unassisted to its native tendencies and

chances. In a country not under the dominion of foreigners, the only cause

adequate to producing similar benefits is the rare accident of a monarch of

extraordinary genius. There have been in history a few of these, who, happily

for humanity, have reigned long enough to render some of their

improvements permanent, by leaving them under the guardianship of a

generation which had grown up under their influence. Charlemagne may be

cited as one instance; Peter the Great is another. Such examples however are

so unfrequent that they can only be classed with the happy accidents whichhave so often decided at a critical moment whether some leading portion of

humanity should make a sudden start, or sink back towards barbarism:

chances like the existence of Themistocles at the time of the Persian invasion,

or of the first or third William of Orange.

              It would be absurd to construct institutions for the mere purpose of

taking advantage of such possibilities; especially as men of this calibre, in

any distinguished position, do not require despotic power to enable them to

exert great influence, as is evidenced by the three last mentioned. The case

most requiring consideration in reference to institutions is the not very

uncommon one in which a small but leading portion of the population, from

difference of race, more civilised origin, or other peculiarities of

circumstance, are markedly superior in civilisation and general character to

the remainder. Under those conditions, government by the representatives of

the mass would stand a chance of depriving them of much of the benefit they

might derive from the greater civilisation of the superior ranks; while

government by the representatives of those ranks would probably rivet the

degradation of the multitude, and leave them no hope of decent treatment

except by ridding themselves of one of the most valuable elements of future

advancement. The best prospect of improvement for a people thus composed

lies in the existence of a constitutionally unlimited, or at least a practically

preponderant, authority in the chief ruler of the dominant class. He alone has

by his position an interest in raising and improving the mass of whom he is

not jealous, as a counterpoise to his associates of whom he is. And if

fortunate circumstances place beside him, not as controllers but as

subordinates, a body representative of the superior caste, which by its

objections and questionings, and by its occasional outbreaks of spirit, keeps

alive habits of collective resistance, and may admit of being, in time and by

degrees, expanded into a really national representation (which is in substance

the history of the English Parliament), the nation has then the most

favourable prospects of improvement which can well occur to a community

thus circumstanced and constituted.

              Among the tendencies which, without absolutely rendering a people

unfit for representative government, seriously incapacitate them from reaping

the full benefit of it, one deserves particular notice. There are two states of

the inclinations, intrinsically very different, but which have something in

common, by virtue of which they often coincide in the direction they give tothe efforts of individuals and of nations: one is, the desire to exercise power

over others; the other is disinclination to have power exercised over

themselves.

              The difference between different portions of mankind in the relative

strength of these two dispositions is one of the most important elements in

their history. There are nations in whom the passion for governing others is

so much stronger than the desire of personal independence, that for the mere

shadow of the one they are found ready to sacrifice the whole of the other.

Each one of their number is willing, like the private soldier in an army, to

abdicate his personal freedom of action into the hands of his general,

provided the army is triumphant and victorious, and he is able to flatter

himself that he is one of a conquering host, though the notion that he has

himself any share in the domination exercised over the conquered is an

illusion. A government strictly limited in its powers and attributions, required

to hold its hands from over-meddling, and to let most things go on without its

assuming the part of guardian or director, is not to the taste of such a people.

In their eyes the possessors of authority can hardly take too much upon

themselves, provided the authority itself is open to general competition. An

average individual among them prefers the chance, however distant or

improbable, of wielding some share of power over his fellow citizens, above

the certainty, to himself and others, of having no unnecessary power

exercised over them. These are the elements of a people of place-hunters; in

whom the course of politics is mainly determined by place-hunting; where

equality alone is cared for, but not liberty; where the contests of political

parties are but struggles to decide whether the power of meddling in

everything shall belong to one class or another, perhaps merely to one knot of

public men or another; where the idea entertained of democracy is merely

that of opening offices to the competition of all instead of a few; where, the

more popular the institutions, the more innumerable are the places created,

and the more monstrous the over-government exercised by all over each, and

by the executive over all. It would be as unjust as it would be ungenerous to

offer this, or anything approaching to it, as an unexaggerated picture of the

French people; yet the degree in which they do participate in this type of

character has caused representative government by a limited class to break

down by excess of corruption, and the attempt at representative government

by the whole male population to end in giving one man the power of

consigning any number of the rest, without trial, to Lambessa or Cayenne,provided he allows all of them to think themselves not excluded from the

possibility of sharing his favours.

              The point of character which, beyond any other, fits the people of

this country for representative government is that they have almost

universally the contrary characteristic. They are very jealous of any attempt

to exercise power over them not sanctioned by long usage and by their own

opinion of right; but they in general care very little for the exercise of power

over others. Not having the smallest sympathy with the passion for

governing, while they are but too well acquainted with the motives of private

interest from which that office is sought, they prefer that it should be

performed by those to whom it comes without seeking, as a consequence of

social position. If foreigners understood this, it would account to them for

some of the apparent contradictions in the political feelings of Englishmen;

their unhesitating readiness to let themselves be governed by the higher

classes, coupled with so little personal subservience to them, that no people

are so fond of resisting authority when it oversteps certain prescribed limits,

or so determined to make their rulers always remember that they will only be

governed in the way they themselves like best. Place-hunting, accordingly, is

a form of ambition to which the English, considered nationally, are almost

strangers. If we except the few families or connections of whom official

employment lies directly in the way, Englishmen's views of advancement in

life take an altogether different direction — that of success in business, or in

a profession. They have the strongest distaste for any mere struggle for office

by political parties or individuals: and there are few things to which they have

a greater aversion than to the multiplication of public employments: a thing,

on the contrary, always popular with the bureaucracy-ridden nations of the

Continent, who would rather pay higher taxes than diminish by the smallest

fraction their individual chances of a place for themselves or their relatives,

and among whom a cry for retrenchment never means abolition of offices,

but the reduction of the salaries of those which are too considerable for the

ordinary citizen to have any chance of being appointed to them.

 

 

                                       Chapter 5

 

 

            Of the Proper Functions of Representative Bodies.

 

 

              IN TREATING of representative government, it is above all

necessary to keep in view the distinction between its idea or essence, and the

particular forms in which the idea has been clothed by accidental historical

developments, or by the notions current at some particular period.

              The meaning of representative government is, that the whole people,

or some numerous portion of them, exercise through deputies periodically

elected by themselves the ultimate controlling power, which, in every

constitution, must reside somewhere. This ultimate power they must possess

in all its completeness. They must be masters, whenever they please, of all

the operations of government. There is no need that the constitutional law

should itself give them this mastery. It does not in the British Constitution.

But what it does give practically amounts to this. The power of final control

is as essentially single, in a mixed and balanced government, as in a pure

monarchy or democracy. This is the portion of truth in the opinion of the

ancients, revived by great authorities in our own time, that a balanced

constitution is impossible. There is almost always a balance, but the scales

never hang exactly even. Which of them preponderates is not always

apparent on the face of the political institutions. In the British Constitution,

each of the three co-ordinate members of the sovereignty is invested with

powers which, if fully exercised, would enable it to stop all the machinery of

government. Nominally, therefore, each is invested with equal power of

thwarting and obstructing the others: and if, by exerting that power, any of

the three could hope to better its position, the ordinary course of human

affairs forbids us to doubt that the power would be exercised. There can be no

question that the full powers of each would be employed defensively if it

found itself assailed by one or both of the others. What then prevents the

same powers from being exerted aggressively? The unwritten maxims of the

Constitution — in other words, the positive political morality of the country:and this positive political morality is what we must look to, if we would

know in whom the really supreme power in the Constitution resides.

              By constitutional law, the Crown can refuse its assent to any Act of

Parliament, and can appoint to office and maintain in it any Minister, in

opposition to the remonstrances of Parliament. But the constitutional morality

of the country nullifies these powers, preventing them from being ever used;

and, by requiring that the head of the Administration should always be

virtually appointed by the House of Commons, makes that body the real

sovereign of the State. These unwritten rules, which limit the use of lawful

powers, are, however, only effectual, and maintain themselves in existence,

on condition of harmonising with the actual distribution of real political

strength. There is in every constitution a strongest power — one which would

gain the victory if the compromises by which the Constitution habitually

works were suspended and there came a trial of strength. Constitutional

maxims are adhered to, and are practically operative, so long as they give the

predominance in the Constitution to that one of the powers which has the

preponderance of active power out of doors. This, in England, is the popular

power. If, therefore, the legal provisions of the British Constitution, together

with the unwritten maxims by which the conduct of the different political

authorities is in fact regulated, did not give to the popular element in the

Constitution that substantial supremacy over every department of the

government which corresponds to its real power in the country, the

Constitution would not possess the stability which characterises it; either the

laws or the unwritten maxims would soon have to be changed. The British

government is thus a representative government in the correct sense of the

term: and the powers which it leaves in hands not directly accountable to the

people can only be considered as precautions which the ruling power is

willing should be taken against its own errors. Such precautions have existed

in all well-constructed democracies. The Athenian Constitution had many

such provisions; and so has that of the United States.

              But while it is essential to representative government that the

practical supremacy in the state should reside in the representatives of the

people, it is an open question what actual functions, what precise part in the

machinery of government, shall be directly and personally discharged by the

representative body. Great varieties in this respect are compatible with the

essence of representative government, provided the functions are such assecure to the representative body the control of everything in the last resort.

              There is a radical distinction between controlling the business of

government and actually doing it. The same person or body may be able to

control everything, but cannot possibly do everything; and in many cases its

control over everything will be more perfect the less it personally attempts to

do. The commander of an army could not direct its movements effectually if

he himself fought in the ranks, or led an assault. It is the same with bodies of

men. Some things cannot be done except by bodies; other things cannot be

well done by them. It is one question, therefore, what a popular assembly

should control, another what it should itself do. It should, as we have already

seen, control all the operations of government. But in order to determine

through what channel this general control may most expediently be exercised,

and what portion of the business of government the representative assembly

should hold in its own hands, it is necessary to consider what kinds of

business a numerous body is competent to perform properly. That alone

which it can do well it ought to take personally upon itself. With regard to the

rest, its proper province is not to do it, but to take means for having it well

done by others.

              For example, the duty which is considered as belonging more

peculiarly than any other to an assembly representative of the people, is that

of voting the taxes. Nevertheless, in no country does the representative body

undertake, by itself or its delegated officers, to prepare the estimates. Though

the supplies can only be voted by the House of Commons, and though the

sanction of the House is also required for the appropriation of the revenues to

the different items of the public expenditure, it is the maxim and the uniform

practice of the Constitution that money can be granted only on the

proposition of the Crown. It has, no doubt, been felt, that moderation as to the

amount, and care and judgment in the detail of its application, can only be

expected when the executive government, through whose hands it is to pass,

is made responsible for the plans and calculations on which the

disbursements are grounded. Parliament, accordingly, is not expected, nor

even permitted, to originate directly either taxation or expenditure. All it is

asked for is its consent, and the sole power it possesses is that of refusal.

              The principles which are involved and recognised in this

constitutional doctrine, if followed as far as they will go, are a guide to the

limitation and definition of the general functions of representative assemblies.In the first place, it is admitted in all countries in which the representative

system is practically understood, that numerous representative bodies ought

not to administer. The maxim is grounded not only on the most essential

principles of good government, but on those of the successful conduct of

business of any description. No body of men, unless organised and under

command, is fit for action, in the proper sense. Even a select board,

composed of few members, and these specially conversant with the business

to be done, is always an inferior instrument to some one individual who could

be found among them, and would be improved in character if that one person

were made the chief, and all the others reduced to subordinates. What can be

done better by a body than by any individual is deliberation. When it is

necessary or important to secure hearing and consideration to many

conflicting opinions, a deliberative body is indispensable. Those bodies,

therefore, are frequently useful, even for administrative business, but in

general only as advisers; such business being, as a rule, better conducted

under the responsibility of one. Even a joint-stock company has always in

practice, if not in theory, a managing director; its good or bad management

depends essentially on some one person's qualifications, and the remaining

directors, when of any use, are so by their suggestions to him, or by the

power they possess of watching him, and restraining or removing him in case

of misconduct. That they are ostensibly equal shares with him in the

management is no advantage, but a considerable set-off against any good

which they are capable of doing: it weakens greatly the sense in his own

mind, and in those of other people, of that individual responsibility in which

he should stand forth personally and undividedly.

              But a popular assembly is still less fitted to administer, or to dictate

in detail to those who have the charge of administration. Even when honestly

meant, the interference is almost always injurious. Every branch of public

administration is a skilled business, which has its own peculiar principles and

traditional rules, many of them not even known, in any effectual way, except

to those who have at some time had a hand in carrying on the business, and

none of them likely to be duly appreciated by persons not practically

acquainted with the department. I do not mean that the transaction of public

business has esoteric mysteries, only to be understood by the initiated. Its

principles are all intelligible to any person of good sense, who has in his mind

a true picture of the circumstances and conditions to be dealt with: but to

have this he must know those circumstances and conditions; and theknowledge does not come by intuition. There are many rules of the greatest

importance in every branch of public business (as there are in every private

occupation), of which a person fresh to the subject neither knows the reason

or even suspects the existence, because they are intended to meet dangers or

provide against inconveniences which never entered into his thoughts. I have

known public men, ministers, of more than ordinary natural capacity, who on

their first introduction to a department of business new to them, have excited

the mirth of their inferiors by the air with which they announced as a truth

hitherto set at nought, and brought to light by themselves, something which

was probably the first thought of everybody who ever looked at the subject,

given up as soon as he had got on to a second. It is true that a great statesman

is he who knows when to depart from traditions, as well as when to adhere to

them. But it is a great mistake to suppose that he will do this better for being

ignorant of the traditions. No one who does not thoroughly know the modes

of action which common experience has sanctioned is capable of judging of

the circumstances which require a departure from those ordinary modes of

action. The interests dependent on the acts done by a public department, the

consequences liable to follow from any particular mode of conducting it,

require for weighing and estimating them a kind of knowledge, and of

specially exercised judgment, almost as rarely found in those not bred to it, as

the capacity to reform the law in those who have not professionally studied it.

              All these difficulties are sure to be ignored by a representative

assembly which attempts to decide on special acts of administration. At its

best, it is inexperience sitting in judgment on experience, ignorance on

knowledge: ignorance which never suspecting the existence of what it does

not know, is equally careless and supercilious, making light of, if not

resenting, all pretensions to have a judgment better worth attending to than its

own. Thus it is when no interested motives intervene: but when they do, the

result is jobbery more unblushing and audacious than the worst corruption

which can well take place in a public office under a government of publicity.

It is not necessary that the interested bias should extend to the majority of the

assembly. In any particular case it is of ten enough that it affects two or three

of their number. Those two or three will have a greater interest in misleading

the body, than any other of its members are likely to have in putting it right.

The bulk of the assembly may keep their hands clean, but they cannot keep

their minds vigilant or their judgments discerning in matters they know

nothing about; and an indolent majority, like an indolent individual, belongsto the person who takes most pains with it. The bad measures or bad

appointments of a minister may be checked by Parliament; and the interest of

ministers in defending, and of rival partisans in attacking, secures a tolerably

equal discussion: but quis custodiet custodes? who shall check the

Parliament? A minister, a head of an office, feels himself under some

responsibility. An assembly in such cases feels under no responsibility at all:

for when did any member of Parliament lose his seat for the vote he gave on

any detail of administration? To a minister, or the head of an office, it is of

more importance what will be thought of his proceedings some time hence

than what is thought of them at the instant: but an assembly, if the cry of the

moment goes with it, however hastily raised or artificially stirred up, thinks

itself and is thought by everybody to be completely exculpated however

disastrous may be the consequences. Besides, an assembly never personally

experiences the inconveniences of its bad measures until they have reached

the dimensions of national evils. Ministers and administrators see them

approaching, and have to bear all the annoyance and trouble of attempting to

ward them off.

              The proper duty of a representative assembly in regard to matters of

administration is not to decide them by its own vote, but to take care that the

persons who have to decide them shall be the proper persons. Even this they

cannot advantageously do by nominating the individuals. There is no act

which more imperatively requires to be performed under a strong sense of

individual responsibility than the nomination to employments. The

experience of every person conversant with public affairs bears out the

assertion, that there is scarcely any act respecting which the conscience of an

average man is less sensitive; scarcely any case in which less consideration is

paid to qualifications, partly because men do not know, and partly because

they do not care for, the difference in qualifications between one person and

another. When a minister makes what is meant to be an honest appointment,

that is when he does not actually job it for his personal connections or his

party, an ignorant person might suppose that he would try to give it to the

person best qualified. No such thing. An ordinary minister thinks himself a

miracle of virtue if he gives it to a person of merit, or who has a claim on the

public on any account, though the claim or the merit may be of the most

opposite description to that required. Il fallait un calculateur, ce fut un

danseur qui l'obtint, is hardly more of a caricature than in the days of Figaro;

and the minister doubtless thinks himself not only blameless but meritoriousif the man dances well. Besides, the qualifications which fit special

individuals for special duties can only be recognised by those who know the

individuals, or who make it their business to examine and judge of persons

from what they have done, or from the evidence of those who are in a

position to judge. When these conscientious obligations are so little regarded

by great public officers who can be made responsible for their appointments,

how must it be with assemblies who cannot? Even now, the worst

appointments are those which are made for the sake of gaining support or

disarming opposition in the representative body: what might we expect if

they were made by the body itself? Numerous bodies never regard special

qualifications at all. Unless a man is fit for the gallows, he is thought to be

about as fit as other people for almost anything for which he can offer

himself as a candidate. When appointments made by a public body are not

decided, as they almost always are, by party connection or private jobbing, a

man is appointed either because he has a reputation, often quite undeserved,

for general ability, or frequently for no better reason than that he is personally

popular.

              It has never been thought desirable that Parliament should itself

nominate even the members of a Cabinet. It is enough that it virtually decides

who shall be prime minister, or who shall be the two or three individuals

from whom the prime minister shall be chosen. In doing this it merely

recognises the fact that a certain person is the candidate of the party whose

general policy commands its support. In reality, the only thing which

Parliament decides is, which of two, or at most three, parties or bodies of

men, shall furnish the executive government: the opinion of the party itself

decides which of its members is fittest to be placed at the head. According to

the existing practice of the British Constitution, these things seem to be on as

good a footing as they can be. Parliament does not nominate any minister, but

the Crown appoints the head of the administration in conformity to the

general wishes and inclinations manifested by Parliament, and the other

ministers on the recommendation of the chief; while every minister has the

undivided moral responsibility of appointing fit persons to the other offices of

administration which are not permanent. In a republic, some other

arrangement would be necessary: but the nearer it approached in practice to

that which has long existed in England, the more likely it would be to work

well. Either, as in the American republic, the head of the Executive must be

elected by some agency entirely independent of the representative body; orthe body must content itself with naming the prime minister, and making him

responsible for the choice of his associates and subordinates. To all these

considerations, at least theoretically, I fully anticipate a general assent:

though, practically, the tendency is strong in representative bodies to interfere

more and more in the details of administration, by virtue of the general law,

that whoever has the strongest power is more and more tempted to make an

excessive use of it; and this is one of the practical dangers to which the

futurity of representative governments will be exposed.

              But it is equally true, though only of late and slowly beginning to be

acknowledged, that a numerous assembly is as little fitted for the direct

business of legislation as for that of administration. There is hardly any kind

of intellectual work which so much needs to be done, not only by

experienced and exercised minds, but by minds trained to the task through

long and laborious study, as the business of making laws. This is a sufficient

reason, were there no other, why they can never be well made but by a

committee of very few persons. A reason no less conclusive is, that every

provision of a law requires to be framed with the most accurate and long-

sighted perception of its effect on all the other provisions; and the law when

made should be capable of fitting into a consistent whole with the previously

existing laws. It is impossible that these conditions should be in any degree

fulfilled when laws are voted clause by clause in a miscellaneous assembly.

The incongruity of such a mode of legislating would strike all minds, were it

not that our laws are already, as to form and construction, such a chaos, that

the confusion and contradiction seem incapable of being made greater by any

addition to the mass.

              Yet even now, the utter unfitness of our legislative machinery for its

purpose is making itself practically felt every year more and more. The mere

time necessarily occupied in getting through Bills renders Parliament more

and more incapable of passing any, except on detached and narrow points. If

a Bill is prepared which even attempts to deal with the whole of any subject

(and it is impossible to legislate properly on any part without having the

whole present to the mind), it hangs over from session to session through

sheer impossibility of finding time to dispose of it. It matters not though the

Bill may have been deliberately drawn up by the authority deemed the best

qualified, with all appliances and means to boot; or by a select commission,

chosen for their conversancy with the subject, and having employed years inconsidering and digesting the particular measure; it cannot be passed, because

the House of Commons will not forego the precious privilege of tinkering it

with their clumsy hands. The custom has of late been to some extent

introduced, when the principle of a Bill has been affirmed on the second

reading, of referring it for consideration in detail to a Select Committee: but it

has not been found that this practice causes much less time to be lost

afterwards in carrying it through the Committee of the whole House: the

opinions or private crotchets which have been overruled by knowledge

always insist on giving themselves a second chance before the tribunal of

ignorance. Indeed, the practice itself has been adopted principally by the

House of Lords, the members of which are less busy and fond of meddling,

and less jealous of the importance of their individual voices, than those of the

elective House. And when a Bill of many clauses does succeed in getting

itself discussed in detail, what can depict the state in which it comes out of

Committee! Clauses omitted which are essential to the working of the rest;

incongruous ones inserted to conciliate some private interest, or some

crotchety member who threatens to delay the Bill; articles foisted in on the

motion of some sciolist with a mere smattering of the subject, leading to

consequences which the member who introduced or those who supported the

Bill did not at the moment foresee, and which need an amending Act in the

next session to correct their mischiefs.

              It is one of the evils of the present mode of managing these things

that the explaining and defending of a Bill, and of its various provisions, is

scarcely ever performed by the person from whose mind they emanated, who

probably has not a seat in the House. Their defence rests upon some minister

or member of Parliament who did not frame them, who is dependent on

cramming for all his arguments but those which are perfectly obvious, who

does not know the full strength of his case, nor the best reasons by which to

support it, and is wholly incapable of meeting unforeseen objections. This

evil, as far as Government bills are concerned, admits of remedy, and has

been remedied in some representative constitutions, by allowing the

Government to be represented in either House by persons in its confidence,

having a right to speak, though not to vote.

              If that, as yet considerable, majority of the House of Commons who

never desire to move an amendment or make a speech would no longer leave

the whole regulation of business to those who do; if they would bethinkthemselves that better qualifications for legislation exist, and may be found if

sought for, than a fluent tongue and the faculty of getting elected by a

constituency; it would soon be recognised that, in legislation as well as

administration, the only task to which a representative assembly can possibly

be competent is not that of doing the work, but of causing it to be done; of

determining to whom or to what sort of people it shall be confided, and

giving or withholding the national sanction to it when performed. Any

government fit for a high state of civilisation would have as one of its

fundamental elements a small body, not exceeding in number the members of

a Cabinet, who should act as a Commission of legislation, having for its

appointed office to make the laws. If the laws of this country were, as surely

they will soon be, revised and put into a connected form, the Commission of

Codification by which this is effected should remain as a permanent

institution, to watch over the work, protect it from deterioration, and make

further improvements as often as required. No one would wish that this body

should of itself have any power of enacting laws: the Commission would

only embody the element of intelligence in their construction; Parliament

would represent that of will. No measure would become a law until expressly

sanctioned by Parliament: and Parliament, or either House, would have the

power not only of rejecting but of sending back a Bill to the Commission for

reconsideration or improvement. Either House might also exercise its

initiative, by referring any subject to the Commission, with directions to

prepare a law. The Commission, of course, would have no power of refusing

its instrumentality to any legislation which the country desired. Instructions,

concurred in by both Houses, to draw up a Bill which should effect a

particular purpose, would be imperative on the Commissioners, unless they

preferred to resign their office. Once framed, however, Parliament should

have no power to alter the measure, but solely to pass or reject it; or, if

partially disapproved of, remit it to the Commission for reconsideration. The

Commissioners should be appointed by the Crown, but should hold their

offices for a time certain, say five years, unless removed on an address from

the two Houses of Parliament, grounded either on personal misconduct (as in

the case of judges), or on refusal to draw up a Bill in obedience to the

demands of Parliament. At the expiration of the five years a member should

cease to hold office unless reappointed, in order to provide a convenient

mode of getting rid of those who had not been found equal to their duties, and

of infusing new and younger blood into the body.              The necessity of some provision corresponding to this was felt even

in the Athenian Democracy, where, in the time of its most complete

ascendancy, the popular Ecclesia could pass Psephisms (mostly decrees on

single matters of policy), but laws, so called, could only be made or altered

by a different and less numerous body, renewed annually, called the

Nomothetae, whose duty it also was to revise the whole of the laws, and keep

them consistent with one another. In the English Constitution there is great

difficulty in introducing any arrangement which is new both in form and in

substance, but comparatively little repugnance is felt to the attainment of new

purposes by an adaptation of existing forms and traditions.

              It appears to me that the means might be devised of enriching the

Constitution with this great improvement through the machinery of the House

of Lords. A Commission for preparing Bills would in itself be no more an

innovation on the Constitution than the Board for the administration of the

Poor Laws, or the Inclosure Commission. If, in consideration of the great

importance and dignity of the trust, it were made a rule that every person

appointed a member of the Legislative Commission, unless removed from

office on an address from Parliament, should be a Peer for life, it is probable

that the same good sense and taste which leave the judicial functions of the

Peerage practically to the exclusive care of the law lords, would leave the

business of legislation, except on questions involving political principles and

interests, to the professional legislators; that Bills originating in the Upper

House would always be drawn up by them; that the Government would

devolve on them the framing of all its Bills; and that private members of the

House of Commons would gradually find it convenient, and likely to

facilitate the passing of their measures through the two Houses, if instead of

bringing in a Bill and submitting it directly to the House, they obtained leave

to introduce it and have it referred to the Legislative Commission. For it

would, of course, be open to the House to refer for the consideration of that

body not a subject merely, but any specific proposal, or a Draft of a Bill in

extenso, when any member thought himself capable of preparing one such as

ought to pass; and the House would doubtless refer every such draft to the

Commission, if only as materials, and for the benefit of the suggestions it

might contain: as they would, in like manner, refer every amendment or

objection which might be proposed in writing by any member of the House

after a measure had left the Commissioners' hands. The alteration of Bills by

a Committee of the whole House would cease, not by formal abolition, but bydesuetude; the right not being abandoned, but laid up in the same armoury

with the royal veto, the right of withholding the supplies, and other ancient

instruments of political warfare, which no one desires to see used, but no one

likes to part with, lest they should any time be found to be still needed in an

extraordinary emergency. By such arrangements as these, legislation would

assume its proper place as a work of skilled labour and special study and

experience; while the most important liberty of the nation, that of being

governed only by laws assented to by its elected representatives, would be

fully preserved, and made more valuable by being detached from the serious,

but by no means unavoidable, drawbacks which now accompany it in the

form of ignorant and ill-considered legislation.

              Instead of the function of governing, for which it is radically unfit,

the proper office of a representative assembly is to watch and control the

government: to throw the light of publicity on its acts: to compel a full

exposition and justification of all of them which any one considers

questionable; to censure them if found condemnable, and, if the men who

compose the government abuse their trust, or fulfil it in a manner which

conflicts with the deliberate sense of the nation, to expel them from office,

and either expressly or virtually appoint their successors. This is surely ample

power, and security enough for the liberty of the nation. In addition to this,

the Parliament has an office, not inferior even to this in importance; to be at

once the nation's Committee of Grievances, and its Congress of Opinions; an

arena in which not only the general opinion of the nation, but that of every

section of it, and as far as possible of every eminent individual whom it

contains, can produce itself in full light and challenge discussion; where

every person in the country may count upon finding somebody who speaks

his mind, as well or better than he could speak it himself — not to friends and

partisans exclusively, but in the face of opponents, to be tested by adverse

controversy; where those whose opinion is overruled, feel satisfied that it is

heard, and set aside not by a mere act of will, but for what are thought

superior reasons, and commend themselves as such to the representatives of

the majority of the nation; where every party or opinion in the country can

muster its strength, and be cured of any illusion concerning the number or

power of its adherents; where the opinion which prevails in the nation makes

itself manifest as prevailing, and marshals its hosts in the presence of the

government, which is thus enabled and compelled to give way to it on the

mere manifestation, without the actual employment, of its strength; wherestatesmen can assure themselves, far more certainly than by any other signs,

what elements of opinion and power are growing, and what declining, and are

enabled to shape their measures with some regard not solely to present

exigencies, but to tendencies in progress.

              Representative assemblies are often taunted by their enemies with

being places of mere talk and bavardage. There has seldom been more

misplaced derision. I know not how a representative assembly can more

usefully employ itself than in talk, when the subject of talk is the great public

interests of the country, and every sentence of it represents the opinion either

of some important body of persons in the nation, or of an individual in whom

some such body have reposed their confidence. A place where every interest

and shade of opinion in the country can have its cause even passionately

pleaded, in the face of the government and of all other interests and opinions,

can compel them to listen, and either comply, or state clearly why they do

not, is in itself, if it answered no other purpose, one of the most important

political institutions that can exist anywhere, and one of the foremost benefits

of free government. Such "talking" would never be looked upon with

disparagement if it were not allowed to stop "doing"; which it never would, if

assemblies knew and acknowledged that talking and discussion are their

proper business, while doing, as the result of discussion, is the task not of a

miscellaneous body, but of individuals specially trained to it; that the fit

office of an assembly is to see that those individuals are honestly and

intelligently chosen, and to interfere no further with them, except by

unlimited latitude of suggestion and criticism, and by applying or

withholding the final seal of national assent. It is for want of this judicious

reserve that popular assemblies attempt to do what they cannot do well — to

govern and legislate — and provide no machinery but their own for much of

it, when of course every hour spent in talk is an hour withdrawn from actual

business.

              But the very fact which most unfits such bodies for a Council of

Legislation qualifies them the more for their other office — namely, that they

are not a selection of the greatest political minds in the country, from whose

opinions little could with certainty be inferred concerning those of the nation,

but are, when properly constituted, a fair sample of every grade of intellect

among the people which is at all entitled to a voice in public affairs. Their

part is to indicate wants, to be an organ for popular demands, and a place ofadverse discussion for all opinions relating to public matters, both great and

small; and, along with this, to check by criticism, and eventually by

withdrawing their support, those high public officers who really conduct the

public business, or who appoint those by whom it is conducted. Nothing but

the restriction of the function of representative bodies within these rational

limits will enable the benefits of popular control to be enjoyed in conjunction

with the no less important requisites (growing ever more important as human

affairs increase in scale and in complexity) of skilled legislation and

administration. There are no means of combining these benefits except by

separating the functions which guarantee the one from those which

essentially require the other; by disjoining the office of control and criticism

from the actual conduct of affairs, and devolving the former on the

representatives of the Many, while securing for the latter, under strict

responsibility to the nation, the acquired knowledge and practised

intelligence of a specially trained and experienced Few.

              The preceding discussion of the functions which ought to devolve on

the sovereign representative assembly of the nation would require to be

followed by an inquiry into those properly vested in the minor representative

bodies, which ought to exist for purposes that regard only localities. And

such an inquiry forms an essential part of the present treatise; but many

reasons require its postponement, until we have considered the most proper

composition of the great representative body, destined to control as sovereign

the enactment of laws and the administration of the general affairs of the

nation.

 

 

                                       Chapter 6

 

 

Of the Infirmities and Dangers to which Representative Government is

                                        Liable.

 

 

              THE DEFECTS of any form of government may be either negative

or positive. It is negatively defective if it does not concentrate in the hands of

the authorities power sufficient to fulfil the necessary offices of a

government; or if it does not sufficiently develop by exercise the active

capacities and social feelings of the individual citizens. On neither of these

points is it necessary that much should be said at this stage of our inquiry.

              The want of an amount power in the government, adequate to

preserve order and allow of progress in the people, is incident rather to a wild

and rude state of society generally, than to any particular form of political

union. When the people are too much attached to savage independence to be

tolerant of the amount of power to which it is for their good that they should

be subject, the state of society (as already observed) is not yet ripe for

representative government. When the time for that government has arrived,

sufficient power for all needful purposes is sure to reside in the sovereign

assembly; and if enough of it is not entrusted to the executive, this can only

arise from a jealous feeling on the part of the assembly towards the

administration, never likely to exist but where the constitutional power of the

assembly to turn them out of office has not yet sufficiently established itself.

Wherever that constitutional right is admitted in principle, and fully operative

in practice, there is no fear that the assembly will not be willing to trust its

own ministers with any amount of power really desirable; the danger is, on

the contrary, lest they should grant it too ungrudgingly, and too indefinite in

extent, since the power of the minister is the power of the body who make

and who keep him so. It is, however, very likely, and is one of the dangers of

a controlling assembly, that it may be lavish of powers, but afterwards

interfere with their exercise; may give power by wholesale, and take it back

in detail, by multiplied single acts of interference in the business ofadministration. The evils arising from this assumption of the actual function

of governing, in lieu of that of criticising and checking those who govern,

have been sufficiently dwelt upon in the preceding chapter. No safeguard can

in the nature of things be provided against this improper meddling, except a

strong and general conviction of its injurious character.

              The other negative defect which may reside in a government, that of

not bringing into sufficient exercise the individual faculties, moral,

intellectual, and active, of the people, has been exhibited generally in setting

forth the distinctive mischiefs of despotism. As between one form of popular

government and another, the advantage in this respect lies with that which

most widely diffuses the exercise of public functions; on the one hand, by

excluding fewest from the suffrage; on the other, by opening to all classes of

private citizens, so far as is consistent with other equally important objects,

the widest participation in the details of judicial and administrative business;

as by jury trial, admission to municipal offices, and above all by the utmost

possible publicity and liberty of discussion, whereby not merely a few

individuals in succession, but the whole public, are made, to a certain extent,

participants in the government, and sharers in the instruction and mental

exercise derivable from it. The further illustration of these benefits, as well as

of the limitations under which they must be aimed at, will be better deferred

until we come to speak of the details of administration.

              The positive evils and dangers of the representative, as of every

other form of government, may be reduced to two heads: first, general

ignorance and incapacity, or, to speak more moderately, insufficient mental

qualifications, in the controlling body; secondly, the danger of its being under

the influence of interests not identical with the general welfare of the

community.

              The former of these evils, deficiency in high mental qualifications, is

one to which it is generally supposed that popular government is liable in a

greater degree than any other. The energy of a monarch, the steadiness and

prudence of an aristocracy, are thought to contrast most favourably with the

vacillation and shortsightedness of even a qualified democracy. These

propositions, however, are not by any means so well founded as they at first

sight appear.

              Compared with simple monarchy, representative government is inthese respects at no disadvantage. Except in a rude age, hereditary monarchy,

when it is really such, and not aristocracy in disguise, far surpasses

democracy in all the forms of incapacity supposed to be characteristic of the

last. I say, except in a rude age, because in a really rude state of society there

is a considerable guarantee for the intellectual and active capacities of the

sovereign. His personal will is constantly encountering obstacles from the

wilfulness of his subjects, and of powerful individuals among their number.

The circumstances of society do not afford him much temptation to mere

luxurious self-indulgence; mental and bodily activity, especially political and

military, are his principal excitements; and among turbulent chiefs and

lawless followers he has little authority, and is seldom long secure even of his

throne, unless he possesses a considerable amount of personal daring,

dexterity, and energy. The reason why the average of talent is so high among

the Henries and Edwards of our history may be read in the tragical fate of the

second Edward and the second Richard, and the civil wars and disturbances

of the reigns of John and his incapable successor. The troubled period of the

Reformation also produced several eminent hereditary monarchs, Elizabeth,

Henri Quatre, Gustavus Adolphus; but they were mostly bred up in adversity,

succeeded to the throne by the unexpected failure of nearer heirs, or had to

contend with great difficulties in the commencement of their reign. Since

European life assumed a settled aspect, anything above mediocrity in an

hereditary king has become extremely rare, while the general average has

been even below mediocrity, both in talent and in vigour of character. A

monarchy constitutionally absolute now only maintains itself in existence

(except temporarily in the hands of some active-minded usurper) through the

mental qualifications of a permanent bureaucracy. The Russian and Austrian

Governments, and even the French Government in its normal condition, are

oligarchies of officials, of whom the head of the State does little more than

select the chiefs. I am speaking of the regular course of their administration;

for the will of the master of course determines many of their particular acts.

              The governments which have been remarkable in history for

sustained mental ability and vigour in the conduct of affairs have generally

been aristocracies. But they have been, without any exception, aristocracies

of public functionaries. The ruling bodies have been so narrow, that each

member, or at least each influential member, of the body, was able to make

and did make, public business an active profession, and the principal

occupation of his life. The only aristocracies which have manifested highgoverning capacities, and acted on steady maxims of policy, through many

generations, are those of Rome and Venice. But, at Venice, though the

privileged order was numerous, the actual management of affairs was rigidly

concentrated in a small oligarchy within the oligarchy, whose whole lives

were devoted to the study and conduct of the affairs of the state. The Roman

government partook more of the character of an open aristocracy like our

own. But the really governing body, the Senate, was in general exclusively

composed of persons who had exercised public functions, and had either

already filled or were looking forward to fill the higher offices of the state, at

the peril of a severe responsibility in case of incapacity and failure. When

once members of the Senate, their lives were pledged to the conduct of public

affairs; they were not permitted even to leave Italy except in the discharge of

some public trust; and unless turned out of the Senate by the censors for

character or conduct deemed disgraceful, they retained their powers and

responsibilities to the end of life. In an aristocracy thus constituted, every

member felt his personal importance entirely bound up with the dignity and

estimation of the commonwealth which he administered, and with the part he

was able to play in its councils. This dignity and estimation were quite

different things from the prosperity or happiness of the general body of the

citizens, and were often wholly incompatible with it. But they were closely

linked with the external success and aggrandisement of the State: and it was,

consequently, in the pursuit of that object almost exclusively that either the

Roman or the Venetian aristocracies manifested the systematically wise

collective policy, and the great individual capacities for government, for

which history has deservedly given them credit.

              It thus appears that the only governments, not representative, in

which high political skill and ability have been other than exceptional,

whether under monarchical or aristocratic forms, have been essentially

bureaucracies. The work of government has been in the hands of governors

by profession; which is the essence and meaning of bureaucracy. Whether the

work is done by them because they have been trained to it, or they are trained

to it because it is to be done by them, makes a great difference in many

respects, but none at all as to the essential character of the rule. Aristocracies,

on the other hand, like that of England, in which the class who possessed the

power derived it merely from their social position, without being specially

trained or devoting themselves exclusively to it (and in which, therefore, the

power was not exercised directly, but through representative institutionsoligarchically constituted) have been, in respect to intellectual endowments,

much on a par with democracies; that is, they have manifested such qualities

in any considerable degree only during the temporary ascendancy which

great and popular talents, united with a distinguished position, have given to

some one man. Themistocles and Pericles, Washington and Jefferson, were

not more completely exceptions in their several democracies, and were

assuredly much more splendid exceptions, than the Chathams and Peels of

the representative aristocracy of Great Britain, or even the Sullys and

Colberts of the aristocratic monarchy of France. A great minister, in the

aristocratic governments of modern Europe, is almost as rare a phenomenon

as a great king.

              The comparison, therefore, as to the intellectual attributes of a

government, has to be made between a representative democracy and a

bureaucracy; all other governments may be left out of the account. And here

it must be acknowledged that a bureaucratic government has, in some

important respects, greatly the advantage. It accumulates experience, acquires

well-tried and well-considered traditional maxims, and makes provision for

appropriate practical knowledge in those who have the actual conduct of

affairs. But it is not equally favourable to individual energy of mind. The

disease which afflicts bureaucratic governments, and which they usually die

of, is routine. They perish by the immutability of their maxims; and, still

more, by the universal law that whatever becomes a routine loses its vital

principle, and having no longer a mind acting within it, goes on revolving

mechanically though the work it is intended to do remains undone. A

bureaucracy always tends to become a pedantocracy. When the bureaucracy

is the real government, the spirit of the corps (as with the Jesuits) bears down

the individuality of its more distinguished members. In the profession of

government, as in other professions, the sole idea of the majority is to do

what they have been taught; and it requires a popular government to enable

the conceptions of the man of original genius among them to prevail over the

obstructive spirit of trained mediocrity. Only in a popular government

(setting apart the accident of a highly intelligent despot) could Sir Rowland

Hill have been victorious over the Post Office. A popular government

installed him in the Post Office, and made the body, in spite of itself, obey

the impulse given by the man who united special knowledge with individual

vigour and originality. That the Roman aristocracy escaped this characteristic

disease of a bureaucracy was evidently owing to its popular element. Allspecial offices, both those which gave a seat in the Senate and those which

were sought by senators, were conferred by popular election. The Russian

government is a characteristic exemplification of both the good and bad side

of bureaucracy; its fixed maxims, directed with Roman perseverance to the

same unflinchingly-pursued ends from age to age; the remarkable skill with

which those ends are generally pursued; the frightful internal corruption, and

the permanent organised hostility to improvements from without, which even

the autocratic power of a vigorous-minded Emperor is seldom or never

sufficient to overcome; the patient obstructiveness of the body being in the

long run more than a match for the fitful energy of one man. The Chinese

Government, a bureaucracy of Mandarins, is, as far as known to us, another

apparent example of the same qualities and defects.

              In all human affairs conflicting influences are required to keep one

another alive and efficient even for their own proper uses; and the exclusive

pursuit of one good object, apart from some other which should accompany

it, ends not in excess of one and defect of the other, but in the decay and loss

even of that which has been exclusively cared for. Government by trained

officials cannot do, for a country, the things which can be done by a free

government; but it might be supposed capable of doing some things which

free government, of itself, cannot do. We find, however, that an outside

element of freedom is necessary to enable it to do effectually or permanently

even its own business. And so, also, freedom cannot produce its best effects,

and often breaks down altogether, unless means can be found of combining it

with trained and skilled administration. There could not be a moment's

hesitation between representative government, among a people in any degree

ripe for it, and the most perfect imaginable bureaucracy. But it is, at the same

time, one of the most important ends of political institutions, to attain as

many of the qualities of the one as are consistent with the other; to secure, as

far as they can be made compatible, the great advantage of the conduct of

affairs by skilled persons, bred to it as an intellectual profession, along with

that of a general control vested in, and seriously exercised by, bodies

representative of the entire people. Much would be done towards this end by

recognising the line of separation, discussed in the preceding chapter,

between the work of government properly so called, which can only be well

performed after special cultivation, and that of selecting, watching, and, when

needful, controlling the governors, which in this case, as in others, properly

devolves, not on those who do the work, but on those for whose benefit itought to be done. No progress at all can be made towards obtaining a skilled

democracy unless the democracy are willing that the work which requires

skill should be done by those who possess it. A democracy has enough to do

in providing itself with an amount of mental competency sufficient for its

own proper work, that of superintendence and check.

              How to obtain and secure this amount is one of the questions to

taken into consideration in judging of the proper constitution of a

representative body. In proportion as its composition fails to secure this

amount, the assembly will encroach, by special acts, on the province of the

executive; it will expel a good, or elevate and uphold a bad, ministry; it will

connive at, or overlook in them, abuses of trust, will be deluded by their false

pretences, or will withhold support from those who endeavour to fulfil their

trust conscientiously; it will countenance, or impose, a selfish, a capricious

and impulsive, a short-sighted, ignorant, and prejudiced general policy,

foreign and domestic; it will abrogate good laws, or enact bad ones, let in

new evils, or cling with perverse obstinacy to old; it will even, perhaps, under

misleading impulses, momentary or permanent, emanating from itself or from

its constituents, tolerate or connive at proceedings which set law aside

altogether, in cases where equal justice would not be agreeable to popular

feeling. Such are among the dangers of representative government, arising

from a constitution of the representation which does not secure an adequate

amount of intelligence and knowledge in the representative assembly.

              We next proceed to the evils arising from the prevalence of modes of

action in the representative body, dictated by sinister interests (to employ the

useful phrase introduced by Bentham), that is, interests conflicting more or

less with the general good of the community.

              It is universally admitted that, of the evils incident to monarchical

and aristocratic governments, a large proportion arise from this cause. The

interest of the monarch, or the interest of the aristocracy, either collective or

that of its individual members, is promoted, or they themselves think that it

will be promoted, by conduct opposed to that which the general interest of

the community requires. The interest, for example, of the government is to

tax heavily: that of the community is to be as little taxed as the necessary

expenses of good government permit. The interest of the king, and of the

governing aristocracy, is to possess, and exercise, unlimited power over the

people; to enforce, on their part, complete conformity to the will andpreferences of the rulers. The interest of the people is to have as little control

exercised over them in any respect as is consistent with attaining the

legitimate ends of government. The interest, or apparent and supposed

interest, of the king or aristocracy is to permit no censure of themselves, at

least in any form which they may consider either to threaten their power, or

seriously to interfere with their free agency. The interest of the people is that

there should be full liberty of censure on every public officer, and on every

public act or measure. The interest of a ruling class, whether in an aristocracy

or an aristocratic monarchy, is to assume to themselves an endless variety of

unjust privileges, sometimes benefiting their pockets at the expense of the

people, sometimes merely tending to exalt them above others, or, what is the

same thing in different words, to degrade others below themselves. If the

people are disaffected, which under such a government they are very likely to

be, it is the interest of the king or aristocracy to keep them at a low level of

intelligence and education, foment dissensions among them, and even prevent

them from being too well off, lest they should "wax fat, and kick"; agreeably

to the maxim of Cardinal Richelieu in his celebrated Testament Politique. All

these things are for the interest of a king or aristocracy, in a purely selfish

point of view, unless a sufficiently strong counter-interest is created by the

fear of provoking resistance. All these evils have been, and many of them still

are, produced by the sinister interests of kings and aristocracies, where their

power is sufficient to raise them above the opinion of the rest of the

community; nor is it rational to expect, as a consequence of such a position,

any other conduct.

              These things are superabundantly evident in the case of a monarchy

or an aristocracy; but it is sometimes rather gratuitously assumed that the

same kind of injurious influences do not operate in a democracy. Looking at

democracy in the way in which it is commonly conceived, as the rule of the

numerical majority, it is surely possible that the ruling power may be under

the dominion of sectional or class interests, pointing to conduct different

from that which would be dictated by impartial regard for the interest of all.

Suppose the majority to be whites, the minority negroes, or vice versa: is it

likely that the majority would allow equal justice to the minority? Suppose

the majority Catholics, the minority Protestants, or the reverse; will there not

be the same danger? Or let the majority be English, the minority Irish, or the

contrary: is there not a great probability of similar evil? In all countries there

is a majority of poor, a minority who, in contradistinction, may be called rich.Between these two classes, on many questions, there is complete opposition

of apparent interest. We will suppose the majority sufficiently intelligent to

be aware that it is not for their advantage to weaken the security of property,

and that it would be weakened by any act of arbitrary spoliation. But is there

not a considerable danger lest they should throw upon the possessors of what

is called realised property, and upon the larger incomes, an unfair share, or

even the whole, of the burden of taxation; and having done so, add to the

amount without scruple, expending the proceeds in modes supposed to

conduce to the profit and advantage of the labouring class? Suppose, again, a

minority of skilled labourers, a majority of unskilled: the experience of many

trade unions, unless they are greatly calumniated, justifies the apprehension

that equality of earnings might be imposed as an obligation, and that

piecework, payment by the hour, and all practices which enable superior

industry or abilities to gain a superior reward might be put down. Legislative

attempts to raise wages, limitation of competition in the labour market, taxes

or restrictions on machinery, and on improvements of all kinds tending to

dispense with any of the existing labour — even, perhaps, protection of the

home producer against foreign industry are very natural (I do not venture to

say whether probable) results of a feeling of class interest in a governing

majority of manual labourers.

              It will be said that none of these things are for the real interest of the

most numerous class: to which I answer, that if the conduct of human beings

was determined by no other interested considerations than those which

constitute their "real" interest, neither monarchy nor oligarchy would be such

bad governments as they are; for assuredly very strong arguments may be,

and often have been, adduced to show that either a king or a governing senate

are in much the most enviable position, when ruling justly and vigilantly over

an active, wealthy, enlightened, and high-minded people. But a king only

now and then, and an oligarchy in no known instance, have taken this exalted

view of their self-interest: and why should we expect a loftier mode of

thinking from the labouring classes? It is not what their interest is, but what

they suppose it to be, that is the important consideration with respect to their

conduct: and it is quite conclusive against any theory of government that it

assumes the numerical majority to do habitually what is never done, nor

expected to be done, save in very exceptional cases, by any other depositaries

of power — namely, to direct their conduct by their real ultimate interest, in

opposition to their immediate and apparent interest. No one, surely, can doubtthat many of the pernicious measures above enumerated, and many others as

bad, would be for the immediate interest of the general body of unskilled

labourers. It is quite possible that they would be for the selfish interest of the

whole existing generation of the class. The relaxation of industry and activity,

and diminished encouragement to saving which would be their ultimate

consequence, might perhaps be little felt by the class of unskilled labourers in

the space of a single lifetime.

              Some of the most fatal changes in human affairs have been, as to

their more manifest immediate effects, beneficial. The establishment of the

despotism of the Caesars was a great benefit to the entire generation in which

it took place. It put a stop to civil war, abated a vast amount of malversation

and tyranny by praetors and proconsuls; it fostered many of the graces of life,

and intellectual cultivation in all departments not political; it produced

monuments of literary genius dazzling to the imaginations of shallow readers

of history, who do not reflect that the men to whom the despotism of

Augustus (as well as of Lorenzo de' Medici and of Louis XIV.) owes its

brilliancy, were all formed in the generation preceding. The accumulated

riches, and the mental energy and activity, produced by centuries of freedom,

remained for the benefit of the first generation of slaves. Yet this was the

commencement of a regime by whose gradual operation all the civilisation

which had been gained insensibly faded away, until the Empire, which had

conquered and embraced the world in its grasp, so completely lost even its

military efficiency, that invaders whom three or four legions had always

sufficed to coerce were able to overrun and occupy nearly the whole of its

vast territory. The fresh impulse given by Christianity came but just in time

to save arts and letters from perishing, and the human race from sinking back

into perhaps endless night.

              When we talk of the interest of a body of men, or even of an

individual man, as a principle determining their actions, the question what

would be considered their interest by an unprejudiced observer is one of the

least important parts of the whole matter. As Coleridge observes, the man

makes the motive, not the motive the man. What it is the man's interest to do

or refrain from depends less on any outward circumstances than upon what

sort of man he is. If you wish to know what is practically a man's interest,

you must know the cast of his habitual feelings and thoughts. Everybody has

two kinds of interests, interests which he cares for, and interests which hedoes not care for. Everybody has selfish and unselfish interests, and a selfish

man has cultivated the habit of caring for the former, and not caring for the

latter. Every one has present and distant interests, and the improvident man is

he who cares for the present interests and does not care for the distant. It

matters little that on any correct calculation the latter may be the more

considerable, if the habits of his mind lead him to fix his thoughts and wishes

solely on the former. It would be vain to attempt to persuade a man who beats

his wife and ill-treats his children that he would be happier if he lived in love

and kindness with them. He would be happier if he were the kind of person

who could so live; but he is not, and it is probably too late for him to become,

that kind of person. Being what he is, the gratification of his love of

domineering, and the indulgence of his ferocious temper, are to his

perceptions a greater good to himself than he would be capable of deriving

from the pleasure and affection of those dependent on him. He has no

pleasure in their pleasure, and does not care for their affection. His

neighbour, who does, is probably a happier man than he; but could he be

persuaded of this, the persuasion would, most likely, only still further

exasperate his malignity or his irritability. On the average, a person who cares

for other people, for his country, or for mankind, is a happier man than one

who does not; but of what use is it to preach this doctrine to a man who cares

for nothing but his own ease, or his own pocket? He cannot care for other

people if he would. It is like preaching to the worm who crawls on the ground

how much better it would be for him if he were an eagle.

              Now it is a universally observed fact that the two evil dispositions in

question, the disposition to prefer a man's selfish interests to those which he

shares with other people, and his immediate and direct interests to those

which are indirect and remote, are characteristics most especially called forth

and fostered by the possession of power. The moment a man, or a class of

men, find themselves with power in their hands, the man's individual interest,

or the class's separate interest, acquires an entirely new degree of importance

in their eyes. Finding themselves worshipped by others, they become

worshippers of themselves, and think themselves entitled to be counted at a

hundred times the value of other people; while the facility they acquire of

doing as they like without regard to consequences insensibly weakens the

habits which make men look forward even to such consequences as affect

themselves. This is the meaning of the universal tradition, grounded on

universal experience, of men's being corrupted by power. Every one knowshow absurd it would be to infer from what a man is or does when in a private

station, that he will be and do exactly the like when a despot on a throne;

where the bad parts of his human nature, instead of being restrained and kept

in subordination by every circumstance of his life and by every person

surrounding him, are courted by all persons, and ministered to by all

circumstances. It would be quite as absurd to entertain a similar expectation

in regard to a class of men; the Demos, or any other. Let them be ever so

modest and amenable to reason while there is a power over them stronger

than they, we ought to expect a total change in this respect when they

themselves become the strongest power.

              Governments must be made for human beings as they are, or as they

are capable of speedily becoming: and in any state of cultivation which

mankind, or any class among them, have yet attained, or are likely soon to

attain, the interests by which they will be led, when they are thinking only of

self-interest, will be almost exclusively those which are obvious at first sight,

and which operate on their present condition. It is only a disinterested regard

for others, and especially for what comes after them, for the idea of posterity,

of their country, or of mankind, whether grounded on sympathy or on a

conscientious feeling, which ever directs the minds and purposes of classes or

bodies of men towards distant or unobvious interests. And it cannot be

maintained that any form of government would be rational which required as

a condition that these exalted principles of action should be the guiding and

master motives in the conduct of average human beings. A certain amount of

conscience, and, of disinterested public spirit, may fairly be calculated on in

the citizens of any community ripe for representative government. But it

would be ridiculous to expect such a degree of it, combined with such

intellectual discernment, as would be proof against any plausible fallacy

tending to make that which was for their class interest appear the dictate of

justice and of the general good.

              We all know what specious fallacies may be urged in defence of

every act of injustice yet proposed for the imaginary benefit of the mass. We

know how many, not otherwise fools or bad men, have thought it justifiable

to repudiate the national debt. We know how many, not destitute of ability,

and of considerable popular influence, think it fair to throw the whole burthen

of taxation upon savings, under the name of realised property, allowing those

whose progenitors and themselves have always spent all they received toremain, as a reward for such exemplary conduct, wholly untaxed. We know

what powerful arguments, the more dangerous because there is a portion of

truth in them, may be brought against all inheritance, against the power of

bequest, against every advantage which one person seems to have over

another. We know how easily the uselessness of almost every branch of

knowledge may be proved, to the complete satisfaction of those who do not

possess it. How many, not altogether stupid men, think the scientific study of

languages useless, think ancient literature useless, all erudition useless, logic

and metaphysics useless, poetry and the fine arts idle and frivolous, political

economy purely mischievous? Even history has been pronounced useless and

mischievous by able men. Nothing but that acquaintance with external nature,

empirically acquired, which serves directly for the production of objects

necessary to existence or agreeable to the senses, would get its utility

recognised if people had the least encouragement to disbelieve it. Is it

reasonable to think that even much more cultivated minds than those of the

numerical majority can be expected to be will have so delicate a conscience,

and so just an appreciation of what is against their own apparent interest, that

they will reject these and the innumerable other fallacies which will press in

upon them from all quarters as soon as they come into power, to induce them

to follow their own selfish inclinations and short-sighted notions of their own

good, in opposition to justice, at the expense of all other classes and of

posterity?

              One of the greatest dangers, therefore, of democracy, as of all other

forms of government, lies in the sinister interest of the holders of power: it is

the danger of class legislation; of government intended for (whether really

effecting it or not) the immediate benefit of the dominant class, to the lasting

detriment of the whole. And one of the most important questions demanding

consideration, in determining the best constitution of a representative

government, is how to provide efficacious securities against this evil.

              If we consider as a class, politically speaking, any number of persons

who have the same sinister interest — that is, whose direct and apparent

interest points towards the same description of bad measures; the desirable

object would be that no class, and no combination of classes likely to

combine, should be able to exercise a preponderant influence in the

government. A modern community, not divided within itself by strong

antipathies of race, language, or nationality, may be considered as in the maindivisible into two sections, which, in spite of partial variations, correspond on

the whole with two divergent directions of apparent interest. Let us call them

(in brief general terms) labourers on the one hand, employers of labour on the

other: including however along with employers of labour, not only retired

capitalists, and the possessors of inherited wealth, but all that highly paid

description of labourers (such as the professions) whose education and way

of life assimilate them with the rich, and whose prospect and ambition it is to

raise themselves into that class. With the labourers, on the other hand, may be

ranked those smaller employers of labour, who by interests, habits, and

educational impressions are assimilated in wishes, tastes, and objects to the

labouring classes; comprehending a large proportion of petty tradesmen. In a

state of society thus composed, if the representative system could be made

ideally perfect, and if it were possible to maintain it in that state, its

organisation must be such that these two classes, manual labourers and their

affinities on one side, employers of labour and their affinities on the other,

should be, in the arrangement of the representative system, equally balanced,

each influencing about an equal number of votes in Parliament: since,

assuming that the majority of each class, in any difference between them,

would be mainly governed by their class interests, there would be a minority

of each in whom that consideration would be subordinate to reason, justice,

and the good of the whole; and this minority of either, joining with the whole

of the other, would turn the scale against any demands of their own majority

which were not such as ought to prevail.

              The reason why, in any tolerable constituted society, justice and the

general interest mostly in the end carry their point, is that the separate and

selfish interests of mankind are almost always divided; some are interested in

what is wrong, but some, also, have their private interest on the side of what

is right: and those who are governed by higher considerations, though too few

and weak to prevail against the whole of the others, usually after sufficient

discussion and agitation become strong enough to turn the balance in favour

of the body of private interests which is on the same side with them. The

representative system ought to be so constituted as to maintain this state of

things: it ought not to allow any of the various sectional interests to be so

powerful as to be capable of prevailing against truth and justice and the other

sectional interests combined. There ought always to be such a balance

preserved among personal interests as may render any one of them dependent

for its successes on carrying with it at least a large proportion of those whoact on higher motives and more comprehensive and distant views.

 

 

                                       Chapter 7

 

 

        Of True and False Democracy; Representation of All, and

                        Representation of the Majority only.

 

 

              IT HAS been seen that the dangers incident to a representative

democracy are of two kinds: danger of a low grade of intelligence in the

representative body, and in the popular opinion which controls it; and danger

of class legislation on the part of the numerical majority, these being all

composed of the same class. We have next to consider how far it is possible

so to organise the democracy as, without interfering materially with the

characteristic benefits of democratic government, to do away with these two

great evils, or at least to abate them, in the utmost degree attainable by human

contrivance.

              The common mode of attempting this is by limiting the democratic

character of the representation, through a more or less restricted suffrage. But

there is a previous consideration which, duly kept in view, considerably

modifies the circumstances which are supposed to render such a restriction

necessary. A completely equal democracy, in a nation in which a single class

composes the numerical majority, cannot be divested of certain evils; but

those evils are greatly aggravated by the fact that the democracies which at

present exist are not equal, but systematically unequal in favour of the

predominant class. Two very different ideas are usually confounded under the

name democracy. The pure idea of democracy, according to its definition, is

the government of the whole people by the whole people, equally

represented. Democracy as commonly conceived and hitherto practised is the

government of the whole people by a mere majority of the people,

exclusively represented. The former is synonymous with the equality of all

citizens; the latter, strangely confounded with it, is a government of privilege,

in favour of the numerical majority, who alone possess practically any voice

in the State. This is the inevitable consequence of the manner in which the

votes are now taken, to the complete disfranchisement of minorities.              The confusion of ideas here is great, but it is so easily cleared up that

one would suppose the slightest indication would be sufficient to place the

matter in its true light before any mind of average intelligence. It would be

so, but for the power of habit; owing to which the simplest idea, if unfamiliar,

has as great difficulty in making its way to the mind as a far more

complicated one. That the minority must yield to the majority, the smaller

number to the greater, is a familiar idea; and accordingly men think there is

no necessity for using their minds any further, and it does not occur to them

that there is any medium between allowing the smaller number to be equally

powerful with the greater, and blotting out the smaller number altogether. In a

representative body actually deliberating, the minority must of course be

overruled; and in an equal democracy (since the opinions of the constituents,

when they insist on them, determine those of the representative body) the

majority of the people, through their representatives, will outvote and prevail

over the minority and their representatives. But does it follow that the

minority should have no representatives at all? Because the majority ought to

prevail over the minority, must the majority have all the votes, the minority

none? Is it necessary that the minority should not even be heard? Nothing but

habit and old association can reconcile any reasonable being to the needless

injustice. In a really equal democracy, every or any section would be

represented, not disproportionately, but proportionately. A majority of the

electors would always have a majority of the representatives; but a minority

of the electors would always have a minority of the representatives. Man for

man they would be as fully represented as the majority. Unless they are, there

is not equal government, but a government of inequality and privilege: one

part of the people rule over the rest: there is a part whose fair and equal share

of influence in the representation is withheld from them; contrary to all just

government, but, above all, contrary to the principle of democracy, which

professes equality as its very root and foundation.

              The injustice and violation of principle are not less flagrant because

those who suffer by them are a minority; for there is not equal suffrage where

every single individual does not count for as much as any other single

individual in the community. But it is not only a minority who suffer.

Democracy, thus constituted, does not even attain its ostensible object, that of

giving the powers of government in all cases to the numerical majority. It

does something very different: it gives them to a majority of the majority;

who may be, and often are, but a minority of the whole. All principles aremost effectually tested by extreme cases. Suppose then, that, in a country

governed by equal and universal suffrage, there is a contested election in

every constituency, and every election is carried by a small majority. The

Parliament thus brought together represents little more than a bare majority of

the people. This Parliament proceeds to legislate, and adopts important

measures by a bare majority of itself. What guarantee is there that these

measures accord with the wishes of a majority of the people? Nearly half the

electors, having been outvoted at the hustings, have had no influence at all in

the decision; and the whole of these may be, a majority of them probably are,

hostile to the measures, having voted against those by whom they have been

carried. Of the remaining electors, nearly half have chosen representatives

who, by supposition, have voted against the measures. It is possible,

therefore, and not at all improbable, that the opinion which has prevailed was

agreeable only to a minority of the nation, though a majority of that portion

of it whom the institutions of the country have erected into a ruling class. If

democracy means the certain ascendancy of the majority, there are no means

of insuring that but by allowing every individual figure to tell equally in the

summing up. Any minority left out, either purposely or by the play of the

machinery, gives the power not to the majority, but to a minority in some

other part of the scale.

              The only answer which can possibly be made to this reasoning is,

that as different opinions predominate in different localities, the opinion

which is in a minority in some places has a majority in others, and on the

whole every opinion which exists in the constituencies obtains its fair share

of voices in the representation. And this is roughly true in the present state of

the constituency; if it were not, the discordance of the House with the general

sentiment of the country would soon become evident. But it would be no

longer true if the present constituency were much enlarged; still less, if made

co-extensive with the whole population; for in that case the majority in every

locality would consist of manual labourers; and when there was any question

pending, on which these classes were at issue with the rest of the community,

no other class could succeed in getting represented anywhere. Even now, is it

not a great grievance that in every Parliament a very numerous portion of the

electors, willing and anxious to be represented, have no member in the House

for whom they have voted? Is it just that every elector of Marylebone is

obliged to be represented by two nominees of the vestries, every elector of

Finsbury or Lambeth by those (as is generally believed) of the publicans?The constituencies to which most of the highly educated and public spirited

persons in the country belong, those of the large towns, are now, in great part,

either unrepresented or misrepresented. The electors who are on a different

side in party politics from the local majority are unrepresented. Of those who

are on the same side, a large proportion are misrepresented; having been

obliged to accept the man who had the greatest number of supporters in their

political party, though his opinions may differ from theirs on every other

point. The state of things is, in some respects, even worse than if the minority

were not allowed to vote at all; for then, at least, the majority might have a

member who would represent their own best mind: while now, the necessity

of not dividing the party, for fear of letting in its opponents, induces all to

vote either for the first person who presents himself wearing their colours, or

for the one brought forward by their local leaders; and these, if we pay them

the compliment, which they very seldom deserve, of supposing their choice

to be unbiassed by their personal interests, are compelled, that they may be

sure of mustering their whole strength, to bring forward a candidate whom

none of the party will strongly object to — that is, a man without any

distinctive peculiarity, any known opinions except the shibboleth of the party.

              This is strikingly exemplified in the United States; where, at the

election of President, the strongest party never dares put forward any of its

strongest men, because every one of these, from the mere fact that he has

been long in the public eye, has made himself objectionable to some portion

or other of the party, and is therefore not so sure a card for rallying all their

votes as a person who has never been heard of by the public at all until he is

produced as the candidate. Thus, the man who is chosen, even by the

strongest party, represents perhaps the real wishes only of the narrow margin

by which that party outnumbers the other. Any section whose support is

necessary to success possesses a veto on the candidate. Any section which

holds out more obstinately than the rest can compel all the others to adopt its

nominee; and this superior pertinacity is unhappily more likely to be found

among those who are holding out for their own interest than for that of the

public. The choice of the majority is therefore very likely to be determined by

that portion of the body who are the most timid, the most narrow-minded and

prejudiced, or who cling most tenaciously to the exclusive class-interest; in

which case the electoral rights of the minority, while useless for the purposes

for which votes are given, serve only for compelling the majority to accept

the candidate of the weakest or worst portion of themselves.              That, while recognising these evils, many should consider them as

the necessary price paid for a free government is in no way surprising: it was

the opinion of all the friends of freedom up to a recent period. But the habit

of passing them over as irremediable has become so inveterate that many

persons seem to have lost the capacity of looking at them as things which

they would be glad to remedy if they could. From despairing of a cure, there

is too often but one step to denying the disease; and from this follows dislike

to having a remedy proposed, as if the proposer were creating a mischief

instead of offering relief from one. People are so inured to the evils that they

feel as if it were unreasonable, if not wrong, to complain of them. Yet,

avoidable or not, he must be a purblind lover of liberty on whose mind they

do not weigh; who would not rejoice at the discovery that they could be

dispensed with. Now, nothing is more certain than that the virtual blotting-out

of the minority is no necessary or natural consequence of freedom; that, far

from having any connection with democracy, it is diametrically opposed to

the first principle of democracy, representation in proportion to numbers. It is

an essential part of democracy that minorities should be adequately

represented. No real democracy, nothing but a false show of democracy, is

possible without it.

              Those who have seen and felt, in some degree, the force of these

considerations, have proposed various expedients by which the evil may be,

in a greater or less degree, mitigated. Lord John Russell, in one of his Reform

Bills, introduced a provision, that certain constituencies should return three

members, and that in these each elector should be allowed to vote only for

two; and Mr. Disraeli, in the recent debates, revived the memory of the fact

by reproaching him for it; being of opinion, apparently, that it befits a

Conservative statesman to regard only means, and to disown scornfully all

fellow-feeling with any one who is betrayed, even once, into thinking of
    4
ends. Others have proposed that each elector should be allowed to vote only

for one. By either of these plans, a minority equalling or exceeding a third of

the local constituency, would be able, if it attempted no more, to return one

out of three members. The same result might be attained in a still better way

if, as proposed in an able pamphlet by Mr. James Garth Marshall, the elector

retained his three votes, but was at liberty to bestow them all upon the same

candidate. These schemes, though infinitely better than none at all, are yet but

makeshifts, and attain the end in a very imperfect manner; since all local

minorities of less than a third, and all minorities, however numerous, whichare made up from several constituencies, would remain unrepresented. It is

much to be lamented, however, that none of these plans have been carried

into effect, as any of them would have recognised the right principle, and

prepared the way for its more complete application. But real equality of

representation is not obtained unless any set of electors amounting to the

average number of a constituency, wherever in the country they happen to

reside, have the power of combining with one another to return a

representative. This degree of perfection in representation, appeared

impracticable until a man of great capacity, fitted alike for large general

views and for the contrivance of practical details — Mr. Thomas Hare — had

proved its possibility by drawing up a scheme for its accomplishment,

embodied in a Draft of an Act of Parliament: a scheme which has the almost

unparalleled merit of carrying out a great principle of government in a

manner approaching to ideal perfection as regards the special object in view,

while it attains incidentally several other ends of scarcely inferior importance.

        4
               This blunder of Mr. Disraeli (from which, greatly to his credit, Sir

John Pakington took an opportunity, soon after, of separating himself) is a

speaking instance among many, how little the Conservative leaders

understand Conservative principles. Without presuming to require from

political Parties such an amount of virtue and discernment as that they should

comprehend, and know when to apply, the principles of their opponents, we

may yet say that it would be a great improvement if each party understood

and acted upon its own. Well would it be for England if Conservatives voted

consistently for everything conservative, and Liberals for everything liberal.

We should not then have to wait long for things which, like the present and

many other great measures, are eminently both the one and the other. The

Conservatives, as being by the law of their existence the stupidest party, have

much the greatest sins of this description to answer for: and it is a melancholy

truth, that if any measure were proposed, on any subject, truly, largely, and

far-sightedly conservative, even if Liberals were willing to vote for it, the

great bulk of the Conservative party would rush blindly in and prevent it from

being carried.

              According to this plan, the unit of representation, the quota of

electors who would be entitled to have a member to themselves, would be

ascertained by the ordinary process of taking averages, the number of voters

being divided by the number of seats in the House: and every candidate whoobtained that quota would be returned, from however great a number of local

constituencies it might be gathered. The votes would, as at present, be given

locally; but any elector would be at liberty to vote for any candidate in

whatever part of the country he might offer himself. Those electors, therefore,

who did not wish to be represented by any of the local candidates, might aid

by their vote in the return of the person they liked best among all those

throughout the country who had expressed a willingness to be chosen. This

would, so far, give reality to the electoral rights of the otherwise virtually

disfranchised minority. But it is important that not those alone who refuse to

vote for any of the local candidates, but those also who vote for one of them

and are defeated, should be enabled to find elsewhere the representation

which they have not succeeded in obtaining in their own district. It is

therefore provided that an elector may deliver a voting paper, containing

other names in addition to the one which stands foremost in his preference.

His vote would only be counted for one candidate; but if the object of his first

choice failed to be returned, from not having obtained the quota, his second

perhaps might be more fortunate. He may extend his list to a greater number,

in the order of his preference, so that if the names which stand near the top of

the list either cannot make up the quota, or are able to make it up without his

vote, the vote may still be used for some one whom it may assist in returning.

To obtain the full number of members required to complete the House, as

well as to prevent very popular candidates from engrossing nearly all the

suffrages, it is necessary, however many votes a candidate may obtain, that

no more of them than the quota should be counted for his return: the

remainder of those who voted for him would have their votes counted for the

next person on their respective lists who needed them, and could by their aid

complete the quota. To determine which of a candidate's votes should be used

for his return, and which set free for others, several methods are proposed,

into which we shall not here enter. He would of course retain the votes of all

those who would not otherwise be represented; and for the remainder,

drawing lots, in default of better, would be an unobjectionable expedient. The

voting papers would be conveyed to a central office; where the votes would

be counted, the number of first, second, third, and other votes given for each

candidate ascertained, and the quota would be allotted to every one who

could make it up, until the number of the House was complete: first votes

being preferred to second, second to third, and so forth. The voting papers,

and all the elements of the calculation, would be placed in public repositories,accessible to all whom they concerned; and if any one who had obtained the

quota was not duly returned it would be in his power easily to prove it.

              These are the main provisions of the scheme. For a more minute

knowledge of its very simple machinery, I must refer to Mr. Hare's Treatise
                                                                                  5
on the Election of Representatives (a small volume Published in 1859), and

to a pamphlet by Mr. Henry Fawcett (now Professor of Political Economy in

the University, of Cambridge), published in 1860, and entitled Mr. Hare's

Reform Bill simplified and explained. This last is a very clear and concise

exposition of the plan, reduced to its simplest elements, by the omission of

some of Mr. Hare's original provisions, which, though in themselves

beneficial, we're thought to take more from the simplicity of the scheme than

they added to its practical usefulness. The more these works are studied the

stronger, I venture to predict, will be the impression of the perfect feasibility

of the scheme, and its transcendant advantages. Such and so numerous are

these, that, in my conviction, they place Mr. Hare's plan among the very

greatest improvements yet made in the theory and practice of government.

        5
               In a second edition, published recently, Mr. Hare has made

important improvements in some of the detailed provisions.

              In the first place, it secures a representation, in proportion to

numbers, of every division of the electoral body: not two great parties alone,

with perhaps a few large sectional minorities in particular places, but every

minority in the whole nation, consisting of a sufficiently large number to be,

on principles of equal justice, entitled to a representative. Secondly, no

elector would, as at present, be nominally represented by some one whom he

had not chosen. Every member of the House would be the representative of a

unanimous constituency. He would represent a thousand electors, or two

thousand, or five thousand, or ten thousand, as the quota might be, every one

of whom would have not only voted for him, but selected him from the whole

country; not merely from the assortment of two or three perhaps rotten

oranges, which may be the only choice offered to him in his local market.

Under this relation the tie between the elector and the representative would be

of a strength, and a value, of which at present we have no experience. Every

one of the electors would be personally identified with his representative, and

the representative with his constituents. Every elector who voted for him

would have done so either because, among all the candidates for Parliament

who are favourably known to a certain number of electors, he is the one whobest expresses the voter's own opinions, because he is one of those whose

abilities and character the voter most respects, and whom he most willingly

trusts to think for him. The member would represent persons, not the mere

bricks and mortar of the town — the voters themselves, not a few vestrymen

or parish notabilities merely. All however, that is worth preserving in the

representation of places would be preserved. Though the Parliament of the

nation ought to have as little as possible to do with purely local affairs, yet,

while it has to do with them, there ought to be members specially

commissioned to look after the interests of every important locality: and these

there would still be. In every locality which could make up the quota within

itself, the majority would generally prefer to be represented by one of

themselves; by a person of local knowledge, and residing in the locality, if

there is any such person to be found among the candidates, who is otherwise

well qualified to be their representative. It would be the minorities chiefly,

who being unable to return the local member, would look out elsewhere for a

candidate likely to obtain other votes in addition to their own.

              Of all modes in which a national representation can possibly be

constituted, this one affords the best, security for the intellectual

qualifications desirable in the representatives. At present, by universal

admission, it is becoming more and more difficult for any one who has only

talents and character to gain admission into the House of Commons. The only

persons who can get elected are those who possess local influence, or make

their way by lavish expenditure, or who, on the invitation of three or four

tradesmen or attorneys, are sent down by one of the two great parties from

their London clubs, as men whose votes the party can depend on under all

circumstances. On Mr. Hare's system, those who did not like the local

candidates, or who could not succeed in carrying the local candidate they

preferred, would have the power to fill up their voting papers by a selection

from all the persons of national reputation, on the list of candidates, with

whose general political principles they were in sympathy. Almost every

person, therefore, who had made himself in any way honourably

distinguished, though devoid of local influence, and having sworn allegiance

to no political party, would have a fair chance of making up the quota; and

with this encouragement such persons might be expected to offer themselves,

in numbers hitherto undreamt of. Hundreds of able men of independent

thought, who would have no chance whatever of being chosen by the

majority of any existing constituency, have by their writings, or theirexertions in some field of public usefulness, made themselves known and

approved by a few persons in almost every district of the kingdom; and if

every vote that would be given for them in every place could be counted for

their election, they might be able to complete the number of the quota. In no

other way which it seems possible to suggest would Parliament be so certain

of containing the very elite of the country.

              And it is not solely through the votes of minorities that this system

of election would raise the intellectual standard of the House of Commons.

Majorities would be compelled to look out for members of a much higher

calibre. When the individuals composing the majority would no longer be

reduced to Hobson's choice, of either voting for the person brought forward

by their local leaders or not voting at all; when the nominee of the leaders

would have to encounter the competition not solely of the candidate of the

minority, but of all the men of established reputation in the country who were

willing to serve; it would be impossible any longer to foist upon the electors

the first person who presents himself with the catchwords of the party in his

mouth and three or four thousand pounds in his pocket. The majority would

insist on having a candidate worthy of their choice, or they would carry their

votes somewhere else, and the minority would prevail. The slavery of the

majority to the least estimable portion of their number would be at an end:

the very best and most capable of the local notabilities would be put forward

by preference; if possible, such as were known in some advantageous way

beyond the locality, that their local strength might have a chance of being

fortified by stray votes from elsewhere. Constituencies would become

competitors for the best candidates, and would vie with one another in

selecting from among the men of local knowledge and connections those who

were most distinguished in every other respect.

              The natural tendency of representative government, as of modern

civilisation, is towards collective mediocrity: and this tendency is increased

by all reductions and extensions of the franchise, their effect being to place

the principal power in the hands of classes more and more below the highest

level of instruction in the community. But though the superior intellects and

characters will necessarily be outnumbered, it makes a great difference

whether or not they are heard. In the false democracy which, instead of

giving representation to all gives it only to the local majorities, the voice of

the instructed minority may have no organs at all in the representative body.It is an admitted fact that in the American democracy, which is constructed

on this faulty model, the highly-cultivated members of the community,

except such of them as are willing to sacrifice their own opinions and modes

of judgment, and become the servile mouthpieces of their inferiors in

knowledge, seldom even offer themselves for Congress or the State

Legislatures, so little likelihood have they of being returned.

              Had a plan like Mr. Hare's by good fortune suggested itself to the

enlightened and patriotic founders of the American Republic, the Federal and

State Assemblies would have contained many of these distinguished men,

and democracy would have been spared its greatest reproach and one of its

most formidable evils. Against this evil the system of personal representation,

proposed by Mr. Hare, is almost a specific. The minority of instructed minds

scattered through the local constituencies would unite to return a number,

proportioned to their own numbers, of the very ablest men the country

contains. They would be under the strongest inducement to choose such men,

since in no other mode could they make their small numerical strength tell for

anything considerable. The representatives of the majority, besides that they

would themselves be improved in quality by the operation of the system,

would no longer have the whole field to themselves. They would indeed

outnumber the others, as much as the one class of electors outnumbers the

other in the country: they could always out vote them, but they would speak

and vote in their presence, and subject to their criticism. When any difference

arose, they would have to meet the arguments of the instructed few by

reasons, at least apparently, as cogent; and since they could not, as those do

who are speaking to persons already unanimous, simply assume that they are

in the right, it would occasionally happen to them to become convinced that

they were in the wrong. As they would in general be well-meaning (for thus

much may reasonably be expected from a fairly-chosen national

representation), their own minds would be insensibly raised by the influence

of the minds with which they were in contact, or even in conflict. The

champions of unpopular doctrines would not put forth their arguments merely

in books and periodicals, read only by their own side; the opposing ranks

would meet face to face and hand to hand, and there would be a fair

comparison of their intellectual strength in the presence of the country. It

would then be found out whether the opinion which prevailed by counting

votes would also prevail if the votes were weighed as well as counted.              The multitude have often a true instinct for distinguishing an able

man, when he has the means of displaying his ability in a fair field before

them. If such a man fails to obtain at least some portion of his just weight, it

is through institutions or usages which keep him out of sight. In the old

democracies there were no means of keeping out of sight any able man: the

bema was open to him; he needed nobody's consent to become a public

adviser. It is not so in a representative government; and the best friends of

representative democracy can hardly be without misgivings that the

Themistocles or Demosthenes, whose counsels would have saved the nation,

might be unable during his whole life ever to obtain a seat. But if the

presence in the representative assembly can be insured of even a few of the

first minds in the country, though the remainder consist only of average

minds, the influence of these leading spirits is sure to make itself sensibly felt

in the general deliberations, even though they be known to be, in many

respects, opposed to the tone of popular opinion and feeling. I am unable to

conceive any mode by which the presence of such minds can be so positively

insured as by that proposed by Mr. Hare.

              This portion of the Assembly would also be the appropriate organ of

a great social function, for which there is no provision in any existing

democracy, but which in no government can remain permanently unfulfilled

without condemning that government to infallible degeneracy and decay.

This may be called the function of Antagonism. In every government there is

some power stronger than all the rest; and the power which is strongest tends

perpetually to become the sole power. Partly by intention, and partly

unconsciously, it is ever striving to make all other things bend to itself; and is

not content while there is anything which makes permanent head against it,

any influence not in agreement with its spirit. Yet if it succeeds in

suppressing all rival influences, and moulding everything after its own

model, improvement, in that country, is at an end, and decline commences.

Human improvement is a product of many factors, and no power ever yet

constituted among mankind includes them all: even the most beneficent

power only contains in itself some of the requisites of good, and the

remainder, if progress is to continue, must be derived from some other

source. No community has ever long continued progressive, but while a

conflict was going on between the strongest power in the community and

some rival power; between the spiritual and temporal authorities; the military

or territorial and the industrious classes; the king and the people; theorthodox and religious reformers. When the victory on either side was so

complete as to put an end to the strife, and no other conflict took its place,

first stagnation followed, and then decay. The ascendancy of the numerical

majority is less unjust, and on the whole less mischievous, than many others,

but it is attended with the very same kind of dangers, and even more

certainly; for when the government is in the hands of One or a Few, the Many

are always existent as a rival power, which may not be strong enough ever to

control the other, but whose opinion and sentiment are a moral, and even a

social, support to all who, either from conviction or contrariety of interest, are

opposed to any of the tendencies of the ruling authority. But when the

Democracy is supreme, there is no One or Few strong enough for dissentient

opinions and injured or menaced interests to lean upon. The great difficulty

of democratic government has hitherto seemed to be, how to provide, in a

democratic society, what circumstances have provided hitherto in all the

societies which have maintained themselves ahead of others — a social

support, a point d'appui, for individual resistance to the tendencies of the

ruling power; a protection, a rallying point, for opinions and interests which

the ascendant public opinion views with disfavour. For want of such a point

d'appui, the older societies, and all but a few modern ones, either fell into

dissolution or became stationary (which means slow deterioration) through

the exclusive predominance of a part only of the conditions of social and

mental well-being.

              Now, this great want the system of Personal Representation is fitted

to supply in the most perfect manner which the circumstances of modern

society admit of. The only quarter in which to look for a supplement, or

completing corrective, to the instincts of a democratic majority, is the

instructed minority: but, in the ordinary mode of constituting democracy, this

minority has no organ: Mr. Hare's system provides one. The representatives

who would be returned to Parliament by the aggregate of minorities would

afford that organ in its greatest perfection. A separate organisation of the

instructed classes, even if practicable, would be invidious, and could only

escape from being offensive by being totally without influence. But if the

elite of these classes formed part of the Parliament, by the same title as any

other of its members — by representing the same number of citizens, the

same numerical fraction of the national willtheir presence could give

umbrage to nobody, while they would be in the position of highest vantage,

both for making their opinions and counsels heard on all important subjects,and for taking an active part in public business. Their abilities would

probably draw to them more than their numerical share of the actual

administration of government; as the Athenians did not confide responsible

public functions to Cleon or Hyperbolus (the employment of Cleon at Pylos

and Amphipolis was purely exceptional), but Nicias, and Theramenes, and

Alcibiades, were in constant employment both at home and abroad, though

known to sympathise more with oligarchy than with democracy. The

instructed minority would, in the actual voting, count only for their numbers,

but as a moral power they would count for much more, in virtue of their

knowledge, and of the influence it would give them over the rest. An

arrangement better adapted to keep popular opinion within reason and justice,

and to guard it from the various deteriorating influences which assail the

weak side of democracy, could scarcely by human ingenuity be devised. A

democratic people would in this way be provided with what in any other way

it would almost certainly miss-leaders of a higher grade of intellect and

character than itself. Modern democracy would have its occasional Pericles,

and its habitual group of superior and guiding minds.

              With all this array of reasons, of the most fundamental character, on

the affirmative side of the question, what is there on the negative? Nothing

that will sustain examination, when people can once be induced to bestow

any real examination upon a new thing. Those indeed, if any such there be,

who, under pretence of equal justice, aim only at substituting the class

ascendancy of the poor for that of the rich, will of course be unfavourable to

a scheme which places both on a level. But I do not believe that any such

wish exists at present among the working classes of this country, though I

would not answer for the effect which opportunity and demagogic artifices

may hereafter have in exciting it. In the United States, where the numerical

majority have long been in full possession of collective despotism, they

would probably be as unwilling to part with it as a single despot or an

aristocracy. But I believe that the English democracy would as yet be content

with protection against the class legislation of others, without claiming the

power to exercise it in their turn.

              Among the ostensible objectors to Mr. Hare's scheme, some profess

to think the plan unworkable; but these, it will be found, are generally people

who have barely heard of it, or have given it a very slight and cursory

examination. Others are unable to reconcile themselves to the loss of whatthey term the local character of the representation. A nation does not seem to

them to consist of persons, but of artificial units, the creation of geography

and statistics. Parliament must represent towns and counties, not human

beings. But no one seeks to annihilate towns and counties. Towns and

counties, it may be presumed, are represented when the human beings who

inhabit them are represented. Local feelings cannot exist without somebody

who feels them; nor local interests without somebody interested in them. If

the human beings whose feelings and interests these are have their proper

share of representation, these feelings and interests are represented in

common with all other feelings and interests of those persons. But I cannot

see why the feelings and interests which arrange mankind according to

localities should be the only one thought worthy of being represented; or why

people who have other feelings and interests, which they value more than

they do their geographical ones, should be restricted to these as the sole

principle of their political classification. The notion that Yorkshire and

Middlesex have rights apart from those of their inhabitants, or that Liverpool

and Exeter are the proper objects of the legislator's care, in contradistinction

the population of those places, is a curious specimen of delusion produced by

words.

              In general, however, objectors cut the matter short by affirming that

the people of England will never consent to such a system. What the people

of England are likely to think of those who pass such a summary sentence on

their capacity of understanding and judgment, deeming it superfluous to

consider whether a thing is right or wrong before affirming that they are

certain to reject it, I will not undertake to say. For my own part, I do not think

that the people of England have deserved to be, without trial, stigmatised as

insurmountably prejudiced against anything which can be proved to be good

either for themselves or for others. It also appears to me that when prejudices

persist obstinately, it is the fault of nobody so much as of those who make a

point of proclaiming them insuperable, as an excuse to themselves for never

joining in an attempt to remove them. Any prejudice whatever will be

insurmountable if those who do not share it themselves truckle to it, and

flatter it, and accept it as a law of nature. I believe, however, that in this case

there is in general, among those who have yet heard of the proposition, no

other hostility to it than the natural and healthy distrust attaching to all

novelties which have not been sufficiently canvassed to make generally

manifest all the pros and cons of the question. The only serious obstacle is theunfamiliarity: this indeed is a formidable one, for the imagination much more

easily reconciles itself to a great alteration in substance, than to a very small

one in names and forms. But unfamiliarity is a disadvantage which, when

there is any real value in an idea, it only requires time to remove. And in

these days of discussion, and generally awakened interest in improvement,

what formerly was the work of centuries, often requires only years.

              Since the first publication of this Treatise, several adverse criticisms

have been made on Mr. Hare's plan, which indicate at least a careful

examination of it, and a more intelligent consideration than had previously

been given to its pretensions. This is the natural progress of the discussion of

great improvements. They are at first met by a blind prejudice, and by

arguments to which only blind prejudice could attach any value. As the

prejudice weakens, the arguments it employs for some time increase in

strength; since, the plan being better understood, its inevitable

inconveniences, and the circumstances which militate against its at once

producing all the benefits it is intrinsically capable of, come to light along

with its merits. But of all the objections, having any semblance of reason,

which have come under my notice, there is not one which had not been

foreseen, considered, and canvassed by the supporters of the plan, and found

either unreal or easily surmountable.

              The most serious, in appearance, of the objections may be the most

briefly answered; the assumed impossibility of guarding against fraud, or

suspicion of fraud, in the operations of the Central Office. Publicity, and

complete liberty of inspecting the voting papers after the election, were the

securities provided; but these, it is maintained, would be unavailing; because,

to check the returns, a voter would have to go over all the work that had been

done by the staff of clerks. This would be a very weighty objection, if there

were any necessity that the returns should be verified individually by every

voter. All that a simple voter could be expected to do in the way of

verification would be to check the use made of his own voting paper; for

which purpose every paper would be returned, after a proper interval, to the

place from whence it came. But what he could not do would be done for him

by the unsuccessful candidates and their agents. Those among the defeated

who thought that they ought to have been returned would, singly or a number

together, employ an agency for verifying the process of the election; and if

they detected material error, the documents would be referred to a Committeeof the House of Commons, by whom the entire electoral operations of the

nation would be examined and verified, at a tenth part the expense of time

and money necessary for the scrutiny of a single return before an Election

Committee under the system now in force.

              Assuming the plan to be workable, two modes have been alleged in

which its benefits might be frustrated, and injurious consequences produced

in lieu of them. First, it is said that undue power would be given to knots or

cliques; sectarian combinations; associations for special objects, such as the

Maine Law League, the Ballot or Liberation Society; or bodies united by

class interests or community of religious persuasion. It is in the second place

objected that the system would admit of being worked for party purposes. A

central organ of each political party would send its list of 658 candidates all

through the country, to be voted for by the whole of its supporters in every

constituency. Their votes would far outnumber those which could ever be

obtained by any independent candidate. The "ticket" system, it is contended,

would, as it does in America, operate solely in favour of the great organised

parties, whose tickets would be accepted blindly, and voted for in their

integrity; and would hardly ever be outvoted, except occasionally, by the

sectarian groups, or knots of men bound together by a common crotchet who

have been already spoken of.

              The answer to this appears to be conclusive. No one pretends that

under Mr. Hare's or any other plan organisation would cease to be an

advantage. Scattered elements are always at a disadvantage compared with

organised bodies. As Mr. Hare's plan cannot alter the nature of things, we

must expect that all parties or sections, great or small, which possess

organisation, would avail themselves of it to the utmost to strengthen their

influence. But under the existing system those influences are everything. The

scattered elements are absolutely nothing. The voters who are neither bound

to the great political nor to any of the little sectarian divisions have no means

of making their votes available. Mr. Hare's plan gives them the means. They

might be more, or less, dexterous in using it. They might obtain their share of

influence, or much less than their share. But whatever they did acquire would

be clear gain. And when it is assumed that every petty interest, or

combination for a petty object, would give itself an organisation, why should

we suppose that the great interest of national intellect and character would

alone remain unorganised? If there would be Temperance tickets, and RaggedSchool tickets, and the like, would not one public-spirited person in a

constituency be sufficient to put forth a "personal merit" ticket, and circulate

it through a whole neighbourhood? And might not a few such persons,

meeting in London, select from the list of candidates the most distinguished

names, without regard to technical divisions of opinion, and publish them at a

trifling expense through all the constituencies? It must be remembered that

the influence of the two great parties, under the present mode of election, is

unlimited: in Mr. Hare's scheme it would be great, but confined within

bounds. Neither they, nor any of the smaller knots, would be able to elect

more members than in proportion to the relative number of their adherents.

The ticket system in America operates under conditions the reverse of this. In

America electors vote for the party ticket, because the election goes by a

mere majority, and a vote for any one who is certain not to obtain the

majority is thrown away. But, on Mr. Hare's system, a vote given to a person

of known worth has almost as much chance of obtaining its object as one

given to a party candidate. It might be hoped, therefore, that every Liberal or

Conservative, who was anything besides a Liberal or a Conservative — who

had any preferences of his own in addition to those of his party — would

scratch through the names of the more obscure and insignificant party

candidates, and inscribe in their stead some of the men who are an honour to

the nation. And the probability of this fact would operate as a strong

inducement with those who drew up the party lists not to confine themselves

to pledged party men, but to include along with these, in their respective

tickets, such of the national notabilities as were more in sympathy with their

side than with the opposite.

              The real difficulty, for it is not to be dissembled that there is a

difficulty, is that the independent voters, those who are desirous of voting for

unpatronised persons of merit, would be apt to put down the names of a few

such persons, and to fill up the remainder of their list with mere party

candidates, thus helping to swell the numbers against those by whom they

would prefer to be represented. There would be an easy remedy for this,

should it be necessary to resort to it, namely, to impose a limit to the number

of secondary or contingent votes. No voter is likely to have an independent

preference, grounded on knowledge, for 658, or even for 100 candidates.

There would be little objection to his being limited to twenty, fifty, or

whatever might be the number in the selection of whom there was some

probability that his own choice would be exercised-that he would vote as anindividual, and not as one of the mere rank and file of a party. But even

without this restriction, the evil would be likely to cure itself as soon as the

system came to be well understood. To counteract it would become a

paramount object with all the knots and cliques whose influence is so much

deprecated. From these, each in itself a small minority, the word would go

forth, "Vote for your special candidates only; or at least put their names

foremost, so as to give them the full chance which your numerical strength

warrants, of obtaining the quota by means of first votes, or without

descending low in the scale." And those voters who did not belong to any

clique would profit by the lesson.

              The minor groups would have precisely the amount of power which

they ought to have. The influence they could exercise would be exactly that

which their number of voters entitled them to; not a particle more; while to

ensure even that, they would have a motive to put up, as representatives of

their special objects, candidates whose other recommendations would enable

them to obtain the suffrages of voters not of the sect or clique. It is curious to

observe how the popular line of argument in defence of existing systems

veers round, according to the nature of the attack made upon them. Not many

years ago it was the favourite argument in support of the then existing system

of representation, that under it all "interests" or "classes" were represented.

And certainly, all interests or classes of any importance ought to be

represented, that is, ought to have spokesmen, or advocates, in Parliament.

But from thence it was argued that a system ought to be supported which

gave to the partial interests not advocates merely, but the tribunal itself. Now

behold the change. Mr. Hare's system makes it impossible for partial interests

to have the command of the tribunal, but it ensures them advocates, and for

doing even this it is reproached. Because it unites the good points of class

representation and the good points of numerical representation, it is attacked

from both sides at once.

              But it is not such objections as these that are the real difficulty in

getting the system accepted; it is the exaggerated notion entertained of its

complexity, and the consequent doubt whether it is capable of being carried

into effect. The only complete answer to this objection would be actual trial.

When the merits of the plan shall have become more generally known, and

shall have gained for it a wider support among impartial thinkers, an effort

should be made to obtain its introduction experimentally in some limitedfield, such as the municipal election of some great town. An opportunity was

lost when the decision was taken to divide the West Riding of Yorkshire for

the purpose of giving it four members; instead of trying the new principle, by

leaving the constituency undivided, and allowing a candidate to be returned

on obtaining either in first or secondary votes a fourth part of the whole

number of votes given. Such experiments, would be a very imperfect test of

the worth of the plan: but they would be an exemplification of its mode of

working; they would enable people to convince themselves that it is not

impracticable; would familiarise them with its machinery, and afford some

materials for judging whether the difficulties which are thought to be so

formidable are real or imaginary. The day when such a partial trial shall be

sanctioned by Parliament will, I believe, inaugurate a new era of

Parliamentary Reform; destined to give to Representative Government a

shape fitted to its mature and triumphant period, when it shall have passed
                                                                              6
through the militant stage in which alone the world has yet seen it.

        6
               In the interval between the last and present editions of this treatise,

it has become known that the experiment here suggested has actually been

made on a larger than any municipal or provincial scale, and has been in

course of trial for several years. In the Danish Constitution (not that of

Denmark proper, but the Constitution framed for the entire Danish kingdom)

the equal representation of minorities was provided for on a plan so nearly

identical with Mr. Hare's, as to add another to the examples how the ideas

which resolve difficulties arising out of a general situation of the human mind

or of society, present themselves, without communication, to several superior

minds at once. This feature of the Danish electoral law has been brought fully

and clearly before the British public in an able paper by Mr. Robert Lytton,

forming one of the valuable reports by Secretaries of Legation, printed by

order of the House of Commons in 1864, Mr. Hare's plan, which may now be

also called M. Andrae's, has thus advanced from the position of a simple

project to that of a realised political fact.

              Though Denmark is as yet the only country in which Personal

Representation has become an institution, the progress of the idea among

thinking minds has been very rapid. In almost all the countries in which

universal suffrage is now regarded as a necessity, the scheme is rapidly

making its way: with the friends of democracy, as a logical consequence of

their principle; with those who rather accept than prefer democraticgovernment, as indispensable corrective of its inconveniences. The political

thinkers of Switzerland led the way. Those of France followed. To mention

no others, within a very recent period two of the most influential and

authoritative writers in France, one belonging to the moderate liberal and the

other to the extreme democratic school, have given in a public adhesion to

the plan. Among its German supporters is numbered one of the most eminent

political thinkers in Germany, who is also a distinguished member of the

liberal Cabinet of the Grand Duke of Baden. This subject, among others, has

its share in the important awakening of thought in the American republic,

which is already one of the fruits of the great pending contest for human

freedom. In the two principal of our Australian colonies Mr. Hare's plan has

been brought under the consideration of their respective legislatures, and

though not yet adopted, has already a strong party in its favour; while the

clear and complete understanding of its principles, shown by the majority of

the speakers both on the Conservative and on the Radical side of general

politics, shows how unfounded is the notion of its being too complicated to

be capable of being generally comprehended and acted on. Nothing is

required to make both the plan and its advantages intelligible to all, except

that the time should have come when they will think it worth their while to

take the trouble of really attending to it.

 

 

                                       Chapter 8

 

 

                        Of the Extension of the Suffrage.

 

 

              SUCH A representative democracy as has now been sketched,

representative of all, and not solely of the majority — in which the interests

the opinions, the grades of intellect which are outnumbered would

nevertheless be heard, and would have a chance of obtaining by weight of

character and strength of argument an influence which would not belong to

their numerical force — this democracy, which is alone equal, alone

impartial, alone the government of all by all, the only true type of democracy

— would be free from the greatest evils of the falsely-called democracies

which now prevail, and from which the current idea of democracy is

exclusively derived. But even in this democracy, absolute power, if they

chose to exercise it, would rest with the numerical majority; and these would

be composed exclusively of a single class, alike in biasses, prepossessions,

and general modes of thinking, and a class, to say no more, not the most

highly cultivated. The constitution would therefore still be liable to the

characteristic evils of class government: in a far less degree, assuredly, than

that exclusive government by a class, which now usurps the name of

democracy; but still, under no effective restraint, except what might be found

in the good sense, moderation, and forbearance of the class itself. If checks of

this description are sufficient, the philosophy of constitutional government is

but solemn trifling. All trust in constitutions is grounded on the assurance

they may afford, not that the depositaries of power will not, but that they

cannot, misemploy it. Democracy is not the ideally best form of government

unless this weak side of it can be strengthened; unless it can be so organised

that no class, not even the most numerous, shall be able to reduce all but itself

to political insignificance, and direct the course of legislation and

administration by its exclusive class interest. The problem is, to find the

means of preventing this abuse, without sacrificing the characteristic

advantages of popular government.              These twofold requisites are not fulfilled by the expedient of a

limitation of the suffrage, involving the compulsory exclusion of any portion

of the citizens from a voice in the representation. Among the foremost

benefits of free government is that education of the intelligence and of the

sentiments which is carried down to the very lowest ranks of the people when

they are called to take a part in acts which directly affect the great interests of

their country. On this topic I have already dwelt so emphatically that I only

return to it because there are few who seem to attach to this effect of popular

institutions all the importance to which it is entitled. People think it fanciful

to expect so much from what seems so slight a cause — to recognise a potent

instrument of mental improvement in the exercise of political franchises by

manual labourers. Yet unless substantial mental cultivation in the mass of

mankind is to be a mere vision, this is the road by which it must come. If any

one supposes that this road will not bring it, I call to witness the entire

contents of M. de Tocqueville's great work; and especially his estimate of the

Americans. Almost all travellers are struck by the fact that every American is

in some sense both a patriot, and a person of cultivated intelligence; and M.

de Tocqueville has shown how close the connection is between these

qualities and their democratic institutions. No such wide diffusion of the

ideas, tastes, and sentiments of educated minds has ever been seen elsewhere,
                                    7
or even conceived as attainable.

        7
               The following "extract from the Report of the English

Commissioner to the New York Exhibition," which I quote from Mr. Carey's

Principles of Social Science bears striking testimony to one part, at least, of

the assertion in the text:-

              "We have a few great engineers and mechanics, and a large body of

clever workmen; but the Americans seem likely to become a whole nation of

such people. Already, their rivers swarm with steamboats; their valleys are

becoming crowded with factories; their towns, surpassing those of every state

of Europe, except Belgium, Holland, and England, are the abodes of all the

skill which now distinguishes a town population; and there is scarcely an art

in Europe not carried on in America with equal or greater skill than in

Europe, though it has been here cultivated and improved through ages. A

whole nation of Franklins, Stephensons, and Watts in prospect, is something

wonderful for other nations to contemplate. In contrast with the comparative

inertness and ignorance of the bulk of the people of Europe, whatever may bethe superiority of a few well-instructed and gifted persons, the America is the

circumstance most worthy of public attention."

              Yet this is nothing to what we might look for in a government

equally democratic in its unexclusiveness, but better organised in other

important points. For political life is indeed in America a most valuable

school, but it is a school from which the ablest teachers are excluded; the first

minds in the country being as effectually shut out from the national

representation, and from public functions generally, as if they were under a

formal disqualification. The Demos, too, being in America the one source of

power, all the selfish ambition of the country gravitates towards it, as it does

in despotic countries towards the monarch: the people, like the despot, is

pursued with adulation and sycophancy, and the corrupting effects of power

fully keep pace with its improving and ennobling influences. If, even with

this alloy, democratic institutions produce so marked a superiority of mental

development in the lowest class of Americans, compared with the

corresponding classes in England and elsewhere, what would it be if the good

portion of the influence could be retained without the bad? And this, to a

certain extent, may be done; but not by excluding that portion of the people

who have fewest intellectual stimuli of other kinds from so inestimable an

introduction to large, distant, and complicated interests as is afforded by the

attention they may be induced to bestow on political affairs. It is by political

discussion that the manual labourer, whose employment is a routine, and

whose way of life brings him in contact with no variety of impressions,

circumstances, or ideas, is taught that remote causes, and events which take

place far off, have a most sensible effect even on his personal interests; and it

is from political discussion, and collective political action, that one whose

daily occupations concentrate his interests in a small circle round himself,

learns to feel for and with his fellow citizens, and becomes consciously a

member of a great community. But political discussions fly over the heads of

those who have no votes, and are not endeavouring to acquire them. Their

position, in comparison with the electors, is that of the audience in a court of

justice, compared with the twelve men in the jury-box. It is not their suffrages

that are asked, it is not their opinion that is sought to be influenced; the

appeals are made, the arguments addressed, to others than them; nothing

depends on the decision they may arrive at, and there is no necessity and very

little inducement to them to come to any. Whoever, in an otherwise popular

government, has no vote, and no prospect of obtaining it, will either be apermanent malcontent, or will feel as one whom the general affairs of society

do not concern; for whom they are to be managed by others; who "has no

business with the laws except to obey them," nor with public interests and

concerns except as a looker-on. What he will know or care about them from

this position may partly be measured by what an average woman of the

middle class knows and cares about politics, compared with her husband or

brothers.

              Independently of all these considerations, it is a personal injustice to

withhold from any one, unless for the prevention of greater evils, the ordinary

privilege of having his voice reckoned in the disposal of affairs in which he

has the same interest as other people. If he is compelled to pay, if he may be

compelled to fight, if he is required implicitly to obey, he should be legally

entitled to be told what for; to have his consent asked, and his opinion

counted at its worth, though not at more than its worth. There ought to be no

pariahs in a full-grown and civilised nation; no persons disqualified, except

through their own default. Every one is degraded, whether aware of it or not,

when other people, without consulting him, take upon themselves unlimited

power to regulate his destiny. And even in a much more improved state than

the human mind has ever yet reached, it is not in nature that they who are

thus disposed of should meet with as fair play as those who have a voice.

Rulers and ruling classes are under a necessity of considering the interests

and wishes of those who have the suffrage; but of those who are excluded, it

is in their option whether they will do so or not, and, however honestly

disposed, they are in general too fully occupied with things which they must

attend to, to have much room in their thoughts for anything which they can

with impunity disregard. No arrangement of the suffrage, therefore, can be

permanently satisfactory in which any person or class is peremptorily

excluded; in which the electoral privilege is not open to all persons of full age

who desire to obtain it.

              There are, however, certain exclusions, required by positive reasons,

which do not conflict with this principle, and which, though an evil in

themselves, are only to be got rid of by the cessation of the state of things

which requires them. I regard it as wholly inadmissible that any person

should participate in the suffrage without being able to read, write, and, I will

add, perform the common operations of arithmetic. Justice demands, even

when the suffrage does not depend on it, that the means of attaining theseelementary acquirements should be within the reach of every person, either

gratuitously, or at an expense not exceeding what the poorest who earn their

own living can afford. If this were really the case, people would no more

think of giving the suffrage to a man who could not read, than of giving it to

a child who could not speak; and it would not be society that would exclude

him, but his own laziness. When society has not performed its duty, by

rendering this amount of instruction accessible to all, there is some hardship

in the case, but it is a hardship that ought to be borne. If society has neglected

to discharge two solemn obligations, the more important and more

fundamental of the two must be fulfilled first: universal teaching must

precede universal enfranchisement. No one but those in whom an a priori

theory has silenced common sense will maintain that power over others, over

the whole community, should be imparted to people who have not acquired

the commonest and most essential requisities for taking care of themselves;

for pursuing intelligently their own interests, and those of the persons most

nearly allied to them. This argument, doubtless, might be pressed further, and

made to prove much more. It would be eminently desirable that other things

besides reading, writing, and arithmetic could be made necessary to the

suffrage; that some knowledge of the conformation of the earth, its natural

and political divisions, the elements of general history, and of the history and

institutions of their own country, could be required from all electors. But

these kinds of knowledge, however indispensable to an intelligent use of the

suffrage, are not, in this country, nor probably anywhere save in the Northern

United States, accessible to the whole people; nor does there exist any

trustworthy machinery for ascertaining whether they have been acquired or

not. The attempt, at present, would lead to partiality, chicanery, and every

kind of fraud. It is better that the suffrage should be conferred

indiscriminately, or even withheld indiscriminately, than that it should be

given to one and withheld from another at the discretion of a public officer.

In regard, however, to reading, writing, and calculating, there need be no

difficulty. It would be easy to require from every one who presented himself

for registry that he should, in the presence of the registrar, copy a sentence

from an English book, and perform a sum in the rule of three; and to secure,

by fixed rules and complete publicity, the honest application of so very

simple a test. This condition, therefore, should in all cases accompany

universal suffrage; and it would, after a few years, exclude none but those

who cared so little for the privilege, that their vote, if given, would not ingeneral be an indication of any real political opinion.

              It is also important, that the assembly which votes the taxes, either

general or local, should be elected exclusively by those who pay something

towards the taxes imposed. Those who pay no taxes, disposing by their votes

of other people's money, have every motive to be lavish and none to

economise. As far as money matters are concerned, any power of voting

possessed by them is a violation of the fundamental principle of free

government; a severance of the power of control from the interest in its

beneficial exercise. It amounts to allowing them to put their hands into other

people's pockets for any purpose which they think fit to call a public one;

which in some of the great towns of the United States is known to have

produced a scale of local taxation onerous beyond example, and wholly borne

by the wealthier classes. That representation should be co-extensive with

taxation, not stopping short of it, but also not going beyond it, is in

accordance with the theory of British institutions. But to reconcile this, as a

condition annexed to the representation, with universality, it is essential, as it

is on many other accounts desirable, that taxation, in a visible shape, should

descend to the poorest class. In this country, and in most others, there is

probably no labouring family which does not contribute to the indirect taxes,

by the purchase of tea, coffee, sugar, not to mention narcotics or stimulants.

But this mode of defraying a share of the public expenses is hardly felt: the

payer, unless a person of education and reflection, does not identify his

interest with a low scale of public expenditure as closely as when money for

its support is demanded directly from himself; and even supposing him to do

so, he would doubtless take care that, however lavish an expenditure he

might, by his vote, assist in imposing upon the government, it should not be

defrayed by any additional taxes on the articles which he himself consumes.

It would be better that a direct tax, in the simple form of a capitation, should

be levied on every grown person in the community; or that every such person

should be admitted an elector on allowing himself to be rated extra ordinem

to the assessed taxes; or that a small annual payment, rising and falling with

the gross expenditure of the country, should be required from every

registered elector; that so everyone might feel that the money which he

assisted in voting was partly his own, and that he was interested in keeping

down its amount.

              However this may be, I regard it as required by first principles, thatthe receipt of parish relief should be a peremptory disqualification for the

franchise. He who cannot by his labour suffice for his own support has no

claim to the privilege of helping himself to the money of others. By

becoming dependent on the remaining members of the community for actual

subsistence, he abdicates his claim to equal rights with them in other respects.

Those to whom he is indebted for the continuance of his very existence may

justly claim the exclusive management of those common concerns, to which

he now brings nothing, or less than he takes away. As a condition of the

franchise, a term should be fixed, say five years previous to the registry,

during which the applicant's name has not been on the parish books as a

recipient of relief. To be an uncertified bankrupt, or to have taken the benefit

of the Insolvent Act, should disqualify for the franchise until the person has

paid his debts, or at least proved that he is not now, and has not for some long

period been, dependent on eleemosynary support. Non-payment of taxes,

when so long persisted in that it cannot have arisen from inadvertence, should

disqualify while it lasts. These exclusions are not in their nature permanent.

They exact such conditions only as all are able, or ought to be able, to fulfil if

they choose. They leave the suffrage accessible to all who are in the normal

condition of a human being: and if any one has to forego it, he either does not

care sufficiently for it to do for its sake what he is already bound to do, or he

is in a general condition of depression and degradation in which this slight

addition, necessary for security of others, would be unfelt, and on emerging

from which, this mark of inferiority would disappear with the rest.

              In the long run, therefore (supposing no restrictions to exist but those

of which we have now treated), we might expect that all, except that (it is to

be hoped) progressively diminishing class, the recipients of parish relief,

would be in possession of votes, so that the suffrage would be, with that

slight abatement, universal. That it should be thus widely expanded is, as we

have seen, absolutely necessary to an enlarged and elevated conception of

good government. Yet in this state of things, the great majority of voters, in

most countries, and emphatically in this, would be manual labourers; and the

twofold danger, that of too low a standard of political intelligence, and that of

class legislation, would still exist in a very perilous degree. It remains to be

seen whether any means exist by which these evils can be obviated.

              They are capable of being obviated, if men sincerely wish it; not by

any artificial contrivance, but by carrying out the natural order of human life,which recommends itself to every one in things in which he has no interest or

traditional opinion running counter to it. In all human affairs, every person

directly interested, and not under positive tutelage, has an admitted claim to a

voice, and when his exercise of it is not inconsistent with the safety of the

whole, cannot justly be excluded from it. But though every one ought to have

a voice — that every one should have an equal voice is a totally different

proposition. When two persons who have a joint interest in any business

differ in opinion, does justice require that both opinions should be held of

exactly equal value? If, with equal virtue, one is superior to the other in

knowledge and intelligence — or if, with equal intelligence, one excels the

other in virtue — the opinion, the judgment, of the higher moral or

intellectual being is worth more than that of the inferior: and if the

institutions of the country virtually assert that they are of the same value, they

assert a thing which is not. One of the two, as the wiser or better man, has a

claim to superior weight: the difficulty is in ascertaining which of the two it

is; a thing impossible as between individuals, but, taking men in bodies and

in numbers, it can be done with a certain approach to accuracy. There would

be no pretence for applying this doctrine to any case which could with reason

be considered as one of individual and private right. In an affair which

concerns only one of two persons, that one is entitled to follow his own

opinion, however much wiser the other may be than himself. But we are

speaking of things which equally concern them both; where, if the more

ignorant does not yield his share of the matter to the guidance of the wiser

man, the wiser man must resign his to that of the more ignorant. Which of

these modes of getting over the difficulty is most for the interest of both, and

most conformable to the general fitness of things? If it be deemed unjust that

either should have to give way, which injustice is greatest? that the better

judgment should give way to the worse, or the worse to the better?

              Now, national affairs are exactly such a joint concern, with the

difference, that no one needs ever be called upon for a complete sacrifice of

his own opinion. It can always be taken into the calculation, and counted at a

certain figure, a higher figure being assigned to the suffrages of those whose

opinion is entitled to greater weight. There is not, in this arrangement,

anything necessarily invidious to those to whom it assigns the lower degrees

of influence. Entire exclusion from a voice in the common concerns is one

thing: the concession to others of a more potential voice, on the ground of

greater capacity for the management of the joint interests, is another. The twothings are not merely different, they are incommensurable. Every one has a

right to feel insulted by being made a nobody, and stamped as of no account

at all. No one but a fool, and only a fool of a peculiar description, feels

offended by the acknowledgment that there are others whose opinion, and

even whose wish, is entitled to a greater amount of consideration than his. To

have no voice in what are partly his own concerns is a thing which nobody

willingly submits to; but when what is partly his concern is also partly

another's, and he feels the other to understand the subject better than himself,

that the other's opinion should be counted for more than his own accords with

his expectations, and with the course of things which in all other affairs of

life he is accustomed to acquiese in. It is only necessary that this superior

influence should be assigned on grounds which he can comprehend, and of

which he is able to perceive the justice.

              I hasten to say that I consider it entirely inadmissible, unless as a

temporary makeshift, that the superiority of influence should be conferred in

consideration of property. I do not deny that property is a kind of test;

education in most countries, though anything but proportional to riches, is on

the average better in the richer half of society than in the poorer. But the

criterion is so imperfect; accident has so much more to do than merit with

enabling men to rise in the world; and it is so impossible for any one, by

acquiring any amount of instruction, to make sure of the corresponding rise in

station, that this foundation of electoral privilege is always, and will continue

to be, supremely odious. To connect plurality of votes with any pecuniary

qualification would be not only objectionable in itself, but a sure mode of

discrediting the principle, and making its permanent maintenance

impracticable. The Democracy, at least of this country, are not at present

jealous of personal superiority, but they are naturally and must justly so of

that which is grounded on mere pecuniary circumstances. The only thing

which can justify reckoning one person's opinion as equivalent to more than

one is individual mental superiority; and what is wanted is some approximate

means of ascertaining that. If there existed such a thing as a really national

education or a trustworthy system of general examination, education might be

tested directly. In the absence of these, the nature of a person's occupation is

some test. An employer of labour is on the average more intelligent than a

labourer; for he must labour with his head, and not solely with his hands. A

foreman is generally more intelligent than an ordinary labourer, and a

labourer in the skilled trades than in the unskilled. A banker, merchant, ormanufacturer is likely to be more intelligent than a tradesman, because he has

larger and more complicated interests to manage.

              In all these cases it is not the having merely undertaken the superior

function, but the successful performance of it, that tests the qualifications; for

which reason, as well as to prevent persons from engaging nominally in an

occupation for the sake of the vote, it would be proper to require that the

occupation should have been persevered in for some length of time (say three

years). Subject to some such condition, two or more votes might be allowed

to every person who exercises any of these superior functions. The liberal

professions, when really and not nominally practised, imply, of course, a still

higher degree of instruction; and wherever a sufficient examination, or any

serious conditions of education, are required before entering on a profession,

its members could be admitted at once to a plurality of votes. The same rule

might be applied to graduates of universities; and even to those who bring

satisfactory certificates of having passed through the course of study required

by any school at which the higher branches of knowledge are taught, under

proper securities that the teaching is real, and not a mere pretence. The

"local" or "middle class" examination for the degree of Associate, so laudably

and public-spiritedly established by the Universities of Oxford and

Cambridge, and any similar ones which may be instituted by other competent

bodies (provided they are fairly open to all comers), afford a ground on

which plurality of votes might with great advantage be accorded to those who

have passed the test. All these suggestions are open to much discussion in the

detail, and to objections which it is of no use to anticipate. The time is not

come for giving to such plans a practical shape, nor should I wish to be

bound by the particular proposals which I have made. But it is to me evident,

that in this direction lies the true ideal of representative government; and that

to work towards it, by the best practical contrivances which can be found, is

the path of real political improvement.

              If it be asked to what length the principle admits of being carried, or

how many votes might be accorded to an individual on the ground of superior

qualifications, I answer, that this is not in itself very material, provided the

distinctions and gradations are not made arbitrarily, but are such as can be

understood and accepted by the general conscience and understanding. But it

is an absolute condition not to overpass the limit prescribed by the

fundamental principle laid down in a former chapter as the condition ofexcellence in the constitution of a representative system. The plurality of

votes must on no account be carried so far that those who are privileged by it,

or the class (if any) to which they mainly belong, shall outweigh by means of

it all the rest of the community. The distinction in favour of education, right

in itself, is further and strongly recommended by its preserving the educated

from the class legislation of the uneducated; but it must stop short of enabling

them to practise class legislation on their own account. Let me add, that I

consider it an absolutely necessary part of the plurality scheme that it be open

to the poorest individual in the community to claim its privileges, if he can

prove that, in spite of all difficulties and obstacles, he is, in point of

intelligence, entitled to them. There ought to be voluntary examinations at

which any person whatever might present himself, might prove that he came

up to the standard of knowledge and ability laid down as sufficient, and be

admitted, in consequence, to the plurality of votes. A privilege which is not

refused to any one who can show that he has realised the conditions on which

in theory and principle it is dependent would not necessarily be repugnant to

any one's sentiment of justice: but it would certainly be so, if, while conferred

on general presumptions not always infallible, it were denied to direct proof.

              Plural voting, though practised in vestry elections and those of poor-

law guardians, is so unfamiliar in elections to Parliament that it is not likely

to be soon or willingly adopted: but as the time will certainly arrive when the

only choice will be between this and equal universal suffrage, whoever does

not desire the last, cannot too soon begin to reconcile himself to the former.

In the meantime, though the suggestion, for the present, may not be a

practical one, it will serve to mark what is best in principle, and enable us to

judge of the eligibility of any indirect means, either existing or capable of

being adopted, which may promote in a less perfect manner the same end. A

person may have a double vote by other means than that of tendering two

votes at the same hustings; he may have a vote in each of two different

constituencies: and though this exceptional privilege at present belongs rather

to superiority of means than of intelligence, I would not abolish it where it

exists, since until a truer test of education is adopted it would be unwise to

dispense with even so imperfect a one as is afforded by pecuniary

circumstances. Means might be found of giving a further extension to the

privilege, which would connect it in a more direct manner with superior

education. In any future Reform Bill which lowers greatly the pecuniary

conditions of the suffrage, it might be a wise provision to allow all graduatesof universities, all persons who have passed creditably through the higher

schools, all members of the liberal professions, and perhaps some others, to

be registered specifically in those characters, and to give their votes as such

in any constituency in which they choose to register; retaining, in addition,

their votes as simple citizens in the localities in which they reside.

              Until there shall have been devised, and until opinion is willing to

accept, some mode of plural voting which may assign to education, as such,

the degree of superior influence due to it, and sufficient as a counterpoise to

the numerical weight of the least educated class; for so long the benefits of

completely universal suffrage cannot be obtained without bringing with them,

as it appears to me, a chance of more than equivalent evils. It is possible,

indeed (and this is perhaps one of the transitions through which we may have

to pass in our progress to a really good representative system), that the

barriers which restrict the suffrage might be entirely levelled in some

particular constituencies, whose members, consequently, would be returned

principally by manual labourers; the existing electoral qualification being

maintained elsewhere, or any alteration in it being accompanied by such a

grouping of the constituencies as to prevent the labouring class from

becoming preponderant in Parliament. By such a compromise, the anomalies

in the representation would not only be retained, but augmented: this

however is not a conclusive objection; for if the country does not choose to

pursue the right ends by a regular system directly leading to them, it must be

content with an irregular makeshift, as being greatly preferable to a system

free from irregularities, but regularly adapted to wrong ends, or in which

some ends equally necessary with the others have been left out. It is a far

graver objection, that this adjustment is incompatible with the

intercommunity of local constituencies which Mr. Hare's plan requires; that

under it every voter would remain imprisoned within the one or more

constituencies in which his name is registered, and unless willing to be

represented by one of the candidates for those localities, would not be

represented at all.

              So much importance do I attach to the emancipation of those who

already have votes, but whose votes are useless, because always

outnumbered; so much should I hope from the natural influence of truth and

reason, if only secured a hearing and a competent advocacy that I should not

despair of the operation even of equal and universal suffrage, if made real bythe proportional representation of all minorities, on Mr. Hare's principle. But

if the best hopes which can be formed on this subject were certainties, I

should still contend for the principle of plural voting. I do not propose the

plurality as a thing in itself undesirable, which, like the exclusion of part of

the community from the suffrage, may be temporarily tolerated while

necessary to prevent greater evils. I do not look upon equal voting as among

the things which are good in themselves, provided they can be guarded

against inconveniences. I look upon it as only relatively good; less

objectionable than inequality of privilege grounded on irrelevant or

adventitious circumstances, but in principle wrong, because recognising a

wrong standard, and exercising a bad influence on the voter's mind. It is not

useful, but hurtful, that the constitution of the country should declare

ignorance to be entitled to as much political power as knowledge. The

national institutions should place all things that they are concerned with

before the mind of the citizen in the light in which it is for his good that he

should regard them: and as it is for his good that he should think that every

one is entitled to some influence, but the better and wiser to more than others,

it is important that this conviction should be professed by the State, and

embodied in the national institutions. Such things constitute the spirit of the

institutions of a country: that portion of their influence which is least

regarded by common, and especially by English, thinkers; though the

institutions of every country, not under great positive oppression, produce

more effect by their spirit than by any of their direct provisions, since by it

they shape the national character. The American institutions have imprinted

strongly on the American mind that any one man (with a white skin) is as

good as any other; and it is felt that this false creed is nearly connected with

some of the more unfavourable points in American character. It is not small

mischief that the constitution of any country should sanction this creed; for

the belief in it, whether express or tacit, is almost as detrimental to moral and

intellectual excellence any effect which most forms of government can

produce.

              It may, perhaps, be said, that a constitution which gives equal

influence, man for man, to the most and to the least instructed, is nevertheless

conducive to progress, because the appeals constantly made to the less

instructed classes, the exercise given to their mental powers, and the

exertions which the more instructed are obliged to make for enlightening

their judgment and ridding them of errors and prejudices, are powerfulstimulants to their advance in intelligence. That this most desirable effect

really attends the admission of the less educated classes to some, and even to

a large share of power, I admit, and have already strenuously maintained. But

theory and experience alike prove that a counter current sets in when they are

made the possessors of all power. Those who are supreme over everything,

whether they be One, or Few, or Many, have no longer need of the arms of

reason: they can make their mere will prevail; and those who cannot be

resisted are usually far too well satisfied with their own opinion to be willing

to change them, or listen without impatience to any one who tells them that

they are in the wrong. The position which gives the strongest stimulus to the

growth of intelligence is that of rising into power, not that of having achieved

it; and of all resting-points, temporary or permanent, in the way to

ascendancy, the one which develops the best and highest qualities is the

position of those who are strong enough to make reason prevail, but not

strong enough to prevail against reason. This is the position in which,

according to the principles we have laid down, the rich and the poor, the

much and the little educated, and all the other classes and denominations

which divide society between them, ought as far as practicable to be placed.

And by combining this principle with the otherwise just one of allowing

superiority of weight to superiority of mental qualities, a political constitution

would realise that kind of relative perfection which is alone compatible with

the complicated nature of human affairs.

              In the preceding argument for universal, but graduated suffrage, I

have taken no account of difference of sex. I consider it to be as entirely

irrelevant to political rights as difference in height or in the colour of the hair.

All human beings have the same interest in good government; the welfare of

all is alike affected by it, and they have equal need of a voice in it to secure

their share of its benefits. If there be any difference, women require it more

than men, since, being physically weaker, they are more dependent on law

and society for protection. Mankind have long since abandoned the only

premises which will support the conclusion that women ought not to have

votes. No one now holds that women should be in personal servitude, that

they should have no thought, wish, or occupation, but to be the domestic

drudges of husbands, fathers, or brothers. It is allowed to unmarried, and

wants but little of being conceded to married women, to hold property, and

have pecuniary and business interests, in the same manner as men. It is

considered suitable and proper that women should think and write, and beteachers. As soon as these things are admitted, the political disqualification

has no principle to rest on. The whole mode of thought of the modern world

is with increasing emphasis pronouncing against the claim of society to

decide for individuals what they are and are not fit for, and what they shall

and shall not be allowed to attempt. If the principles of modern politics and

political economy are good for anything, it is for proving that these points

can only be rightly judged of by the individuals themselves and that, under

complete freedom of choice, wherever there are real diversities of aptitude,

the great number will apply themselves to the things for which they are on

the average fittest, and the exceptional course will only be taken by the

exceptions. Either the whole tendency of modern social improvements has

been wrong, or it ought to be carried out to the total abolition of all

exclusions and disabilities which close any honest employment to a human

being.

              But it is not even necessary to maintain so much in order to prove

that women should have the suffrage. Were it as right, as it is wrong, that

they should be a subordinate class, confined to domestic occupations and

subject to domestic authority, they would not the less require the protection

of the suffrage to secure them from the abuse of that authority. Men, as well

as women, do not need political rights in order that they may govern, but in

order that they may not be misgoverned. The majority of the male sex are,

and will be all their lives, nothing else than labourers in cornfields or

manufactories; but this does not render the suffrage less desirable for them,

nor their claim to it less irresistible, when not likely to make a bad use of it.

Nobody pretends to think that woman would make a bad use of the suffrage.

The worst that is said is that they would vote as mere dependents, the bidding

of their male relations. If it be so, so let it be. If they think for themselves,

great good will be done, and if they do not, no harm. It is a benefit to human

beings to take off their fetters, even if they do not desire to walk. It would

already be a great improvement in the moral position of women to be no

longer declared by law incapable of an opinion, and not entitled to a

preference, respecting the most important concerns of humanity. There would

be some benefit to them individually in having something to bestow which

their male relatives cannot exact, and are yet desirous to have. It would also

be no small benefit that the husband would necessarily discuss the matter

with his wife, and that the vote would not be his exclusive affair, but a joint

concern. People do not sufficiently consider how markedly the fact that she isable to have some action on the outward world independently of him raises

her dignity and value in a vulgar man's eyes, and makes her the object of a

respect which no personal qualities would ever obtain for one whose social

existence he can entirely appropriate.

              The vote itself, too, would be improved in quality. The man would

often be obliged to find honest reasons for his vote, such as might induce a

more upright and impartial character to serve with him under the same

banner. The wife's influence would often keep him true to his own sincere

opinion. Often, indeed, it would be used, not on the side of public principle,

but of the personal interest or worldly vanity of the family. But wherever this

would be the tendency of the wife's influence, it is exerted to the full already

in that bad direction; and with the more certainty, since under the present law

and custom she is generally too utter a stranger to politics in any sense in

which they involve principle to be able to realise to herself that there is a

point of honour in them, and most people have as little sympathy in the point

of honour of others, when their own is not placed in the same thing, as they

have in the religious feelings of those whose religion differs from theirs. Give

the woman a vote, and she comes under the operation of the political point of

honour. She learns to look on politics as a thing on which she is allowed to

have an opinion, and in which if one has an opinion it ought to be acted upon;

she acquires a sense of personal accountability in the matter, and will no

longer feel, as she does at present, that whatever amount of bad influence she

may exercise, if the man can but be persuaded, all is right, and his

responsibility covers all. It is only by being herself encouraged to form an

opinion, and obtain an intelligent comprehension of the reasons which ought

to prevail with the conscience against the temptations of personal or family

interest, that she can ever cease to act as a disturbing force on the political

conscience of the man. Her indirect agency can only be prevented from being

politically mischievous by being exchanged for direct.

              I have supposed the right of suffrage to depend, as in a good state of

things it would, on personal conditions. Where it depends, as in this and most

other countries, on conditions of property, the contradiction is even more

flagrant. There something more than ordinarily irrational in the fact that when

a woman can give all the guarantees required from a male elector,

independent circumstances, the position of a householder and head of a

family, payment of taxes, or whatever may be the conditions imposed, thevery principle and system of a representation based on property is set aside,

and an exceptionally personal disqualification is created for the mere purpose

of excluding her. When it is added that in the country where this is done a

woman now reigns, and that the most glorious ruler whom that country ever

had was a woman, the picture of unreason, and scarcely disguised injustice, is

complete. Let us hope that as the work proceeds of pulling down, one after

another, the remains of the mouldering fabric of monopoly and tyranny, this

one will not be the last to disappear; that the opinion of Bentham, of Mr.

Samuel Bailey, of Mr. Hare, and many other of the most powerful political

thinkers of this age and country (not to speak of others), will make its way to

all minds not rendered obdurate by selfishness or inveterate prejudice; and

that, before the lapse another generation, the accident of sex, no more than

the accident of skin, will be deemed a sufficient justification for depriving its

possessor of the equal protection and just privileges of a citizen.

 

 

                                       Chapter 9

 

 

                    Should there be Two Stages of Election?

 

 

              IN SOME representative constitutions the plan has been adopted of

choosing the members of the representative body by a double process, the

primary electors only choosing other electors, and these electing the member

of parliament. This contrivance was probably intended as a slight impediment

to the full sweep of popular feeling; giving the suffrage, and with it the

complete ultimate power, to the Many, but compelling them to exercise it

through the agency of a comparatively few, who, it was supposed, would be

less moved than the Demos by the gusts of popular passion; and as the

electors, being already a select body, might be expected to exceed in intellect

and character the common level of their constituents, the choice made by

them was thought likely to be more careful and enlightened, and would in

any case be made under a greater feeling of responsibility, than election by

the masses themselves. This plan of filtering, as it were, the popular suffrage

through an intermediate body admits of a very plausible defence; since it may

be said, with great appearance of reason, that less intellect and instruction are

required for judging who among our neighbours can be most safely trusted to

choose a member of parliament, than who is himself fittest to be one.

              In the first place, however, if the dangers incident to popular power

may be thought to be in some degree lessened by this indirect arrangement,

so also are its benefits; and the latter effect is much more certain than the

former. To enable the system to work as desired, it must be carried into effect

in the spirit in which it is planned; the electors must use the suffrage in the

manner supposed by the theory, that is, each of them must not ask himself

who the member of parliament should be, but only whom he would best like

to choose one for him. It is evident that the advantages which indirect is

supposed to have over direct election require this disposition of mind in the

voter, and will only be realised by his taking the doctrine au serieux, that his

sole business is to choose the choosers, not the member himself. Thesupposition must be, that he will not occupy his thoughts with political

opinions and measures, or political men, but will be guided by his personal

respect for some private individual, to whom he will give a general power of

attorney to act for him. Now if the primary electors adopt this view of their

position, one of the principal uses of giving them a vote at all is defeated: the

political function to which they are called fails of developing public spirit and

political intelligence; of making public affairs an object of interest to their

feelings and of exercise to their faculties. The supposition, moreover,

involves inconsistent conditions; for if the voter feels no interest in the final

result, how or why can he be expected to feel any in the process which leads

to it? To wish to have a particular individual for his representative in

parliament is possible to a person of a very moderate degree of virtue and

intelligence; and to wish to choose an elector who will elect that individual is

a natural consequence: but for a person does not care who is elected, or feels

bound to put that consideration in abeyance, to take any interest whatever in

merely naming the worthiest person to elect another according to his own

judgment, implies a zeal for what is right in the abstract, an habitual principle

of duty for the sake of duty, which is possible only to persons of a rather high

grade of cultivation, who, by the very possession of it, show that they may

be, and deserve to be, trusted with political power in a more direct shape. Of

all public functions which it is possible to confer on the poorer members of

the community this surely is the least calculated to kindle their feelings, and

holds out least natural inducement to care for it, other than a virtuous

determination to discharge conscientiously whatever duty one has to perform:

and if the mass of electors cared enough about political affairs to set any

value on so limited a participation in them, they would not be likely to be

satisfied without one much more extensive.

              In the next place, admitting that a person who, from his narrow

range of cultivation, cannot judge well of the qualifications of a candidate for

parliament may be a sufficient judge of the honesty and general capacity of

somebody whom he may depute to choose a member of Parliament for him; I

may remark, that if the voter acquiesces in this estimate of his capabilities,

and really wishes to have the choice made for him by a person in whom he

places reliance, there is no need of any constitutional provision for the

purpose; he has only to ask this confidential person privately what candidate

he had better vote for. In that case the two modes of election coincide in their

result, and every advantage of indirect election is obtained under direct. Thesystems only diverge in their operation, if we suppose that the voter would

prefer to use his own judgment in the choice of a representative, and only lets

another choose for him because the law does not allow him a more direct

mode of action. But if this be his state of mind; if his will does not go along

with the limitation which the law imposes, and he desires to make a direct

choice, he can do so notwithstanding the law. He has only to choose as

elector a known partisan of the candidate he prefers, or some one who will

pledge himself to vote for that candidate. And this is so much the natural

working of election by two stages that, except in a condition of complete

political indifference, it can scarcely be expected to act otherwise. It is in this

way that the election of the President of the United States practically takes

place. Nominally, the election is indirect: the population at large does not

vote for the President; it votes for electors who choose the President. But the

electors are always chosen under an express engagement to vote for a

particular candidate: nor does a citizen ever vote for an elector because of any

preference for the man; he votes for the Lincoln ticket, or the Breckenridge

ticket. It must be remembered that the electors are not chosen in order that

they may search the country and find the fittest person in it to be President, or

to be a member of Parliament. There would be something to be said for the

practice if this were so: but it is not so; nor ever will be until mankind in

general are of opinion, with Plato, that the proper person to be entrusted with

power is the person most unwilling to accept it. The electors are to make

choice of one of those who have offered themselves as candidates: and those

who choose the electors already know who these are. If there is any political

activity in the country, all electors, who care to vote at all, have made up their

minds which of these candidates they would like to have; and will make that

the sole consideration in giving their vote. The partisans of each candidate

will have their list of electors ready, all pledged to vote for that individual;

and the only question practically asked of the primary elector will be which

of these lists he will support.

              The case in which election by two stages answers well in practice is

when the electors are not chosen solely as electors, but have other important

functions to discharge, which precludes their being selected solely as

delegates to give a particular vote. This combination of circumstances

exemplifies itself in another American institution, the Senate of the United

States. That assembly, the Upper House, as it were, of Congress, is

considered to represent not the people directly, but the States as such, and tobe the guardian of that portion of their sovereign rights which they have not

alienated. As the internal sovereignty of each State is, by the nature of an

equal federation, equally sacred whatever be the size or importance of the

State, each returns to the Senate the same number of members (two), whether

it be little Delaware or the "Empire State" of New York. These members are

not chosen by the population, but by the State Legislatures, themselves

elected by the people of each State; but as the whole ordinary business of a

legislative assembly, internal legislation and the control of the executive,

devolves upon these bodies, they are elected with a view to those objects

more than to the other; and in naming two persons to represent the State in

the Federal Senate they for the most part exercise their own judgment, with

only that general reference to public opinion necessary in all acts of the

government of a democracy. The elections, thus made, have proved

eminently successful, and are conspicuously the best of all the elections in the

United States, the Senate invariably consisting of the most distinguished men

among those who have made themselves sufficiently known in public life.

              After such an example, it cannot be said that indirect popular

election is never advantageous. Under certain conditions it is the very best

system that can be adopted. But those conditions are hardly to be obtained in

practice, except in a federal government like that of the United States, where

the election can be entrusted to local bodies whose other functions extend to

the most important concerns of the nation. The only bodies in any analogous

position which exist, or are likely to exist, in this country are the

municipalities, or any other boards which have been or may be created for

similar local purposes. Few persons, however, would think it any

improvement in our parliamentary constitution if the members for the City of

London were chosen by the Aldermen and Common Council, and those for

the borough of Marylebone avowedly, as they already are virtually, by the

vestries of the component parishes. Even if those bodies, considered merely

as local boards, were far less objectionable than they are, the qualities that

would fit them for the limited and peculiar duties of municipal or parochial

aedileship are no guarantee of any special fitness to judge of the comparative

qualifications of candidates for a seat in Parliament. They probably would not

fulfil this duty any better than it is fulfilled by the inhabitants voting directly;

while, on the other hand, if fitness for electing members of Parliament had to

be taken into consideration in selecting persons for the office of vestrymen or

town councillors, many of those who are fittest for that more limited dutywould inevitably be excluded from it, if only by the necessity there would be

of choosing persons whose sentiments in general politics agreed with those of

the voters who elected them. The mere indirect political influence of town-

councils has already led to a considerable perversion of municipal elections

from their intended purpose, by making them a matter of party politics. If it

were part of the duty of a man's book-keeper or steward to choose his

physician, he would not be likely to have a better medical attendant than if he

chose one for himself, while he would be restricted in his choice of a steward

or book-keeper to such as might without too great danger to his health be

entrusted with the other office.

              It appears, therefore, that every benefit of indirect election which is

attainable at all is attainable under direct; that such of the benefits expected

from it, as would not be obtained under direct election, will just as much fail

to be obtained under indirect; while the latter has considerable disadvantages

peculiar to itself. The mere fact that it is an additional and superfluous wheel

in the machinery is no trifling objection. Its decided inferiority as a means of

cultivating public spirit and political intelligence has already been dwelt

upon: and if it had any effective operation at all — that is, if the primary

electors did to any extent leave to their nominees the selection of their

parliamentary representative — the voter would be prevented from

identifying himself with his member of Parliament, and the member would

feel a much less active sense of responsibility to his constituents. In addition

to all this, the comparatively small number of persons in whose hands, at last,

the election of a member of Parliament would reside, could not but afford

great additional facilities to intrigue, and to every form of corruption

compatible with the station in life of the electors. The constituencies would

universally be reduced, in point of conveniences for bribery, to the condition

of the small boroughs at present. It would be sufficient to gain over a small

number of persons to be certain of being returned. If it be said that the

electors would be responsible to those who elected them, the answer is

obvious, that, holding no permanent office, or position in the public eye, they

would risk nothing by a corrupt vote except what they would care little for,

not to be appointed electors again: and the main reliance must still be on the

penalties for bribery, the insufficiency of which reliance, in small

constituencies, experience has made notorious to all the world. The evil

would be exactly proportional to the amount of discretion left to the chosen

electors. The only case in which they would probably be afraid to employtheir vote for the promotion of their personal interest would be when they

were elected under an express pledge, as mere delegates, to carry, as it were,

the votes of their constituents to the hustings. The moment the double stage

of election began to have any effect, it would begin to have a bad effect. And

this we shall find true of the principle of indirect election however applied,

except in circumstances similar to those of the election of Senators in the

United States.

              The best which could be said for this political contrivance that in

some states of opinion it might be a more practicable expedient than that of

plural voting for giving to every member of the community a vote of some

sort, without rendering the mere numerical majority predominant in

Parliament: as, for instance, if the present constituency of this country were

increased by the addition of a numerous and select portion of the labouring

classes, elected by the remainder. Circumstances might render such a scheme

a convenient mode of temporary compromise, but it does not carry out any

principle sufficiently thoroughly to be likely to recommend itself to any class

of thinkers as a permanent arrangement.

 

 

                                       Chapter 10

 

 

                              Of the Mode of Voting.

 

 

              THE QUESTION of greatest moment in regard to modes of voting is

that of secrecy or publicity; and to this we will at once address ourselves.

              It would be a great mistake to make the discussion turn on

sentimentalities about skulking or cowardice. Secrecy is justifiable in many

cases, imperative in some, and it is not cowardice to seek protection against

evils which are honestly avoidable. Nor can it be reasonably maintained that

no cases are conceivable in which secret voting is preferable to public. But I

must contend that these cases, in affairs of a political character, are the

exception, not the rule.

              The present is one of the many instances in which, as I have already

had occasion to remark, the spirit of an institution, the impression it makes on

the mind of the citizen, is one of the most important parts of its operation.

The spirit of vote by ballot — the interpretation likely to be put on it in the

mind of an elector — is that the suffrage is given to him for himself; for his

particular use and benefit, and not as a trust for the public. For if it is indeed a

trust, if the public are entitled to his vote, are not they entitled to know his

vote? This false and pernicious impression may well be made on the

generality, since it has been made on most of those who of late years have

been conspicuous advocates of the ballot. The doctrine was not so understood

by its earlier promoters; but the effect of a doctrine on the mind is best

shown, not in those who form it, but in those who are formed by it. Mr.

Bright and his school of democrats think themselves greatly concerned in

maintaining that the franchise is what they term a right, not a trust. Now this

one idea, taking root in the general mind, does a moral mischief outweighing

all the good that the ballot could do, at the highest possible estimate of it. In

whatever way we define or understand the idea of a right, no person can have

a right (except in the purely legal sense) to power over others: every such

power, which he is allowed to possess, is morally, in the fullest force of theterm, a trust. But the exercise of any political function, either as an elector or

as a representative, is power over others.

              Those who say that the suffrage is not a trust but a right will scarcely

accept the conclusions to which their doctrine leads. If it is a right, if it

belongs to the voter for his own sake, on what ground can we blame him for

selling it, or using it to recommend himself to any one whom it is his interest

to please? A person is not expected to consult exclusively the public benefit

in the use he makes of his house, or his three per cent stock, or anything else

to which he really has a right. The suffrage is indeed due to him, among other

reasons, as a means to his own protection, but only against treatment from

which he is equally bound, so far as depends on his vote, to protect every one

of his fellow-citizens. His vote is not a thing in which he has an option; it has

no more to do with his personal wishes than the verdict of a juryman. It is

strictly a matter of duty; he is bound to give it according to his best and most

conscientious opinion of the public good. Whoever has any other idea of it is

unfit to have the suffrage; its effect on him is to pervert, not to elevate his

mind. Instead of opening his heart to an exalted patriotism and the obligation

of public duty, it awakens and nourishes in him the disposition to use a public

function for his own interest, pleasure, or caprice; the same feelings and

purposes, on a humbler scale, which actuate a despot and oppressor. Now an

ordinary citizen in any public position, or on whom there devolves any social

function, is certain to think and feel, respecting the obligations it imposes on

him, exactly what society appears to think and feel in conferring it. What

seems to be expected from him by society forms a standard which he may fall

below, but which he will seldom rise above. And the interpretation which he

is almost sure to put upon secret voting is that he is not bound to give his vote

with any reference to those who are not allowed to know how he gives it; but

may bestow it simply as he feels inclined.

              This is the decisive reason why the argument does not hold, from the

use of the ballot in clubs and private societies, to its adoption in

parliamentary elections. A member of a club is really, what the elector falsely

believes himself to be, under no obligation to consider the wishes or interests

of any one else. He declares nothing by his vote but that he is or is not willing

to associate, in a manner more or less close, with a particular person. This is a

matter on which, by universal admission, his own pleasure or inclination is

entitled to decide: and that he should be able so to decide it without risking aquarrel is best for everybody, the rejected person included. An additional

reason rendering the ballot unobjectionable in these cases is that it does not

necessarily or naturally lead to lying. The persons concerned are of the same

class or rank, and it would be considered improper in one of them to press

another with questions as to how he had voted. It is far otherwise in

parliamentary elections, and is likely to remain so, as long as the social

relations exist which produce the demand for the ballot; as long as one person

is sufficiently the superior of another to think himself entitled to dictate his

vote. And while this is the case, silence or an evasive answer is certain to be

construed as proof that the vote given has not been that which was desired.

              In any political election, even by universal suffrage (and still more

obviously in the case of a restricted suffrage), the voter is under an absolute

moral obligation to consider the interest of the public, not his private

advantage, and give his vote, to the best of his judgment, exactly as he would

be bound to do if he were the sole voter, and the election depended upon him

alone. This being admitted, it is at least a prima facie consequence that the

duty of voting, like any other public duty, should be performed under the eye

and criticism of the public; every one of whom has not only an interest in its

performance, but a good title to consider himself wronged if it is performed

otherwise than honestly and carefully. Undoubtedly neither this nor any other

maxim of political morality is absolutely inviolable; it may be overruled by

still more cogent considerations. But its weight is such that the cases which

admit of a departure from it must be of a strikingly exceptional character.

              It may, unquestionably, be the fact that if we attempt, by publicity,

to make the voter responsible to the public for his vote, he will practically be

made responsible for it to some powerful individual, whose interest is more

opposed to the general interest of the community than that of the voter

himself would be if, by the shield of secrecy, he were released from

responsibility altogether. When this is the condition, in a high degree, of a

large proportion of the voters, the ballot may be the smaller evil. When the

voters are slaves, anything may be tolerated which enables them to throw off

the yoke. The strongest case for the ballot is when the mischievous power of

the Few over the Many is increasing. In the decline of the Roman republic the

reasons for the ballot were irresistible. The oligarchy was yearly becoming

richer and more tyrannical, the people poorer and more dependent, and it was

necessary to erect stronger and stronger barriers against such abuse of thefranchise as rendered it but an instrument the more in the hands of

unprincipled persons of consequence. As little can it be doubted that the

ballot, so far as it existed, had a beneficial operation in the Athenian

constitution. Even in the least unstable of the Grecian commonwealths

freedom might be for the time destroyed by a single unfairly obtained popular

vote; and though the Athenian voter was not sufficiently dependent to be

habitually coerced, he might have been bribed, or intimidated by the lawless

outrages of some knot of individuals, such as were not uncommon even at

Athens among the youth of rank and fortune. The ballot was in these cases a

valuable instrument of order, and conduced to the Eunomia by which Athens

was distinguished among the ancient commonwealths.

              But in the more advanced states of modern Europe, and especially in

this country, the power of coercing voters has declined and is declining; and

bad voting is now less to be apprehended from the influences to which the

voter is subject at the hands of others than from the sinister interests and

discreditable feelings which belong to himself, either individually or as a

member of a class. To secure him against the first, at the cost of removing all

restraint from the last, would be to exchange a smaller and a diminishing evil

for a greater and increasing one. On this topic, and on the question generally,

as applicable to England at the present date, I have, in a pamphlet on

Parliamentary Reform, expressed myself in terms which, as I do not feel that

I can improve upon, I will venture here to transcribe.

              "Thirty years ago it was still true that in the election of members of

Parliament the main evil to be guarded against was that which the ballot

would exclude — coercion by landlords, employers, and customers. At

present, I conceive, a much greater source of evil is the selfishness, or the

selfish partialities, of the voter himself. A base and mischievous vote is now,

I am convinced, much oftener given from the voter's personal interest, or

class interest, or some mean feeling in his own mind, than from any fear of

consequences at the hands of others: and to these influences the ballot would

enable him to yield himself up, free from all sense of shame or responsibility.

              "In times not long gone by, the higher and richer classes were in

complete possession of the government. Their power was the master

grievance of the country. The habit of voting at the bidding of an employer,

or of a landlord, was so firmly established, that hardly anything was capable

of shaking it but a strong popular enthusiasm, seldom known to exist but in agood cause. A vote given in opposition to those influences was therefore, in

general, an honest, a public-spirited vote; but in any case, and by whatever

motive dictated, it was almost sure to be a good vote, for it was a vote against

the monster evil, the over-ruling influence of oligarchy. Could the voter at

that time have been enabled, with safety to himself, to exercise his privilege

freely, even though neither honestly nor intelligently, it would have been a

great gain to reform; for it would have broken the yoke of the then ruling

power in the country — the power which had created and which maintained

all that was bad in the institutions and the administration of the State — the

power of landlords and boroughmongers.

              "The ballot was not adopted; but the progress of circumstances has

done and is doing more and more, in this respect, the work of the ballot. Both

the political and the social state of the country, as they affect this question,

have greatly changed, and are changing every day. The higher classes are not

now masters of the country. A person must be blind to all the signs of the

times who could think that the middle classes are as subservient to the higher,

or the working classes as dependent on the higher and middle, as they were a

quarter of a century ago. The events of that quarter of a century have not only

taught each class to know its own collective strength, but have put the

individuals of a lower class in a condition to show a much bolder front to

those of a higher. In a majority of cases, the vote of the electors, whether in

opposition to or in accordance with the wishes of their superiors, is not now

the effect of coercion, which there are no longer the same means of applying,

but the expression of their own personal or political partialities. The very

vices of the present electoral system are a proof of this. The growth of

bribery, so loudly complained of, and the spread of the contagion to places

formerly free from it, are evidence that the local influences are no longer

paramount; that the electors now vote to please themselves, and not other

people. There is, no doubt, in counties, and in the smaller boroughs, a large

amount of servile dependence still remaining; but the temper of the times is

adverse to it, and the force of events is constantly tending to diminish it. A

good tenant can now feel that he is as valuable to his landlord as his landlord

is to him; a prosperous tradesman can afford to feel independent of any

particular customer. At every election the votes are more and more the voter's

own. It is their minds, far more than their personal circumstances, that now

require to be emancipated. They are no longer passive instruments of other

men's will — mere organs for putting power into the hands of a controllingoligarchy. The electors themselves are becoming the oligarchy.

              "Exactly in proportion as the vote of the elector is determined by his

own will, and not by that of somebody who is his master, his position is

similar to that of a member of Parliament, and publicity is indispensable. So

long as any portion of the community are unrepresented, the argument of the

Chartists against ballot in conjunction with a restricted suffrage is

unassailable. The present electors, and the bulk of those whom any probable

Reform Bill would add to the number, are the middle class; and have as much

a class interest, distinct from the working classes, as landlords or great

manufacturers. Were the suffrage extended to all skilled labourers, even these

would, or might, still have a class interest distinct from the unskilled.

Suppose it extended to all men — suppose that what was formerly called by

the misapplied name of universal suffrage, and now by the silly title of

manhood suffrage, became the law; the voters would still have a class

interest, as distinguished from women. Suppose that there were a question

before the Legislature specially affecting women; as whether women should

be allowed to graduate at Universities; whether the mild penalties inflicted on

ruffians who beat their wives daily almost to death's door should be

exchanged for something more effectual; or suppose that any one should

propose in the British Parliament, what one State after another in America is

enacting, not by a mere law, but by a provision of their revised Constitutions

— that married women should have a right to their own property. Are not a

man's wife and daughters entitled to know whether he votes for or against a

candidate who will support these propositions?

              "It will of course be objected that these arguments' derive all their

weight from the supposition of an unjust state of the suffrage: That if the

opinion of the non-electors is likely to make the elector vote more honestly,

or more beneficially, than he would vote if left to himself, they are more fit to

be electors than he is, and ought to have the franchise: That whoever is fit to

influence electors is fit to be an elector: That those to whom voters ought to

be responsible should be themselves voters; and being such, should have the

safeguard of the ballot to shield them from the undue influence of powerful

individuals or classes to whom they ought not to be responsible.

              "This argument is specious, and I once thought it conclusive. It now

appears to me fallacious. All who are fit to influence electors are not, for that

reason, fit to be themselves electors. This last is a much greater power thanthe former, and those may be ripe for the minor political function who could

not as yet be safely trusted with the superior. The opinions and wishes of the

poorest and rudest class of labourers may be very useful as one influence

among others on the minds of the voters, as well as on those of the

Legislature; and yet it might be highly mischievous to give them the

preponderant influence by admitting them, in their present state of morals and

intelligence, to the full exercise of the suffrage. It is precisely this indirect

influence of those who have not the suffrage over those who have which, by

its progressive growth, softens the transition to every fresh extension of the

franchise, and is the means by which, when the time is ripe, the extension is

peacefully brought about. But there is another and a still deeper

consideration, which should never be left out of the account in political

speculations. The notion is itself unfounded, that publicity, and the sense of

being answerable to the public, are of no use unless the public are qualified to

form a sound judgment. It is a very superficial view of the utility of public

opinion to suppose that it does good only when it succeeds in enforcing a

servile conformity to itself. To be under the eyes of others — to have to

defend oneself to others — is never more important than to those who act in

opposition to the opinion of others, for it obliges them to have sure ground of

their own. Nothing has so steadying an influence as working against pressure.

Unless when under the temporary sway of passionate excitement, no one will

do that which he expects to be greatly blamed for, unless from a

preconceived and fixed purpose of his own; which is always evidence of a

thoughtful and deliberate character, and, except in radically bad men,

generally proceeds from sincere and strong personal convictions. Even the

bare fact of having to give an account of their conduct is a powerful

inducement to adhere to conduct of which at least some decent account can

be given. If any one thinks that the mere obligation of preserving decency is

not a very considerable check on the abuse of power, he has never had his

attention called to the conduct of those who do not feel under the necessity of

observing that restraint. Publicity is inappreciable, even when it does no more

than prevent that which can by no possibility be plausibly defended — than

compel deliberation, and force every one to determine, before he acts, what

he shall say if called to account for his actions.

              "But, if not now (it may be said), at least hereafter, when all are fit to

have votes, and when all men and women are admitted to vote in virtue of

their fitness; then there can no longer be danger of class legislation; then theelectors, being the nation, can have no interest apart from the general interest:

even if individuals still vote according to private or class inducements, the

majority will have no such inducement; and as there will then be no non-

electors to whom they ought to be responsible, the effect of the ballot,

excluding none but the sinister influences, will be wholly beneficial.

              "Even in this I do not agree. I cannot think that even if the people

were fit for, and had obtained, universal suffrage, the ballot would be

desirable. First, because it could not, in such circumstances be supposed to be

needful. Let us only conceive the state of things which the hypothesis

implies; a people universally educated, and every grown-up human being

possessed of a vote. If, even when only a small proportion are electors, and

the majority of the population almost uneducated, public opinion is already,

as every one now sees that it is, the ruling power in the last resort; it is a

chimera to suppose that over a community who all read, and who all have

votes, any power could be exercised by landlords and rich people against

their own inclination which it would be at all difficult for them to throw off.

But though the protection of secrecy would then be needless, the control of

publicity would be as needful as ever. The universal observation of mankind

has been very fallacious if the mere fact of being one of the community, and

not being in a position of pronounced contrariety of interest to the public at

large, is enough to ensure the performance of a public duty, without either the

stimulus or the restraint derived from the opinion of our fellow creatures. A

man's own particular share of the public interest, even though he may have no

private interest drawing him in the opposite direction, is not, as a general

rule, found sufficient to make him do his duty to the public without other

external inducements. Neither can it be admitted that even if all had votes

they would give their votes as honestly in secret as in public.

              "The proposition that the electors when they compose the whole of

the community cannot have an interest in voting against the interest of the

community will be found on examination to have more sound than meaning

in it. Though the community as a whole can have (as the terms imply) no

other interest than its collective interest, any or every individual in it may. A

man's interest consists of whatever he takes an interest in. Everybody has as

many different interests as he has feelings; likings or dislikings, either of a

selfish or of a better kind. It cannot be said that any of these, taken by itself,

constitutes 'his interest'; he is a good man or a bad according as he prefersone class of his interests or another. A man who is a tyrant at home will be

apt to sympathise with tyranny (when not exercised over himself): he will be

almost certain not to sympathise with resistance to tyranny. An envious man

will vote against Aristides because he is called the just. A selfish man will

prefer even a trifling individual benefit to his share of the advantage which

his country would derive from a good law; because interests peculiar to

himself are those which the habits of his mind both dispose him to dwell on,

and make him best able to estimate. A great number of the electors will have

two sets of preferences — those on private and those on public grounds. The

last are the only ones which the elector would like to avow. The best side of

their character is that which people are anxious to show, even to those who

are no better than themselves. People will give dishonest or mean votes from

lucre, from malice, from pique, from personal rivalry, even from the interests

or prejudices of class or sect, more readily in secret than in public. And cases

exist — they may come to be more frequent — in which almost the only

restraint upon a majority of knaves consists in their involuntary respect for

the opinion of an honest minority. In such a case as that of the repudiating

States of North America, is there not some check to the unprincipled voter in

the shame of looking an honest man in the face? Since all this good would be

sacrificed by the ballot, even in the circumstances most favourable to it, a

much stronger case is requisite than can now be made out for its necessity

(and the case is continually becoming still weaker) to make its adoption
          8
desirable."

        8
               Thoughts on Parliamentary Reform, 2nd ed. pp 32-36.

              On the other debateable points connected with the mode of voting it

is not necessary to expend so many words. The system of personal

representation, as organised by Mr. Hare, renders necessary the employment

of voting papers. But it appears to me indispensable that the signature of the

elector should be affixed to the paper at a public polling place, or if there be

no such place conveniently accessible, at some office open to all the world,

and in the presence of a responsible public officer. The proposal which has

been thrown out of allowing the voting papers to be filled up at the voter's

own residence, and sent by the post, or called for by a public officer, I should

regard as fatal. The act would be done in the absence of the salutary and the

presence of all the pernicious influences. The briber might, in the shelter of

privacy, behold with his own eyes his bargain fulfilled, and the intimidatorcould see the extorted obedience rendered irrevocably on the spot; while the

beneficent counter-influence of the presence of those who knew the voter's

real sentiments, and the inspiring effect of the sympathy of those of his own
                                        9
party or opinion, would be shut out.

        9
               "This expedient has been recommended, both on the score of

saving expense, and on that of obtaining the votes of many electors who

otherwise would not vote, and who are regarded by the advocates of the plan

as a particularly desirable class of voters. The scheme has been carried into

practice in the election of poor-law guardians, and its success in that instance

is appealed to in favour of adopting it in the more important case of voting

for a member of the Legislature. But the two cases appear to me to differ in

the point on which the benefits of the expedient depend. In a local election

for a special kind of administrative business, which consists mainly in the

dispensation of a public fund, it is an object to prevent the choice from being

exclusively in the hands of those who actively concern themselves about it;

for the public interest which attaches to the election being of a limited kind,

and in most cases not very great in degree, the disposition to make

themselves busy in the matter is apt to be in a great measure confined to

persons who hope to turn their activity to their own private advantage; and it

may be very desirable to render the intervention of other people as little

onerous to them as possible, if only for the purpose of swamping these

private interests. But when the matter in hand is the great business of national

government, in which every one must take an interest who cares for anything

out of himself, or who cares even for himself intelligently, it is much rather

an object to prevent those from voting who are indifferent to the subject, than

to induce them to vote by any other means than that of awakening their

dormant minds. The voter who does not care enough about the election to go

to the poll, is the very man who, if he can vote without that small trouble, will

give his vote to the first person who asks for it, or on the most trifling or

frivolous inducement. A man who does not care whether he votes, is not

likely to care much which way he votes; and he who is in that state of mind

has no moral right to vote at all; since, if he does so, a vote which is not the

expression of a conviction, counts for as much, and goes as far in determining

the result, as one which represents the thoughts and purposes of a life." —

Thoughts, etc., p. 39.

              The polling places should be so numerous as to be within easy reachof every voter; and no expenses of conveyance, at the cost of the candidate,

should be tolerated under any pretext. The infirm, and they only on medical

certificate, should have the right of claiming suitable carriage conveyance, at

the cost of the State, or of the locality. Hustings, poll clerks, and all the

necessary machinery of elections, should be at the public charge. Not only

the candidate should not be required, he should not be permitted, to incur any

but a limited and trifling expense for his election. Mr. Hare thinks it desirable

that a sum of L50 should be required from every one who places his name on

the list of candidates, to prevent persons who have no chance of success, and

no real intention of attempting it, from becoming candidates in wantonness or

from mere love of notoriety, and perhaps carrying off a few votes which are

needed for the return of more serious aspirants. There is one expense which a

candidate or his supporters cannot help incurring, and which it can hardly be

expected that the public should defray for every one who may choose to

demand it; that of making his claims known to the electors, by

advertisements, placards, and circulars. For all necessary expenses of this

kind the L50 proposed by Mr. Hare, if allowed to be drawn upon for these

purposes (it might be made L100 if requisite), ought to be sufficient. If the

friends of the candidate choose to go to expense for committees and

canvassing there are no means of preventing them; but such expenses out of

the candidates's own pocket, or any expenses whatever beyond the deposit of

L50 (or L100), should be illegal and punishable. If there appeared any

likelihood that opinion would refuse to connive at falsehood, a declaration on

oath or honour should be required from every member on taking his seat that

he had not expended, nor would expend, money or money's worth beyond the

L50, directly or indirectly, for the purposes of his election; and if the

assertion were proved to be false or the pledge to have been broken, he

should be liable to the penalties of perjury.

              It is probable that those penalties, by showing that the Legislature

was in earnest, would turn the course of opinion in the same direction, and

would hinder it from regarding, as has hitherto done, this most serious crime

against society as a venial peccadillo. When once this effect has been

produced, there need be no doubt that the declaration on oath or honour
                                  10
would be considered binding. "Opinion tolerates a false disclaimer, only

when it already tolerates the thing disclaimed." This is notoriously the case

with regard to electoral corruption. There has never yet been, among political

men, any real and serious attempt to prevent bribery, because there has beenno real desire that elections should not be costly. Their costliness is an

advantage to those who can afford the expense, by excluding a multitude of

competitors; and anything, however noxious, is cherished as having a

conservative tendency if it limits the access to Parliament to rich men. This is

a rooted feeling among our legislators of both political parties, and is almost

the only point on which I believe them to be really ill-intentioned. They care

comparatively little who votes, as long as they feel assured that none but

persons of their own class can be voted for. They know that they can rely on

the fellow-feeling of one of their class with another, while the subservience

of nouveaux enrichis, who are knocking at the door of the class, is a still surer

reliance; and that nothing very hostile to the class interests or feelings of the

rich need be apprehended under the most democratic suffrage as long as

democratic persons can be prevented from being elected to Parliament. But,

even from their own point of view, this balancing of evil by evil, instead of

combining good with good, is a wretched policy. The object should be to

bring together the best members of both classes, under such a tenure as shall

induce them to lay aside their class preferences, and pursue jointly the path

traced by the common interest; instead of allowing the class feelings of the

Many to have full swing in the constituencies, subject to the impediment of

having to act through persons imbued with the class feelings of the Few.

        10
               Several of the witnesses before the Committee of the House of

Commons in 1860, on the operation of the Corrupt Practices Prevention Act,

some of them of great practical experience in election matters, were

favourable (either absolutely or as a last resort) to the principle of requiring a

declaration from members of Parliament; and were of opinion that, if

supported by penalties, it would be, to a great degree, effectual. (Evidence,

pp. 46, 54-57, 67, 123, 198-202, 208.) The Chief Commissioner of the

Wakefield Inquiry said (in reference certainly to a different proposal), "If

they see that the Legislature is earnest upon the subject, the machinery will

work.... I am quite sure that if some personal stigma were applied upon

conviction of bribery, it would change the current of public opinion" (pp. 26

and 32). A distinguished member of the Committee (and of the present

Cabinet) seemed to think it very objectionable to attach the penalties of

perjury to a merely promissory as distinguished from an assertory oath; but

he was reminded, that the oath taken by a witness in a court of justice is a

promissory oath: and the rejoinder (that the witness's promise relates to an act

to be done at once, while the member's would be a promise for all futuretime) would only be to the purpose, if it could be supposed that the swearer

might forget the obligation he had entered into, or could possibly violate it

unawares: contingencies which, in a case like the present, are out of the

question.

              A more substantial difficulty is that one of the forms most frequently

assumed by election expenditure is that of subscriptions to local charities, or

other local objects; and it would be a strong measure to enact that money

should not be given in charity, within a place, by the member for it. When

such subscriptions are bona fide, the popularity which may be derived from

them is an advantage which it seems hardly possible to deny to superior

riches. But the greatest part of the mischief consists in the fact that money so

contributed is employed in bribery, under the euphemistic name of keeping

up the member's interest. To guard against this, it should be part of the

member's promissory declaration, that all sums expended by him in the place,

or for any purpose connected with it or with any of its inhabitants (with the

exception perhaps of his own hotel expenses), should pass through the hands

of the election auditor, and be by him (and not by the member himself or his

friends) applied to its declared purpose.

              The principle of making all lawful expenses of a charge not upon the

candidate, but upon the locality, was upheld by two of the best witnesses (pp.

20, 65-70, 277).

              There is scarcely any mode in which political institutions are more

morally mischievous-work greater evil through their spirit-than by

representing political functions as a favour to be conferred, a thing which the

depositary is to ask for as desiring it for himself, and even pay for as if it

were designed for his pecuniary benefit. Men are not fond of paying large

sums for leave to perform a laborious duty. Plato had a much juster view of

the conditions of good government when he asserted that the persons who

should be sought out to be invested with political power are those who are

personally most averse to it, and that the only motive which can be relied on

for inducing the fittest men to take upon themselves the toils of government

is the fear of being governed by worse men. What must an elector think,

when he sees three or four gentlemen, none of them previously observed to

be lavish of their money on projects of disinterested beneficence, vying with

one another in the sums they expend to be enabled to write M.P. after their

names? Is it likely he will suppose that it is for his interest they incur all thiscost? And if he form an uncomplimentary opinion of their part in the affair,

what moral obligation is he likely to feel as to his own? Politicians are fond

of treating it as the dream of enthusiasts that the electoral body will ever be

uncorrupt: truly enough, until they are willing to become so themselves: for

the electors, assuredly, will take their moral tone from the candidates. So long

as the elected member, in any shape or manner, pay for his seat, all

endeavours, will fail to make the business of election anything but a selfish

bargain on all sides. "So long as the candidate himself, and the customs of the

world, seem to regard the function of a member of Parliament less as a duty

to be discharged than a personal favour to be solicited, no effort will avail to

implant in an ordinary voter the feeling that the election of a member of

Parliament is also a matter of duty, and that he is not at liberty to bestow his

vote on any other consideration than that of personal fitness."

              The same principle which demands that no payment of money for

election purposes should be either required or tolerated on the part of the

person elected dictates another conclusion, apparently of contrary tendency,

but really directed to the same object. It negatives what has often been

proposed as a means of rendering Parliament accessible to persons of all

ranks and circumstances; the payment of members of Parliament. If, as in

some of our colonies, there are scarcely any fit persons who can afford to

attend to an unpaid occupation, the payment should be an indemnity for loss

of time or money, not a salary. The greater latitude of choice which a salary

would give is an illusory advantage. No remuneration which any one would

think of attaching to the post would attract to it those who were seriously

engaged in other lucrative professions with a prospect of succeeding in them.

The business of a member of Parliament would therefore become an

occupation in itself; carried on, like other professions, with a view chiefly to

its pecuniary returns, and under the demoralising influences of an occupation

essentially precarious. It would become an object of desire to adventurers of a

low class; and 658 persons in possession, with ten or twenty times as many in

expectancy, would be incessantly bidding to attract or retain the suffrages of

the electors, by promising all things, honest or dishonest, possible or

impossible, and rivalling each other in pandering to the meanest feelings and

most ignorant prejudices of the vulgarest part of the crowd. The auction

between Cleon and the sausage-seller in Aristophanes is a fair caricature of

what would be always going on. Such an institution would be a perpetual

blister applied to the most peccant parts of human nature. It amounts tooffering 658 prizes for the most successful flatterer, the most adroit

misleader, of a body of his fellow-countrymen. Under no despotism has there

been such an organised system of tillage for raising a rich crop of vicious
            11
courtiership. When, by reason of pre-eminent qualifications (as may at any

time happen to be the case), it is desirable that a person entirely without

independent means, either derived from property or from a trade or

profession, should be brought into Parliament to render services which no

other person accessible can render as well, there is the resource of a public

subscription; he may be supported while in Parliament, like Andrew Marvell,

by the contributions of his constituents. This mode is unobjectionable for

such an honour will never be paid to mere subserviency: bodies of men do

not care so much for the difference between one sycophant and another as to

go to the expense of his maintenance in order to be flattered by that particular

individual. Such a support will only be given in consideration of striking and

impressive personal qualities, which, though no absolute proof of fitness to

be a national representative, are some presumption of it, and, at all events,

some guarantee for the possession of an independent opinion and will.

        11
               "As Mr. Lorimer remarks, by creating a pecuniary inducement to

persons of the lowest class to devote themselves to public affairs, the calling

of the demagogue would be formally inaugurated. Nothing is more to be

deprecated than making it the private interest of a number of active persons to

urge the form of government in the direction of its natural perversion. The

indications which either a multitude or an individual can give, when merely

left to their own weaknesses, afford but a faint idea of what those weaknesses

would become when played upon by a thousand flatterers. If there were 658

places of certain, however moderate, emolument, to be gained by persuading

the multitude that ignorance is as good as knowledge, and better, it is terrible

odds that they would believe and act upon the lesson." — (Article in Fraser's

Magazine for April 1859, headed "Recent Writers on Reform.")

 

 

                                       Chapter 11

 

 

                        Of the Duration of Parliaments.

 

 

              AFTER HOW long a term should members of Parliament be subject

to re-election? The principles involved are here very obvious; the difficulty

lies in their application. On the one hand, the member ought not to have so

long a tenure of his seat as to make him forget his responsibility, take his

duties easily, conduct them with a view to his own personal advantage, or

neglect those free and public conferences with his constituents which,

whether he agrees or differs with them, are one of the benefits of

representative government. On the other hand, he should have such a term of

office to look forward to as will enable him to be judged, not by a single act,

but by his course of action. It is important that he should have the greatest

latitude of individual opinion and discretion compatible with the popular

control essential to free government; and for this purpose it is necessary that

the control should be exercised, as in any case it is best exercised, after

sufficient time has been given him to show all the qualities he possesses, and

to prove that there is some other way than that of a mere obedient voter and

advocate of their opinions, by which he can render himself in the eyes of his

constituents a desirable and creditable representative.

              It is impossible to fix, by any universal rule, the boundary between

these principles. Where the democratic power in the constitution is weak or

over-passive, and requires stimulation; where the representative, on leaving

his constituents, enters at once into a courtly or aristocratic atmosphere,

whose influences all tend to deflect his course into a different direction from

the popular one, to tone down any democratic feelings which he may have

brought with him, and make him forget the wishes and grow cool to the

interests of those who chose him — the obligation of a frequent return to

them for a renewal of his commission is indispensable to keeping his temper

and character up to the right mark. Even three years, in such circumstances,

are almost too long a period; and any longer term is absolutely inadmissible.Where, on the contrary, democracy is the ascendant power, and still tends to

increase, requiring rather to be moderated in its exercise than encouraged to

any abnormal activity; where unbounded publicity, and an ever-present

newspaper press, give the representative assurance that his every act will be

immediately known, discussed, and judged by his constituents, and that he is

always either gaining or losing ground in the estimation; while by the same

means the influence of their sentiments, and all other democratic influences,

are kept constantly alive and active in his own mind-less than five years

would hardly be a sufficient period to prevent timid subserviency. The

change which has taken place in English politics as to all these features

explains why annual Parliaments, which forty years ago stood prominently in

front of the creed of the more advanced reformers, are so little cared for and

so seldom heard of at present. It deserves consideration that, whether the term

is short or long, during the last year of it the members are in position in which

they would always be if Parliaments were annual: so that if the term were

very brief, there would virtually be annual Parliaments during a great

proportion of all time. As things now are, the period of seven years, though of

unnecessary length, is hardly worth altering for any benefit likely to be

produced; especially since the possibility, always impending, of an earlier

dissolution keeps the motives for standing well with constituents always

before the member's eyes.

              Whatever may be the term most eligible for the duration of the

mandate, it might seem natural that the individual member should vacate his

seat at the expiration of that term from the day of his election, and that there

should be no general renewal of the whole House. A great deal might be said

for this system if there were any practical object in recommending it. But it is

condemned by much stronger reasons than can be alleged in its support. One

is, that there would be no means of promptly getting rid of a majority which

had pursued a course offensive to the nation. The certainty of a general

election after a limited, which would often be a nearly expired, period, and

the possibility of it at any time when the minister either desires it for his own

sake, or thinks that it would make him popular with the country, tend to

prevent that wide divergence between the feelings of the assembly and those

of the constituency, which might subsist indefinitely if the majority of the

House had always several years of their term still to run — if it received new

infusions drop by drop, which would be more likely to assume than to modify

the qualities of the mass they were joined to. It is as essential that the generalsense of the House should accord in the main with that of the nation as is that

distinguished individuals should be forfeiting their seats, to give free

utterance to the most unpopular sentiments. There is another reason, of much

weight, against the gradual and partial renewal of a representative assembly.

It is useful that there should be a periodical general muster of opposing

forces, to gauge the state of the national mind, and ascertain, beyond dispute,

the relative strength of different parties and opinions. This is not done

conclusively by any partial renewal, even where, as in some of the French

constitutions, a large fraction, a fifth or a third, go out at once.

              The reasons for allowing to the executive the power of dissolution

will be considered in a subsequent chapter, relating to the constitution and

functions of the Executive in a representative government.

 

 

                                       Chapter 12

 

 

      Ought Pledges to be Required from Members of Parliament?

 

 

              SHOULD A member of the legislature be bound by the instructions

of his constituents? Should he be the organ of their sentiments, or of his own?

their ambassador to a congress, or their professional agent, empowered not

only to act for them, but to judge for them what ought to be done? These two

theories of the duty of a legislator in a representative government have each

its supporters, and each is the recognised doctrine of some representative

governments. In the Dutch United Provinces, the members of the States

General were mere delegates; and to such a length was the doctrine carried,

that when any important question arose which had not been provided for in

their instructions, they had to refer back to their constituents, exactly as an

ambassador does to the government from which he is accredited. In this and

most other countries which possess representative constitutions, law and

custom warrant a member of Parliament in voting according to his opinion of

right, however different from that of his constituents: but there is a floating

notion of the opposite kind, which has considerable practical operation on

many minds, even of members of Parliament, and often makes them,

independently of desire for popularity, or concern for their re-election, feel

bound in conscience to let their conduct, on questions on which their

constituents have a decided opinion, be the expression of that opinion rather

than of their own. Abstractedly from positive law, and from the historical

traditions of any particular people, which of these notions of the duty of a

representative is the true one?

              Unlike the questions which we have hitherto treated, this is not a

question of constitutional legislation, but of what may more properly be

called constitutional morality — the ethics of representative government. It

does not so much concern institutions, as the temper of mind which the

electors ought to bring to the discharge of their functions; the ideas which

should prevail as to the moral duties of an elector. For let the system ofrepresentation be what it may, it will be converted into one of mere

delegation if the electors so choose. As long as they are free not to vote, and

free to vote as they like, they cannot be prevented from making their vote

depend on any condition they think fit to annex to it. By refusing to elect any

one who will not pledge himself to all their opinions, and even, if they please,

to consult with them before voting on any important subject not foreseen,

they can reduce their representative to their mere mouthpiece, or compel him

in honour, when no longer willing to act in that capacity, to resign his seat.

And since they have the power of doing this, the theory of the Constitution

ought to suppose that they will wish to do it; since the very principle of

constitutional government requires it to be assumed that political power will

be abused to promote the particular purposes of the holder; not because it

always is so, but because such is the natural tendency of things, to guard

against which is the especial use of free institutions. However wrong,

therefore, or however foolish, we may think it in the electors to convert their

representative into a delegate, that stretch of the electoral privilege being a

natural and not improbable one, the same precautions ought to be taken as if

it were certain. We may hope that the electors will not act on this notion of

the use of the suffrage; but a representative government needs to be so

framed that, even if they do, they shall not be able to effect what ought not to

be in the power of any body of persons — class legislation for their own

benefit.

              When it is said that the question is only one of political morality, this

does not extenuate its importance. Questions of constitutional morality are of

no less practical moment than those relating to the constitution itself. The

very existence of some governments, and all that renders others endurable,

rests on the practical observance of doctrines of constitutional morality;

traditional notions in the minds of the several constituted authorities, which

modify the use that might otherwise be made of their powers. In unbalanced

governments — pure monarchy, pure aristocracy, pure democracy — such

maxims are the only barrier which restrains the government from the utmost

excesses in the direction of its characteristic tendency. In imperfectly

balanced governments, where some attempt is made to set constitutional

limits to the impulses of the strongest power, but where that power is strong

enough to overstep them with at least temporary impunity, it is only by

doctrines of constitutional morality, recognised and sustained by opinion, that

any regard at all is preserved for the checks and limitations of theconstitution. In well-balanced governments, in which the supreme power is

divided, and each sharer is protected against the usurpations of the others in

the only manner possible — namely, by being armed for defence with

weapons as strong as the others can wield for attack — the government can

only be carried on by forbearance on all sides to exercise those extreme

powers, unless provoked by conduct equally extreme on the part of some

other sharer of power: and in this case we may truly say that only by the

regard paid to maxims of constitutional morality is the constitution kept in

existence. The question of pledges is not one of those which vitally concern

the existence of representative governments; but it is very material to their

beneficial operation. The laws cannot prescribe to the electors the principles

by which they shall direct their choice; but it makes a great practical

difference by what principles they think they ought to direct it. And the

whole of that great question is involved in the inquiry whether they should

make it a condition that the representative shall adhere to certain opinions

laid down for him by his constituents.

              No reader of this treatise can doubt what conclusion, as to this

matter, results from the general principles which it professes. We have from

the first affirmed, and unveryingly kept in view, the co-equal importance of

two great requisites of government: responsibility to those for whose benefit

political power ought to be, and always professes to be, employed; and

jointly therewith to obtain, in the greatest measure possible, for the function

of government the benefits of superior intellect, trained by long meditation

and practical discipline to that special task. If this second purpose is worth

attaining, it is worth the necessary price. Superior powers of mind and

profound study are of no use if they do not sometimes lead a person to

different conclusions from those which are formed by ordinary powers of

mind without study: and if it be an object to possess representatives in any

intellectual respect superior to average electors, it must be counted upon that

the representative will sometimes differ in opinion from the majority of his

constituents, and that when he does, his opinion will be the oftenest right of

the two. It follows that the electors will not do wisely if they insist on

absolute conformity to their opinions as the condition of his retaining his seat.

              The principle is, thus far, obvious; but there are real difficulties in its

application: and we will begin by stating them in their greatest force. If it is

important that the electors should choose a representative more highlyinstructed than themselves, it is no less necessary that this wiser man should

be responsible to them; in other words, they are the judges of the manner in

which he fulfils his trust: and how are they to judge, except by the standard of

their own opinions? How are they even to select him in the first instance but

by the same standard? It will not do to choose by mere brilliancy — by

superiority of showy talent. The tests by which an ordinary man can judge

beforehand of mere ability are very imperfect: such as they are, they have

almost exclusive reference to the arts of expression, and little or none to the

worth of what is expressed. The latter cannot be inferred from the former; and

if the electors are to put their own opinions in abeyance, what criterion

remains to them of the ability to govern well? Neither, if they could ascertain,

even infallibly, the ablest man, ought they to allow him altogether to judge

for them, without any reference to their own opinions. The ablest candidate

may be a Tory and the electors Liberals; or a Liberal and they may be Tories.

The political questions of the day may be Church questions, and he may be a

High Churchman or a Rationalist, while they may be Dissenters or

Evangelicals; and vice versa. His abilities, in these cases, might only enable

him to go greater lengths, and act with greater effect, in what they may

conscientiously believe to be a wrong course; and they may be bound, by

their sincere convictions, to think it more important that their representative

should be kept, on these points, to what they deem the dictate of duty, than

that they should be represented by a person of more than average abilities.

They may also have to consider, not solely how they can be most ably

represented, but how their particular moral position and mental point of view

shall be represented at all.

              The influence of every mode of thinking which is shared by numbers

ought to be felt in the legislature: and the constitution being supposed to have

made due provision that other and conflicting modes of thinking shall be

represented likewise, to secure the proper representation for their own mode

may be the most important matter which the electors on the particular

occasion have to attend to. In some cases, too, it may be necessary that the

representative should have his hands tied, to keep him true to their interest, or

rather to the public interest as they conceive it. This would not be needful

under a political system which assured them an indefinite choice of honest

and unprejudiced candidates; but under the existing system, in which the

electors are almost always obliged, by the expenses of election and the

general circumstances of society, to select their representative from personsof a station in life widely different from theirs, and having a different class-

interest, who will affirm that they ought to abandon themselves to his

discretion? Can we blame an elector of the poorer classes, who has only the

choice among two or three rich men, for requiring from the one he votes for a

pledge to those measures which he considers as a test of emancipation from

the class-interests of the rich? It moreover always happens to some members

of the electoral body to be obliged to accept the representative selected by a

majority of their own side. But though a candidate of their own choosing

would have no chance, their votes may be necessary to the success of the one

chosen for them; and their only means of exerting their share of influence on

his subsequent conduct, may be to make their support of him dependent on

his pledging himself to certain conditions.

              These considerations and counter-considerations are so intimately

interwoven with one another; it is so important that the electors should

choose as their representatives wiser men than themselves, and should

consent to be governed according to that superior wisdom, while it is

impossible that conformity to their own opinions, when they have opinions,

should not enter largely into, their judgment as to who possesses the wisdom,

and how far its presumed possessor has verified the presumption by his

conduct; that it seems quite impracticable to lay down for the elector any

positive rule of duty: and the result will depend, less on any exact

prescription, or authoritative doctrine of political morality, than on the

general tone of mind of the electoral body, in respect to the important

requisite of deference to mental superiority. Individuals, and peoples, who are

acutely sensible of the value of superior wisdom, are likely to recognise it,

where it exists, by other signs than thinking exactly as they do, and even in

spite of considerable differences of opinion: and when they have recognised

it they will be far too desirous to secure it, at any admissible cost, to be prone

to impose their own opinion as a law upon persons whom they look up to as

wiser than themselves. On the other hand, there is a character of mind which

does not look up to any one; which thinks no other person's opinion much

better than its own, or nearly so good as that of a hundred or a thousand

persons like itself. Where this is the turn of mind of the electors, they will

elect no one who is not or at least who does not profess to be, the image of

their own sentiments, and will continue him no longer than while he reflects

those sentiments in his conduct: and all aspirants to political honours will

endeavour, as Plato says in the "Gorgias," to fashion themselves after themodel of the Demos, and make themselves as like to it as possible. It cannot

be denied that a complete democracy has a strong tendency to cast the

sentiments of the electors in this mould. Democracy is not favourable to the

reverential spirit. That it destroys reverence for mere social position must be

counted among the good, not the bad part of its influences; though by doing

this it closes the principal school of reverence (as to merely human relations)

which exists in society. But also democracy, in its very essence, insists so

much more forcibly on the things in which all are entitled to be considered

equally, than on those in which one person is entitled to more consideration

than another, that respect for even personal superiority is likely to be below

the mark. It is for this, among other reasons, I hold it of so much importance

that the institutions of the country should stamp the opinions of persons of a

more educated class as entitled to greater weight than those of the less

educated: and I should still contend for assigning plurality of votes to

authenticated superiority of education, were it only to give the tone to public

feeling, irrespective of any direct political consequences.

              When there does exist in the electoral body an adequate sense of the

extraordinary difference in value between one person and another, they will

not lack signs by which to distinguish the persons whose worth for their

purposes is the greatest. Actual public services will naturally be the foremost

indication: to have filled posts of magnitude, and done important things in

them, of which the wisdom has been justified by the results; to have been the

author of measures which appear from their effects to have been wisely

planned; to have made predictions which have been of verified by the event,

seldom or never falsified by it; to have given advice, which when taken has

been followed by good consequences, when neglected, by bad. There is

doubtless a large portion of uncertainty in these signs of wisdom; but we are

seeking for such as can be applied by persons of ordinary discernment. They

will do well not to rely much on any one indication, unless corroborated by

the rest; and, in their estimation of the success or merit of any practical effort,

to lay great stress on the general opinion of disinterested persons conversant

with the subject matter. The tests which I have spoken of are only applicable

to tried men; among whom must be reckoned those who, though untried

practically, have been tried speculatively; who, in public speech or in print,

have discussed public affairs in a manner which proves that they have given

serious study to them. Such persons may, in the mere character of political

thinkers, have exhibited a considerable amount of the same titles toconfidence as those who have been proved in the position of practical

statesmen. When it is necessary to choose persons wholly untried, the best

criteria are, reputation for ability among those who personally know them,

and the confidence placed and recommendations given by persons already

looked up to. By tests like these, constituencies who sufficiently value mental

ability, and eagerly seek for it, will generally succeed in obtaining men

beyond mediocrity, and often men whom they can trust to carry on public

affairs according to their unfettered judgment; to whom it would be an affront

to require that they should give up that judgment at the behest of their

inferiors in knowledge.

              If such persons, honestly sought, are not to be found, then indeed the

electors are justified in taking other precautions; for they cannot be expected

to postpone their particular opinions, unless in order that they may be served

by a person of superior knowledge to their own. They would do well, indeed,

even then, to remember, that when once chosen, the representative, if he

devotes himself to his duty, has greater opportunities of correcting an original

false judgment than fall to the lot of most of his constituents; a consideration

which generally ought to prevent them (unless compelled by necessity to

choose some one whose impartiality they do not fully trust) from exacting a

pledge not to change his opinion, or, if he does, to resign his seat. But when

an unknown person, not certified in unmistakable terms by some high

authority, is elected for the first time, the elector cannot be expected not to

make conformity to his own sentiments the primary requisite. It is enough if

he does not regard a subsequent change of those sentiments, honestly

avowed, with its grounds undisguisedly stated, as a peremptory reason for

withdrawing his confidence.

              Even supposing the most tried ability and acknowledged eminence

of character in the representative, the private opinions of the electors are not

to be placed entirely in abeyance. Deference to mental superiority is not to go

the length of self-annihilation — abnegation of any personal opinion. But

when the difference does not relate to the fundamentals of politics, however

decided the elector may be in his own sentiments, he ought to consider that

when an able man differs from him there is at least a considerable chance of

his being in the wrong, and that even if otherwise, it is worth while to give up

his opinion in things not absolutely essential, for the sake of the inestimable

advantage of having an able man to act for him in the many matters in whichhe himself is not qualified to form a judgment. In such cases he often

endeavours to reconcile both wishes, by inducing the able man to sacrifice his

own opinion on the points of difference: but, for the able man to lend himself

to this compromise, is treason against his especial office; abdication of the

peculiar duties of mental superiority, of which it is one of the most sacred not

to desert the cause which has the clamour against it, nor to deprive of his

services those of his opinions which need them the most. A man of

conscience and known ability should insist on full freedom to act as he in his

own judgment deems best; and should not consent to serve on any other

terms. But the electors are entitled to know how he means to act; what

opinions, on all things which concern his public duty, he intends should guide

his conduct. If some of these are unacceptable to them, it is for him to satisfy

them that he nevertheless deserves to be their representative; and if they are

wise, they will overlook, in favour of his general value, many and great

differences between his opinions and their own.

              There are some differences, however, which they cannot be expected

to overlook. Whoever feels the amount of interest in the government of his

country which befits a freeman, has some convictions on national affairs

which are like his life-blood; which the strength of his belief in their truth,

together with the importance he attaches to them, forbid him to make a

subject of compromise, or postpone to the judgment of any person, however

greatly his superior. Such convictions, when they exist in a people, or in any

appreciable portion of one, are entitled to influence in virtue of their mere

existence, and not solely in that of the probability of their being grounded in

truth. A people cannot be well governed in opposition to their primary

notions of right, even though these may be in some points erroneous. A

correct estimate of the relation which should subsist between governors and

governed, does not require the electors to consent to be represented by one

who intends to govern them in opposition to their fundamental convictions. If

they avail themselves of his capacities of useful service in other respects, at a

time when the points on which he is vitally at issue with them are not likely

to be mooted, they are justified in dismissing him at the first moment when a

question arises involving these, and on which there is not so assured a

majority for what they deem right as to make the dissenting voice of that

particular individual unimportant. Thus (I mention names to illustrate my

meaning, not for any personal application) the opinions supposed to be

entertained by Mr. Cobden and Mr. Bright on resistance to foreign aggressionmight be overlooked during the Crimean war, when there was an

overwhelming national feeling on the contrary side, and might yet very

properly lead to their rejection by the electors at the time of the Chinese

quarrel (though in itself a more doubtful question), because it was then for

some time a moot point whether their view of the case might not prevail.

              As the general result of what precedes, we may affirm that actual

pledges should not be required, unless, from unfavourable social

circumstances or faulty institutions, the electors are so narrowed in their

choice as to be compelled to fix it on a person presumptively under the

influence of partialities hostile to their interest: That they are entitled to a full

knowledge of the political opinions and sentiments of the candidate; and not

only entitled, but often bound, to reject one who differs from themselves on

the few articles which are the foundation of their political belief: That in

proportion to the opinion they entertain of the mental superiority of a

candidate, they ought to put up with his expressing and acting on opinions

different from theirs on any number of things not included in their

fundamental articles of belief: That they ought to be unremitting in their

search for a representative of such calibre as to be entrusted with full power

of obeying the dictates of his own judgment: That they should consider it a

duty which they owe to their fellow-countrymen, to do their utmost towards

placing men of this quality in the legislature: and that it is of much greater

importance to themselves to be represented by such a man than by one who

professes agreement in a greater number of their opinions: for the benefits of

his ability are certain, while the hypothesis of his being wrong and their being

right on the points of difference is a very doubtful one.

              I have discussed this question on the assumption that the electoral

system, in all that depends on positive institution, conforms to the principles

laid down in the preceding chapters. Even on this hypothesis, the delegation

theory of representation seems to me false, and its practical operation hurtful,

though the mischief would in that case be confined within certain bounds.

But if the securities by which I have endeavoured to guard the representative

principle are not recognised by the Constitution; if provision is not made for

the representation of minorities, nor any difference admitted in the numerical

value of votes, according to some criterion of the amount of education

possessed by the voters; in that case no words can exaggerate the importance

in principle of leaving an unfettered discretion to the representative; for itwould then be the only chance, under universal suffrage, for any other

opinions than those of the majority to be heard in Parliament. In that falsely

called democracy which is really the exclusive rule of the operative classes,

all others being unrepresented and unheard, the only escape from class

legislation in its narrowest, and political ignorance in its most dangerous,

form, would lie in such disposition as the uneducated might have to choose

educated representatives, and to defer to their opinions. Some willingness to

do this might reasonably be expected, and everything would depend upon

cultivating it to the highest point. But, once invested with political

omnipotence, if the operative classes voluntarily concurred in imposing in

this or any other manner any considerable limitation upon their self-opinion

and self-will, they would prove themselves wiser than any class, possessed of

absolute power, has shown itself, or, we may venture to say, is ever likely to

show itself, under that corrupting influence.

 

 

                                       Chapter 13

 

 

                              Of a Second Chamber.

 

 

              OF ALL topics relating to the theory of representative government,

none has been the subject of more discussion, especially on the Continent,

than what is known as the question of the Two Chambers. It has occupied a

greater amount of the attention of thinkers than many questions of ten times

its importance, and has been regarded as a sort of touchstone which

distinguishes the partisans of limited from those of uncontrolled democracy.

For my own part, I set little value on any check which a Second Chamber can

apply to a democracy otherwise unchecked; and I am inclined to think that if

all other constitutional questions are rightly decided, it is but of secondary

importance whether the Parliament consists of two Chambers, or only of one.

              If there are two Chambers, they may either be of similar, or of

dissimilar composition. If of similar, both will obey the same influences, and

whatever has a majority in one of the Houses will be likely to have it in the

other. It is true that the necessity of obtaining the consent of both to the

passing of any measure may at times be a material obstacle to improvement,

since, assuming both the Houses to be representative, and equal in their

numbers, a number slightly exceeding a fourth of the entire representation

may prevent the passing of a Bill; while, if there is but one House, a Bill is

secure of passing if it has a bare majority. But the case supposed is rather

abstractedly possible than likely to occur in practice. It will not often happen

that of two Houses similarly composed, one will be almost unanimous, and

the other nearly equally divided: if a majority in one rejects a measure, there

will generally have been a large minority unfavourable to it in the other; any

improvement, therefore, which could be thus impeded, would in almost all

cases be one which had not much more than a simple majority in the entire

body, and the worst consequence that could ensue would be to delay for a

short time the passing of the measure, or give rise to a fresh appeal to the

electors to ascertain if the small majority in Parliament corresponded to aneffective one in the country. The inconvenience of delay, and the advantages

of the appeal to the nation, might be regarded in this case as about equally

balanced.

              I attach little weight to the argument oftenest urged for having two

Chambers — to prevent precipitancy, and compel a second deliberation; for it

must be a very ill-constituted representative assembly in which the

established forms of business do not require many more than two

deliberations. The consideration which tells most, in my judgment, in favour

of two Chambers (and this I do regard as of some moment) is the evil effect

produced upon the mind of any holder of power, whether an individual or an

assembly, by the consciousness of having only themselves to consult. It is

important that no set of persons should, in great affairs, be able, even

temporarily, to make their sic volo prevail without asking any one else for his

consent. A majority in a single assembly, when it has assumed a permanent

character — when composed of the same persons habitually acting together,

and always assured of victory in their own House — easily becomes despotic

and overweening, if released from the necessity of considering whether its

acts will be concurred in by another constituted authority. The same reason

which induced the Romans to have two consuls makes it desirable there

should be two Chambers: that neither of them may be exposed to the

corrupting influence of undivided power, even for the space of a single year.

One of the most indispensable requisites in the practical conduct of politics,

especially in the management of free institutions, is conciliation: a readiness

to compromise; a willingness to concede something to opponents, and to

shape good measures so as to be as little offensive as possible to persons of

opposite views; and of this salutary habit, the mutual give and take (as it has

been called) between two Houses is a perpetual school; useful as such even

now, and its utility would probably be even more felt in a more democratic

constitution of the Legislature.

              But the Houses need not both be of the same composition; they may

be intended as a check on one another. One being supposed democratic, the

other will naturally be constituted with a view to its being some restraint

upon the democracy. But its efficacy in this respect wholly depends on the

social support which it can command outside the House. An assembly which

does not rest on the basis of some great power in the country is ineffectual

against one which does. An aristocratic House is only powerful in anaristocratic state of society. The House of Lords was once the strongest

power in our Constitution, and the Commons only a checking body: but this

was when the Barons were almost the only power out of doors. I cannot

believe that, in a really democratic state of society, the House of Lords would

be of any practical value as a moderator of democracy. When the force on

one side is feeble in comparison with that on the other, the way to give it

effect is not to draw both out in line, and muster their strength in open field

over against one another. Such tactics would ensure the utter defeat of the

less powerful. It can only act to advantage by not holding itself apart, and

compelling every one to declare himself either with or against it, but taking a

position among, rather than in opposition to, the crowd, and drawing to itself

the elements most capable of allying themselves with it on any given point;

not appearing at all as an antagonist body, to provoke a general rally against

it, but working as one of the elements in a mixed mass, infusing its leaven,

and often making what would be the weaker part the stronger, by the addition

of its influence. The really moderating power in a democratic constitution

must act in and through the democratic House.

              That there should be, in every polity, a centre of resistance to the

predominant power in the Constitution — and in a democratic constitution,

therefore, a nucleus of resistance to the democracy — I have already

maintained; and I regard it as a fundamental maxim of government. If any

people, who possess a democratic representation, are, from their historical

antecedents, more willing to tolerate such a centre of resistance in the form of

a Second Chamber or House of Lords than in any other shape, this constitutes

a stronger reason for having it in that shape. But it does not appear to me the

best shape in itself, nor by any means the most efficacious for its object. If

there are two Houses, one considered to represent the people, the other to

represent only a class, or not to be representative at all, I cannot think that

where democracy is the ruling power in society the Second House would

have any real ability to resist even the aberrations of the first. It might be

suffered to exist in deference to habit and association, but not as an effective

check. If it exercised an independent will, it would be required to do so in the

same general spirit as the other House; to be equally democratic with it, and

to content itself with correcting the accidental oversights of the more popular

branch of the legislature, or competing with it in popular measures.

              The practicability of any real check to the ascendancy of themajority depends henceforth on the distribution of strength in the most

popular branch of the governing body; and I have indicated the mode in

which, to the best of my judgment, a balance of forces might most

advantageously be established there. I have also pointed out, that even if the

numerical majority were allowed to exercise complete predominance by

means of a corresponding majority in Parliament, yet if minorities also are

permitted to enjoy the equal right due to them on strictly democratic

principles, of being represented proportionally to their numbers, this

provision will ensure the perpetual presence in the House by the same

popular title as its other members, of so many of the first intellects in the

country, that without being in any way banded apart, or invested with any

invidious prerogative, this portion of the national representation will have a

personal weight much more than in proportion to its numerical strength, and

will afford, in a most effective form, the moral centre of resistance which is

needed. A Second Chamber, therefore, is not required for this purpose, and

would not contribute to it, but might even, in some conceivable modes

impede its attainment. If, however, for the other reasons already mentioned,

the decision were taken that there should be such a Chamber, it is desirable

that it should be composed of elements which, without being open to the

imputation of class interests adverse to the majority, would incline it to

oppose itself to the class interests of the majority, and qualify it to raise its

voice with authority against their errors and weaknesses. These conditions

evidently are not found in a body constituted in the manner of our House of

Lords. So soon as conventional rank and individual riches no longer overawe

the democracy, a House of Lords becomes insignificant.

              Of all principles on which a wisely conservative body, destined to

moderate and regulate democratic ascendancy, could possibly be constructed,

the best seems to be that exemplified in the Roman Senate, itself the most

consistently prudent and sagacious body that ever administered public affairs.

The deficiencies of a democratic assembly, which represents the general

public, are the deficiencies of the public itself, want of special training and

knowledge. The appropriate corrective is to associate with it a body of which

special training and knowledge should be the characteristics. If one House

represents popular feeling, the other should represent personal merit, tested

and guaranteed by actual public service, and fortified by practical experience.

If one is the People's Chamber, the other should be the Chamber of

Statesmen; a council composed of all living public men who have passedthrough important political offices or employments. Such a Chamber would

be fitted for much more than to be a merely moderating body. It would not be

exclusively a check, but also an impelling force. In its hands the power of

holding the people back would be vested in those most competent, and who

would generally be most inclined, to lead them forward in any right course.

The council to whom the task would be entrusted of rectifying the people's

mistakes would not represent a class believed to be opposed to their interest,

but would consist of their own natural leaders in the path of progress. No

mode of composition could approach to this in giving weight and efficacy to

their function of moderators. It would be impossible to cry down a body

always foremost in promoting improvements as a mere obstructive body,

whatever amount of mischief it might obstruct.

              Were the place vacant in England for such a Senate (I need scarcely

say that this is a mere hypothesis), it might be composed of some such

elements as the following. All who were or had been members of the

Legislative Commission described in a former chapter, and which I regard as

an indispensable ingredient in a well-constituted popular government. All

who were or had been Chief justices, or heads of any of the superior courts of

law or equity. All who had for five years filled the office of puisne judge. All

who had held for two years any Cabinet office: but these should also be

eligible to the House of Commons, and if elected members of it, their peerage

or senatorial office should be held in suspense. The condition of time is

needed to prevent persons from being named Cabinet Ministers merely to

give them a seat in the Senate; and the period of two years is suggested, that

the same term which qualifies them for a pension might entitle them to a

senatorship. All who had filled the office of Commander-in-Chief; and all

who, having commanded an army or a fleet, had been thanked by Parliament

for military or naval successes. All who had held, during ten years, first-class

diplomatic appointments. All who had been Governors-General of India or

British America, and all who had held for ten years any Colonial

Governorships. The permanent civil service should also be represented; all

should be senators who had filled, during ten years, the important offices of

Under-Secretary to the Treasury, permanent Under-Secretary of State, or any

others equally high and responsible. If, along with the persons thus qualified

by practical experience in the administration of public affairs, any

representation of the speculative class were to be included — a thing in itself

desirable — it would be worth consideration whether certain professorships,in certain national institutions, after a tenure of a few years, might confer a

seat in the Senate. Mere scientific and literary eminence are too indefinite and

disputable: they imply a power of selection, whereas the other qualifications

speak for themselves; if the writings by which reputation has been gained are

unconnected with politics, they are no evidence of the special qualities

required, while if political, they would enable successive Ministries to deluge

the House with party tools.

              The historical antecedents of England render it all but certain that,

unless in the improbable case of a violent subversion of the existing

Constitution, any Second Chamber which could possibly exist would have to

be built on the foundation of the House of Lords. It is out of the question to

think practically of abolishing that assembly, to replace it by such a Senate as

I have sketched, or by any other; but there might not be the same insuperable

difficulty in aggregating the classes or categories just spoken of to the

existing body, in the character of Peers for life. An ulterior, and perhaps, on

this supposition, a necessary step, might be, that the hereditary Peerage

should be present in the House by their representatives instead of personally:

a practice already established in the case of the Scotch and Irish Peers, and

which the mere multiplication of the order will probably at some time or

other render inevitable. An easy adaptation of Mr. Hare's plan would prevent

the representative Peers from representing exclusively the party which has the

majority in the Peerage. If, for example, one representative were allowed for

every ten Peers, any ten might be admitted to choose a representative, and the

Peers might be free to group themselves for that purpose as they pleased. The

election might be thus conducted: All Peers who were candidates for the

representation of their order should be required to declare themselves such,

and enter their names in a list. A day and place should be appointed at which

Peers desirous of voting should be present, either in person, or, in the usual

parliamentary manner, by their proxies. The votes should be taken, each Peer

voting for only one. Every candidate who had as many as ten votes should be

declared elected. If any one had more, all but ten should be allowed to

withdraw their votes, or ten of the number should be selected by lot. These

ten would form his constituency, and the remainder of his voters would be set

free to give their votes over again for some one else. This process should be

repeated until (so far as possible) every Peer present either personally or by

proxy was represented. When a number less than ten remained over, if

amounting to five they might still be allowed to agree on a representative; iffewer than five, their votes must be lost, or they might be permitted to record

them in favour of somebody already elected. With this inconsiderable

exception, every representative Peer would represent ten members of the

Peerage, all of whom had not only voted for him, but selected him as the one,

among all open to their choice, by whom they were most desirous to be

represented. As a compensation to the Peers who were not chosen

representatives of their order, they should be eligible to the House of

Commons; a justice now refused to Scotch Peers, and to Irish Peers in their

own part of the kingdom, while the representation in the House of Lords of

any but the most numerous party in the Peerage is denied equally to both.

              The mode of composing a Senate, which has been here advocated,

not only seems the best in itself, but is that for which historical precedent,

and actual brilliant success, can to the greatest extent be pleaded. It is not,

however, the only feasible plan that might be proposed. Another possible

mode of forming a Second Chamber would be to have it elected by the First;

subject to the restriction that they should not nominate any of their own

members. Such an assembly, emanating like the American Senate from

popular choice, only once removed, would not be considered to clash with

democratic institutions, and would probably acquire considerable popular

influence. From the mode of its nomination it would be peculiarly unlikely to

excite the jealousy of, to come into hostile collision with, the popular House.

It would, moreover (due provision being made for the representation of the

minority), be almost sure to be well composed, and to comprise many of that

class of highly capable men, who, either from accident or for want of showy

qualities, had been unwilling to seek, or unable to obtain, the suffrages of a

popular constituency.

              The best constitution of a Second Chamber is that which embodies

the greatest number of elements exempt from the class interests and

prejudices of the majority, but having in themselves nothing offensive to

democratic feeling. I repeat, however, that the main reliance for tempering

the ascendancy of the majority can be placed in a Second Chamber of any

kind. The character of a representative government is fixed by the

constitution of the popular House. Compared with this, all other questions

relating to the form of government are insignificant.

  

 