England. We shall export less cloth, and import more linen, till the

equilibrium is restored. It thus appears (what is at first sight somewhat

remarkable) that by taxing her exports, England would, in some conceivable

circumstances, not only gain from her foreign customers the whole amount of

the tax, but would also get her imports cheaper. She would get them cheaper

in two ways; for she would obtain them for less money, and would have more

money to purchase them with. Germany, on the other hand, would suffer

doubly: she would have to pay for her cloth a price increased not only by the

duty, but by the influx of money into England, while the same change in the

distribution of the circulating medium would leave her less money to

purchase it with.

              ‘This, however, is only one of three possible cases. If, after the

imposition of the duty, Germany requires so diminished a quantity of cloth,

that its total value is exactly the same as before, the balance of trade would be

undisturbed; England will gain the duty, Germany will lose it, and nothing

more. If, again, the imposition of the duty occasions such a falling off in the

demand that Germany requires a less pecuniary value than before, our

exports will no longer pay for our imports; money must pass from England

into Germany; and Germany’s share of the advantage of the trade will be

increased. By the change in the distribution of money, cloth will fall in

England; and therefore it will, of course, fall in Germany — Thus Germany

will not pay the whole of the tax. From the same cause, linen will rise in

Germany, and consequently in England. When this alteration of prices has so

adjusted the demand, that the cloth and the linen again pay for one another,

the result is that Germany has paid only a part of the tax, and the remainder

of what has been received into our treasury has come indirectly out of the

pockets of our own consumers of linen, who pay a higher price for that

imported commodity in consequence of the tax on our exports, while at the

same time they, in consequence of the efflux of money and the fall of prices,

have smaller money incomes wherewith to pay for the linen at that advanced

price.

              ‘It is not an impossible supposition that by taxing our exports we

might not only gain nothing from the foreigner, the tax being paid out of our

own pockets, but might even compel our own people to pay a second tax to

the foreigner. Suppose, as before, that the demand of Germany for cloth falls

off so much on the imposition of the duty, that she requires a smaller moneyvalue than before, but that the case is so different with linen in England, that

when the price rises the demand either does not fall off at all, or so little that

the money value required is greater than before. The first effect of laying on

the duty is, as before, that the cloth exported will no longer pay for the linen

imported. Money will therefore flow out of England into Germany. One

effect is to raise the price of linen in Germany, and consequently in England.

But this, by the supposition, instead of stopping the efflux of money, only

makes it greater, because the higher the price, the greater the money value of

the linen consumed. The balance, therefore, can only be restored by the other

effect, which is going on at the same time, namely, the fall of cloth in the

English and consequently in the German market. Even when cloth has fallen

so low that its price with the duty is only equal to what its price without the

duty was at first, it is not a necessary consequence that the fall will stop; for

the same amount of exportation as before will not now suffice to pay the

increased money value of the imports; and although the German consumers

have now not only cloth at the old price, but likewise increased money

incomes, it is not certain that they will be inclined to employ the increase of

their incomes in increasing their purchases of cloth. The price of cloth,

therefore, must perhaps fall, to restore the equilibrium, more than the whole

amount of the duty; Germany may be enabled to import cloth at a lower price

when it is taxed, than when it was untaxed: and this gain she will acquire at

the expense of the English consumers of linen, who, in addition, will be the

real payers of the whole of what is received at their own custom-house under

the name of duties on the export of cloth.’

              It is almost unnecessary to remark that cloth and linen are here

merely representatives of exports and imports in general; and that the effect

which a tax on exports might have in increasing the costs of imports, would

affect the imports from all countries, and not peculiarly the articles which

might be imported from the particular country to which the taxed exports

were sent.

              ‘Such are the extremely various effects which may result to

ourselves and to our customers from the imposition of taxes on our exports;

and the determining circumstances are of a nature so imperfectly

ascertainable, that it must be almost impossible to decide with any certainty,

even after the tax has been imposed, whether we have been gainers by it or

losers.’ In general however there could be little doubt that a country whichimposed such taxes would succeed in making foreign countries contribute

something to its revenue; but unless the taxed article be one for which their

demand is extremely urgent, they will seldom pay the whole of the amount
                          254
which the tax brings in. ‘In any case, whatever we gain is lost by somebody

else, and there is the expense of the collection besides: if international

morality, therefore, were rightly understood and acted upon, such taxes, as

being contrary to the universal weal, would not exist.’

              Thus far of duties on exports. We now proceed to the more ordinary

case of duties on imports. ‘We have had an example of a tax on exports, that

is, on foreigners, falling in part on ourselves. We shall therefore not be

surprised if we find a tax on imports, that is, on ourselves, partly falling upon

foreigners.

              ‘Instead of taxing the cloth which we export, suppose that we tax the

linen which we import. The duty which we are now supposing must not be

what is termed a protecting duty, that is, a duty sufficiently high to induce us

to produce the article at home. If it had this effect, it would destroy entirely

the trade both in cloth and in linen, and both countries would lose the whole

of the advantage which they previously gained by exchanging those

commodities with one another. We suppose a duty which might diminish the

consumption of the article, but which would not prevent us from continuing

to import, as before, whatever linen we did consume.

              ‘The equilibrium of trade would be disturbed if the imposition of the

tax diminished, in the slightest degree, the quantity of linen consumed. For,

as the tax is levied at our own custom-house, the German exporter only

receives the same price as formerly, though the English consumer pays a

higher one. If, therefore, there be any diminution of the quantity bought,

although a larger sum of money may be actually laid out in the article, a

smaller one will be due from England to Germany: this sum will no longer be

an equivalent for the sum due from Germany to England for cloth, the

balance therefore must be paid in money. Prices will fall in Germany and rise

in England; linen will fall in the German market; cloth will rise in the

English. The Germans will pay a higher price for cloth, and will have smaller

money incomes to buy it with; while the English will obtain linen cheaper,

that is, its price will exceed what it previously was by less than the amount of

the duty, while their means of purchasing it will be increased by the increase

of their money incomes.              ‘If the imposition of the tax does not diminish the demand, it will

leave the trade exactly as it was before. We shall import as much, and export

as much; the whole of the tax will be paid out of our own pockets.

              ‘But the imposition of a tax on a commodity almost always

diminishes the demand more or less; and it can never, or scarcely ever,

increase the demand. It may, therefore, be laid down as a principle, that a tax

on imported commodities, when it really operates as a tax, and not as a

prohibition either total or partial, almost always falls in part upon the

foreigners who consume our goods; and that this is a mode in which a nation

may appropriate to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a larger share than

would otherwise belong to it of the increase in the general productiveness of

the labour and capital of the world, which results from the interchange of

commodities among nations.’

              Those are, therefore, in the right who maintain that taxes on imports

are partly paid by foreigners; but they are mistaken when they say, that is is

by the foreign producer. It is not on the person from whom we buy, but on all

those who buy from us, that a portion of our custom-duties spontaneously

falls. It is the foreign consumer of our exported commodities, who is obliged

to pay a higher price for them because we maintain revenue duties on foreign

goods.

              There are but two cases in which duties on commodities can in any

degree, or in any manner, fall on the producer. One is, when the article is a

strict monopoly, and at a scarcity price. The price in this case being only

limited by the desires of the buyer; the sum obtained from the restricted

supply being the utmost which the buyers would consent to give rather than

go without it; if the treasury intercepts a part of this, the price cannot be

further raised to compensate for the tax, and it must be paid from the

monopoly profits. A tax on rare and high-priced wines will fall wholly on the

growers, or rather, on the owners of the vineyards. The second case in which

the producer sometimes bears a portion of the tax, is more important: the case

of duties on the produce of land or of mines. These might be so high as to

diminish materially the demand for the produce, and compel the

abandonment of some of the inferior qualities of land or mines. Supposing

this to be the effect, the consumers, both in the country itself and in those

which dealt with it, would obtain the produce at smaller cost; and a part only,

instead of the whole, of the duty would fall on the purchaser, who would beindemnified chiefly at the expense of the landowners or mine-owners in the

producing country.

              Duties on importation may, then, be divided ‘into two classes: those

which have the effect of encouraging some particular branch of domestic

industry, and those which have not. The former are purely mischievous, both

to the country imposing them, and to those with whom it trades. They prevent

a saving of labour and capital, which, if permitted to be made, would be

divided in some proportion or other between the importing country and the

countries which buy what that country does or might export.

              ‘The other class of duties are those which do not encourage one

mode of procuring an article at the expense of another, but allow interchange

to take place just as if the duty did not exist, and to produce the saving of

labour which constitutes the motive to international, as to all other commerce.

Of this kind are duties on the importation of any commodity which could not

by any possibility be produced at home; and duties not sufficiently high to

counterbalance the difference of expense between the production of the

article at home and its importation. Of the money which is brought into the

treasury of any country by taxes of this last description, a part only is paid by

the people of that country; the remainder by the foreign consumers of their

goods.

              ‘Nevertheless, this latter kind of taxes are in principle as ineligible as

the former, though not precisely on the same ground. A protecting duty can

never be a cause of gain, but always and necessarily of loss, to the country

imposing it, just so far as it is efficacious to its end. A non-protecting duty,

on the contrary, would in most cases be a source of gain to the country

imposing it, in so far as throwing part of the weight of its taxes upon other

people is a gain; but it would be a means which it could seldom be advisable

to adopt, being so easily counteracted by a precisely similar proceeding on

the other side.

              ‘If England, in the case already supposed, sought to obtain for

herself more than her natural share of the advantage of the trade with

Germany, by imposing a duty upon linen, Germany would only have to

impose a duty upon cloth, sufficient to diminish the demand for that article

about as much as the demand for linen had been diminished in England by

the tax. Things would then be as before, and each country would pay its owntax. Unless, indeed, the sum of the two duties exceeded the entire advantage

of the trade; for in that case the trade, and its advantage, would cease entirely.

‘There would be no advantage, therefore, in imposing duties of this kind,

with a view to gain by them in the manner which has been pointed out. But

when any part of the revenue is derived from taxes on commodities, these

may often be as little objectionable as the rest. It is evident, too, that

considerations of reciprocity, which are quite unessential when the matter in

debate is a protecting duty, are of material importance when the repeal of

duties of this other description is discussed. A country cannot be expected to

renounce the power of taxing foreigners, unless foreigners will in return

practise towards itself the same forbearance. The only mode in which a

country can save itself from being a loser by the revenue duties imposed by

other countries on its commodities, is to impose corresponding revenue duties

on theirs. Only it must take care that those duties be not so high as to exceed

all that remains of the advantage of the trade, and put an end to importation

altogether, causing the article to be either produced at home, or imported

from another and a dearer market.’

        244
               It is true, this does not constitute, as at first sight it appears to do,

a case of taking more out of the pockets of the people than the state receives;

since if the state needs the advance, and gets it in this manner, it can dispense

with an equivalent amount of borrowing in stock or exchequer bills. But it is

more economical that the necessities of the state should be supplied from the

disposable capital in the hands of the lending class, than by an artificial

addition to the expenses of one or several classes of producers or dealers.

        245
               Probably the strongest known instance of a large revenue raised

from foreigners by a tax on exports, is the opium trade with China. The high

price of the article under the Government monopoly (which is equivalent to a

high export duty) has so little effect in discouraging its consumption, that it is

said to have been occasionally sold in China for as much as its weight in

silver.

 

 

                         Chapter 5 – Of Some Other Taxes

 

 

              1. Besides direct taxes on income, and taxes on consumption, the

financial systems of most countries comprise a variety of miscellaneous

imposts, not strictly included in either class. The modern European systems

retain many such taxes, though in much less number and variety than those

semi-barbarous governments which European influence has not yet reached.

In some of these, scarcely any incident of life has escaped being made an

excuse for some fiscal exaction; hardly any act, not belonging to daily

routine, can be performed by any one, without obtaining leave from some

agent of government, which is only granted in consideration of a payment:

especially when the act requires the aid or the peculiar guarantee of a public

authority. In the present treatise we may confine our attention to such taxes as

lately existed, or still exist, in countries usually classed as civilized.

              In almost all nations a considerable revenue is drawn from taxes on

contracts. These are imposed in various forms. One expedient is that of

taxing the legal instrument which serves as evidence of the contract, and

which is commonly the only evidence legally admissible. In England,

scarcely any contract is binding unless executed on stamped paper, which has

paid a tax to government; and until very lately, when the contract related to

property the tax was proportionally much heavier on the smaller than on the

larger transactions; which is still true of some of those taxes. There are also

stamp-duties on the legal instruments which are evidence of the fulfilment of

contracts; such as acknowledgments of receipt, and deeds of release. Taxes

on contracts are not always levied by means of stamps. The duty on sales by

auction, abrogated by Sir Robert Peel, was an instance in point. The taxes on

transfers of landed property, in France, are another: in England there are

stamp-duties. In some countries, contracts of many kinds are not valid unless

registered, and their registration is made an occasion for a tax.

              Of taxes on contracts, the most important are those on the transfer of

property; chiefly on purchases and sales. Taxes on the sale of consumable

commodities are simply taxes on those commodities. If they affect only some

particular commodities, they raise the prices of those commodities, and are

paid by the consumer. If the attempt were made to tax all purchases and sales,which, however absurd, was for centuries the law of Spain, the tax, if it could

be enforced, would be equivalent to a tax on all commodities, and would not

affect prices: if levied from the sellers, it would be a tax on profits, if from

the buyers, a tax on consumption; and neither class could throw the burthen

upon the other. If confined to some one mode of sale, as for example by

auction, it discourages recourse to that mode, and if of any material amount,

prevents it from being adopted at all, unless in a case of emergency; in which

case as the seller is under a necessity to sell, but the buyer under no necessity

to buy, the tax falls on the seller; and this was the strongest of the objections

to the auction duty: it almost always fell on a necessitous person, and in the

crisis of his necessities.

              Taxes on the purchase and sale of land are, in most countries, liable

to the same objection. Landed property in old countries is seldom parted

with, except from reduced circumstances, or some urgent need: the seller,

therefore, must take what he can get, while the buyer, whose object is an

investment, makes his calculations on the interest which he can obtain for his

money in other ways, and will not buy if he is charged with a government tax
                    255
on the transaction. It has indeed been objected, that this argument would

not apply if all modes of permanent investment, such as the purchase of

government securities, shares in joint-stock companies, mortgages, and the

like, were subject to the same tax. But even then, if paid by the buyer, it

would be equivalent to a tax on interest: if sufficiently heavy to be of any

importance, it would disturb the established relation between interest and

profit; and the disturbance would redress itself by a rise in the rate of interest,

and a fall of the price of land and of all securities. It appears to me, therefore,

that the seller is the person by whom such taxes, unless under peculiar

circumstances, will generally be borne.

              All taxes must be condemned which throw obstacles in the way of

the sale of land, or other instruments of production. Such sales tend naturally

to render the property more productive. The seller, whether moved by

necessity or choice, is probably some one who is either without the means, or

without the capacity, to make the most advantageous use of the property for

productive purposes; while the buyer, on the other hand, is at any rate not

needy, and is frequently both inclined and able to improve the property,

since, as it is worth more to such a person than to any other, he is likely to

offer the highest price for it. All taxes, therefore, and all difficulties andexpenses, annexed to such contracts, are decidedly detrimental; especially in

the case of land, the source of subsistence, and the original foundation of all

wealth, on the improvement of which, therefore, so much depends. Too great

facilities cannot be given to enable land to pass into the hands, and assume

the modes of aggregation or division, most conducive to its productiveness. If

landed properties are too large, alienation should be free, in order that they

may be subdivided; if too small, in order that they may be united. All taxes

on the transfer of landed property should be abolished; but, as the landlords

have no claim to be relieved from any reservation which the state has hitherto

made in its own favour from the amount of their rent, an annual impost

equivalent to the average produce of these taxes should be distributed over

the land generally, in the form of a land-tax.

              Some of the taxes on contracts are very pernicious, imposing a

virtual penalty upon transactions which it ought to be the policy of the

legislator to encourage. Of this sort is the stamp-duty on leases, which in a

country of large properties are an essential condition of good agriculture; and

the taxes on insurances, a direct discouragement to prudence and forethought.

              2. Nearly allied to the taxes on contracts are those on

communication. The principal of these is the postage tax; to which may be

added taxes on advertisements, and on newspapers, which are taxes on the

communication of information.

              The common mode of levying a tax on the conveyance of letters, is

by making the government the sole authorized carrier of them, and

demanding a monopoly price. When this price is so moderate as it is in this

country under the uniform penny postage, scarcely if at all exceeding what

would be charged under the freest competition by any private company, it can

hardly be considered as taxation, but rather as the profits of a business;

whatever excess there is above the ordinary profits of stock being a fair result

of the saving of expense, caused by having only one establishment and one

set of arrangements for the whole country, instead of many competing ones.

The business, too, being one which both can and ought to be conducted on

fixed rules, is one of the few businesses which it is not unsuitable to a

government to conduct. The post office, therefore, is at present one of the

best of the sources from which this country derives its revenue. But a postage

much exceeding what would be paid for the same service in a system of

freedom, is not a desirable tax. Its chief weight falls on letters of business,and increases the expense of mercantile relations between distant places. It is

like an attempt to raise a large revenue by heavy tolls: it obstructs all

operations by which goods are conveyed from place to place, and discourages

the production of commodities in one place for consumption in another;

which is not only in itself one of the greatest sources of economy of labour,

but is a necessary condition of almost all improvements in production, and

one of the strongest stimulants to industry, and promoters of civilization.

              The tax on advertisements was not free from the same objection,

since in whatever degree advertisements are useful to business, by facilitating

the coming together of the dealer or producer and the consumer, in that same

degree, if the tax be high enough to be a serious discouragement to

advertising, it prolongs the period during which goods remain unsold, and

capital locked up in idleness.

              A tax on newspapers is objectionable, not so much where it does fall

as where is does not, that is, where it prevents newspapers from being used.

To the generality of those who buy them, newspapers are a luxury which they

can as well afford to pay for as any other indulgence, and which is as

unexceptionable a source of revenue. But to that large part of the community

who have been taught to read, but have received little other intellectual

education, newspapers are the source of nearly all the general information

which they possess, and of nearly all their acquaintance with the ideas and

topics current among mankind; and an interest is more easily excited in

newspapers, than in books or other more recondite sources of instruction.

Newspapers contribute so little, in a direct way, to the origination of useful

ideas, that many persons undervalue the importance of their office in

disseminating them. They correct many prejudices and superstitions, and

keep up a habit of discussion, and interest in public concerns, the absence of

which is a great cause of stagnation of mind usually found in the lower and

middle, if not in all, ranks, of those countries where newspapers of an

important or interesting character do not exist. There ought to be no taxes (as

in this country there now are not) which render this great diffuser of

information, of mental excitement, and mental exercise, less accessible to that

portion of the public which most needs to be carried into a region of ideas

and interests beyond its own limited horizon.

              3. In the enumeration of bad taxes, a conspicuous place must be

assigned to law taxes; which extract a revenue for the state from the variousoperations involved in an application to the tribunals. Like all needless

expenses attached to law proceedings, they are a tax on redress, and therefore

a premium on injury. Although such taxes have been abolished in this

country as a general source of revenue, they still exist in the form of fees of

court, for defraying the expense of the courts of justice; under the idea,

apparently, that those may fairly be required to bear the expenses of the

administration of justice, who reap the benefit of it. The fallacy of this

doctrine was powerfully exposed by Bentham. As he remarked, those who

are under the necessity of going to law, are those who benefit least, not most,

by the law and its administration. To them the protection which the law

affords has not been complete, since they have been obliged to resort to a

court of justice to ascertain their rights, or maintain those rights against

infringement: while the remainder of the public have enjoyed the immunity

from injury conferred by the law and the tribunals, without the inconvenience

of an appeal to them.

              4. Besides the general taxes of the State, there are in all or most

countries local taxes, to defray any expenses of a public nature which it is

thought best to place under the control or management of a local authority.

Some of these expenses are incurred for purposes in which the particular

locality is solely or chiefly interested; as the paving, cleansing, and lighting

of the streets; or the making and repairing of roads and bridges, which may

be important to people from any part of the country, but only in so far as

they, or goods in which they have an interest, pass along the roads or over the

bridges. In other cases again, the expenses are of a kind as nationally

important as any others, but are defrayed locally because supposed more

likely to be well administered by local bodies; as, in England, the relief of the

poor, and the support of gaols, and in some other countries, of schools. To

decide for what public objects local superintendence is best suited, and what

are those which should be kept immediately under the central government, or

under a mixed system of local management and central superintendence, is a

question not of political economy, but of administration. It is an important

principle, however, that taxes imposed by a local authority, being less

amenable to publicity and discussion than the acts of the government, should

always be special — laid on for some definite service, and not exceeding the

expense actually incurred in rendering the service. Thus limited, it is

desirable, whenever practicable, that the burthen should fall on those to

whom the service is rendered; that the expense, for instance, of roads andbridges, should be defrayed by a toll on passengers and goods conveyed by

them, thus dividing the cost between those who use them for pleasure or

convenience, and the consumers of the goods which they enable to be

brought to and from the market at a diminished expense. When, however, the

tolls have repaid with interest the whole of the expenditure, the road or bridge

should be thrown open free of toll, that it may be used also by those to whom,

unless open gratuitously, it would be valueless; provision being made for

repairs either from the funds of the state, or by a rate levied on the localities

which reap the principal benefit.

              In England, almost all local taxes are direct, (the coal duty of the

City of London, and a few similar imposts, being the chief exceptions),

though the greatest part of the taxation for general purposes is indirect. On

the contrary, in France, Austria, and other countries where direct taxation is

much more largely employed by the state, the local expenses of towns are

principally defrayed by taxes levied on commodities when entering them.

These indirect taxes are much more objectionable in towns than on the

frontier, because the things which the country supplies to the towns are

chiefly the necessaries of life and the materials of manufacture, while, of

what a country imports from foreign countries, the greater part usually

consists of luxuries. An octroi cannot produce a large revenue, without

pressing severely upon the labouring classes of the towns; unless their wages

rise proportionally, in which case the tax falls in a great measure on the

consumers of town produce, whether residing in town or country, since

capital will not remain in the towns if its profits fall below their ordinary

proportion as compared with the rural districts.

        246
               The statement in the text requires modification in the case of

countries where the land is owned in small portions. These, being neither a

badge of importance, nor in general an object of local attachment, are readily

parted with at a small advance on their original cost, with the intention of

buying elsewhere; and the desire of acquiring land even on disadvantageous

terms is so great, as to be little checked by even a high rate of taxation.

 

 

         Chapter 6 – Comparison between Direct and Indirect Taxes

 

 

              1. Are direct or indirect taxes the most eligible? This question, at all

times interesting, has of late excited a considerable amount of discussion. In

England there is a popular feeling, of old standing, in favour of indirect, or it

should rather be said in opposition to direct, taxation. The feeling is not

grounded on the merits of the case, and is of a puerile kind. An Englishman

dislikes, not so much the payment, as the act of paying. He dislikes seeing the

face of the tax-collector, and being subjected to his peremptory demand.

Perhaps, too, the money which he is required to pay directly out of his pocket

is the only taxation which he is quite sure that he pays at all. That a tax of one

shilling per pound on tea, or of two shillings per bottle on wine, raises the

price of each pound of tea and bottle of wine which he consumes, by that and

more than that amount, cannot indeed be denied; it is the fact, and is intended

to be so, and he himself, at times, is perfectly aware of it; but it makes hardly

any impression on his practical feelings and associations, serving to illustrate

the distinction between what is merely known to be true and what is felt to be

so. The unpopularity of direct taxation, contrasted with the easy manner in

which the public consent to let themselves be fleeced in the prices of

commodities, has generated in many friends of improvement a directly

opposite mode of thinking to the foregoing. They contend that the very

reason which makes direct taxation disagreeable, makes it preferable. Under

it, every one knows how much he really pays; and if he votes for a war, or

any other expensive national luxury, he does so with his eyes open to what it

costs him. If all taxes were direct, taxation would be much more perceived

than at present; and there would be a security which now there is not, for

economy in the public expenditure.

              Although this argument is not without force, its weight is likely to be

constantly diminishing. The real incidence of indirect taxation is every day

more generally understood and more familiarly recognized: and whatever

else may be said of the changes which are taking place in the tendencies of

the human mind, it can scarcely, I think, be denied, that things are more and

more estimated according to their calculated value, and less according to their

non-essential accompaniments. The mere distinction between paying moneydirectly to the tax-collector, and contributing the same sum through the

intervention of the tea.dealer or the wine-merchant, no longer makes the

whole difference between dislike or opposition, and passive acquiescence.

But further, while any such infirmity of the popular mind subsists, the

argument grounded on it tells partly on the other side of the question. If our

present revenue of about seventy millions were all raised by direct taxes, an

extreme dissatisfaction would certainly arise at having to pay so much; but

while men’s minds are so little guided by reason, as such a change of feeling

from so irrelevant a cause would imply, so great an aversion to taxation

might not be an unqualified good. Of the seventy millions in question, nearly

thirty are pledged, under the most binding obligations, to those whose

property has been borrowed and spent by the state: and while this debt

remains unredeemed, a greatly increased impatience of taxation would

involve no little danger of a breach of faith, similar to that which, in the

defaulting states of America, has been produced, and in some of them still

continues, from the same cause. That part, indeed, of the public expenditure,

which is devoted to the maintenance of civil and military establishments,

(that is, all except the interest of the national debt,) affords, in many of its

details, ample scope for retrenchment. But while much of the revenue is

wasted under the mere pretence of public service, so much of the most

important business of government is left undone, that whatever can be

rescued from useless expenditure is urgently required for useful. Whether the

object be education; a more efficient and accessible administration of justice;

reforms of any kind which, like the Slave Emancipation, require

compensation to individual interests; or what is as important as any of these,

the entertainment of a sufficient staff of able and educated public servants, to

conduct in a better than the present awkward manner the business of

legislation and administration; every one of these things implies considerable

expense, and many of them have again and again been prevented by the

reluctance which existed to apply to Parliament for an increased grant of

public money, though (besides that the existing means would probably be

sufficient if applied to the proper purposes) the cost would be repaid, often a

hundredfold, in mere pecuniary advantage to the community generally. If so

great an addition were made to the public dislike of taxation as might be the

consequence of confining it to the direct form, the classes who profit by the

misapplication of public money might probably succeed in saving that by

which they profit, at the expense of that which would only be useful to thepublic.

              There is, however, a frequent plea in support of indirect taxation,

which must be altogether rejected, as grounded on a fallacy. We are often

told that taxes on commodities are less burthensome than other taxes, because

the contributor can escape from them by ceasing to use the taxed commodity.

He certainly can, if that be his object, deprive the government of the money:

but he does so by a sacrifice of his own indulgences, which (if he chose to

undergo it) would equally make up to him for the same amount taken from

him by direct taxation. Suppose a tax laid on wine, sufficient to add five

pounds to the price of the quantity of wine which he consumes in a year. He

has only (we are told) to diminish his consumption of wine by 5 l., and he

escapes the burthen. True: but if the 5 l., instead of being laid on wine, had

been taken from him by an income tax, he could, by expending 5 l. less in

wine, equally save the amount of the tax, so that the difference between the

two cases is really illusory. If the government takes from the contributor five

pounds a year, whether in one way or another, exactly that amount must be

retrenched from his consumption to leave him as well off as before; and in

either way the same amount of sacrifice, neither more nor less, is imposed on

him.

              On the other hand, it is some advantage on the side of indirect taxes,

that what they exact from the contributor is taken at a time and in a manner

likely to be convenient to him. It is paid at a time when he has at any rate a

payment to make; it causes, therefore, no additional trouble, nor (unless the

tax be on necessaries) any inconvenience but what is inseparable from the

payment of the amount. He can also, except in the case of very perishable

articles, select his own time for laying in a stock of the commodity, and

consequently for payment of the tax. The producer or dealer who advances

these taxes, is, indeed, sometimes subjected to inconvenience; but, in the case

of imported goods, this inconvenience is reduced to a minimum by what is

called the Warehousing System, under which, instead of paying the duty at

the time of importation, he is only required to do so when he takes out the

goods for consumption, which is seldom done until he has either actually

found, or has the prospect of immediately finding, a purchaser.

              The strongest objection, however, to raising the whole or the greater

part of a large revenue by direct taxes, is the impossibility of assessing them

fairly without a conscientious co-operation on the part of the contributors, notto be hoped for in the present low state of public morality. In the case of an

income tax, we have already seen that unless it be found practicable to

exempt savings altogether from the tax, the burthen cannot be apportioned

with any tolerable approach to fairness upon those whose incomes are

derived from business or professions; and this is in fact admitted by most of

the advocates of direct taxation, who, I am afraid, generally get over the

difficulty by leaving those classes untaxed, and confining their projected

income tax to ‘realized property’, in which form it certainly has the merit of

being a very easy form of plunder. But enough has been said in

condemnation of this expedient. We have seen, however, that a house-tax is a

form of direct taxation not liable to the same objections as an income tax, and

indeed liable to as few objections of any kind as perhaps any of our indirect

taxes. But it would be impossible to raise by a house.tax alone, the greatest

part of the revenue of Great Britain, without producing a very objectionable

overcrowding of the population, through the strong motive which all persons

would have to avoid the tax by restricting their house accommodation.

Besides, even a house-tax has inequalities, and consequent injustices; no tax

is exempt from them, and it is neither just nor politic to make all the

inequalities fall in the same places, by calling upon one tax to defray the

whole or the chief part of the public expenditure. So much of the local

taxation, in this country, being already in the form of a house.tax, it is

probable that ten millions a year would be fully as much as could beneficially

be levied, through this medium, for general purposes.

              A certain amount of revenue may, as we have seen, be obtained

without injustice by a peculiar tax on rent. Besides the present land.tax, and

an equivalent for the revenue now derived from stamp duties on the

conveyance of land, some further taxation might, I have contended, at some

future period be imposed, to enable the state to participate in the progressive

increase of the incomes of landlords from natural causes. Legacies and

inheritances, we have also seen, ought to be subjected to taxation sufficient to

yield a considerable revenue. With these taxes, and a house.tax of suitable

amount; we should, I think, have reached the prudent limits of direct taxation,

save in a national emergency so urgent as to justify the government in

disregarding the amount of inequality and unfairness which may ultimately

be found inseparable from an income tax. The remainder of the revenue

would have to be provided by taxes on consumption, and the question is,

which of these are the least objectionable.              2. There are some forms of indirect taxation which must be

peremptorily excluded. Taxes on commodities, for revenue purposes, must

not operate as protecting duties, but must be levied impartially on every mode

in which the articles can be obtained, whether produced in the country itself,

or imported. An exclusion must also be put upon all taxes on the necessaries

of life, or on the materials or instruments employed in producing those

necessaries. Such taxes are always liable to encroach on what should be left

untaxed, the incomes barely sufficient for healthful existence; and on the

most favourable supposition, namely, that wages rise to compensate the

labourers for the tax, it operates as a peculiar tax on profits, which is at once
                                                256
unjust, and detrimental to national wealth. What remain are taxes on

luxuries. And these have some properties which strongly recommend them.

In the first place, they can never, by any possibility, touch those whose whole

income is expended on necessaries; while they do reach those by whom what

is required for necessaries, is expended on indulgences. In the next place,

they operate in some cases as an useful, and the only useful, kind of

sumptuary law. I disclaim all asceticism, and by no means wish to see

discouraged, either by law or opinion, any indulgence (consistent with the

means and obligations of the person using it) which is sought from a genuine

inclination for, and enjoyment of, the thing itself; but a great portion of the

expenses of the higher and middle classes in most countries, and the greatest

in this, is not incurred for the sake of the pleasure afforded by the things on

which the money is spent, but from regard to opinion, and an idea that certain

expenses are expected from them, as an appendage of station; and I cannot

but think that expenditure of this sort is a most desirable subject of taxation.

If taxation discourages it, some good is done, and if not, no harm; for in so

far as taxes are levied on things which are desired and possessed from

motives of this description, nobody is the worse for them. When a thing is

bought not for its use but for its costliness, cheapness is no recommendation.

As Sismondi remarks, the consequence of cheapening articles of vanity, is

not that less is expended on such things, but that the buyers substitute for the

cheapened article some other which is more costly, or a more elaborate

quality of the same thing; and as the inferior quality answered the purpose of

vanity equally well when it was equally expensive, a tax on the article is

really paid by nobody: it is a creation of public revenue by which nobody
    257
loses.

              3. In order to reduce as much as possible the inconveniences, andincrease the advantages, incident to taxes on commodities, the following are

the practical rules which suggest themselves. 1st. To raise as large a revenue

as conveniently may be, from those classes of luxuries which have most

connexion with vanity, and least with positive enjoyment; such as the more

costly qualities of all kinds of personal equipment and ornament. 2ndly.

Whenever possible, to demand the tax, not from the producer, but directly

from the consumer, since when levied on the producer it raises the price

always by more, and often by much more, than the mere amount of the tax.

Most of the minor assessed taxes in this country are recommended by both

these considerations. But with regard to horses and carriages, as there are

many persons to whom, from health or constitution, these are not so much

luxuries as necessaries, the tax paid by those who have but one riding horse,

or but one carriage, especially of the cheaper descriptions, should be low;

while taxation should rise very rapidly with the number of horses and

carriages, and with their costliness. 3rdly. But as the only indirect taxes

which yield a large revenue are those which fall on articles of universal or

very general consumption, and as it is therefore necessary to have some taxes

on real luxuries, that is, on things which afford pleasure in themselves, and

are valued on that account rather than for their cost; these taxes should, if

possible, be so adjusted as to fall with the same proportional weight on small,

on moderate, and on large incomes. This is not an easy matter; since the

things which are the subjects of the more productive taxes, are in proportion

more largely consumed by the poorer members of the community than by the

rich. Tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco, fermented drinks, can hardly be so taxed

that the poor shall not bear more than their due share of the burthen.

Something might be done by making the duty on the superior qualities, which

are used by the richer consumers, much higher in proportion to the value

(instead of much lower, as is almost universally the practice, under the

present English system); but in some cases the difficulty of at all adjusting

the duty to the value, so as to prevent evasion, is said, with what truth I know

not, to be insuperable; so that it is thought necessary to levy the same fixed

duty on all the qualities alike: a flagrant injustice to the poorer class of

contributors, unless compensated by the existence of other taxes from which,

as from the present income tax, they are altogether exempt. 4thly. As far as is

consistent with the preceding rules, taxation should rather be concentrated on

a few articles than diffused over many, in order that the expenses of

collection may be smaller, and that as few employments as possible may beburthensomely and vexatiously interfered with. 5thly. Among luxuries of

general consumption, taxation should by preference attach itself to

stimulants, because these, though in themselves as legitimate indulgences as

any others, are more liable than most others to be used in excess, so that the

check to consumption, naturally arising from taxation, is on the whole better

applied to them than to other things. 6thly. As far as other considerations

permit, taxation should be confined to imported articles, since these can be

taxed with a less degree of vexatious interference, and with fewer incidental

bad effects, than when a tax is levied on the field or on the workshop.

Custom-duties are, caeteris paribus, much less objectionable than excise: but

they must be laid only on things which either cannot, or at least will not, be

produced in the country itself; or else their production there must be

prohibited (as in England is the case with tobacco), or subjected to an excise

duty of equivalent amount. 7thly. No tax ought to be kept so high as to

furnish a motive to its evasion, too strong to be counteracted by ordinary

means of prevention: and especially no commodity should be taxed so highly

as to raise up a class of lawless characters, smugglers, illicit distillers, and the

like.

              Of the excise and custom duties lately existing in this country, all

which are intrinsically unfit to form part of a good system of taxation, have,

since the last reforms by Mr Gladstone, been got rid of. Among these are all

duties on ordinary articles of food, whether for human beings or for cattle;

those on timber, as fall. ing on the materials of lodging, which is one of the

necessaries of life; all duties on the metals, and on implements made of them;

taxes on soap, which is a necessary of cleanliness, and on tallow, the material

both of that and of some other necessaries; the tax on paper, an indispensable

instrument of almost all business and of most kinds of instruction. The duties

which now yield nearly the whole of the customs and excise revenue, those

on sugar, coffee, tea, wine, beer, spirits, and tobacco, are in themselves where

a large amount of revenue is necessary, extremely proper taxes; but at present

grossly unjust, from the disproportionate weight with which they press on the

poorer classes; and some of them (those on spirits and tobacco) are so high as

to cause a considerable amount of smuggling. It is probable that most of these

taxes might bear a great reduction without any material loss of revenue. In

what manner the finer articles of manufacture, consumed by the rich, might

most advantageously be taxed, I must leave to be decided by those who have

the requisite practical knowledge. The difficulty would be, to effect it withoutan inadmissible degree of interference with production. In countries which,

like the United States, import the principal part of the finer manufactures

which they consume, there is little difficulty in the matter: and even where

nothing is imported but the raw material, that may be taxed, especially the

qualities of it which are exclusively employed for the fabrics used by the

richer class of consumers. Thus, in England a high custom-duty on raw silk

would be consistent with principle; and it might perhaps be practicable to tax

the finer qualities of cotton or linen yarn, whether spun in the country itself or

imported.

        247
               Some argue that the materials and instruments of all production

should be exempt from taxation; but these, when they do not enter into the

production of necessaries, seem as proper subjects of taxation as the finished

article. It is chiefly with reference to foreign trade, that such taxes have been

considered injurious. Internationally speaking, they may be looked upon as

export duties, and, unless in cases in which an export duty is advisable, they

should be accompanied with an equivalent drawback on exportation. But

there is no sufficient reason against taxing the materials and instruments used

in the production of anything which is itself a fit object of taxation.

        248
               ‘Were we to suppose that diamonds could only be procured from

one particular and distant country, and pearls from another, and were the

produce of the mines in the former, and of the fishery in the latter, from the

operation of natural causes, to become doubly difficult to procure, the effect

would merely be that in time half the quantity of diamonds and pearls would

be sufficient to mark a certain opulence and rank, that it had before been

necessary to employ for that purpose. The same quantity of gold, or some

commodity reducible at last to labour, would be required to produce the now

reduced amount, as the former larger amount. Were the difficulty interposed

by the regulations of legislators... it could purposes of make no difference to

the fitness of these articles to serve the vanity.’ Suppose that means were

discovered whereby the physiological process which generates the pearl

might be induced ad libitum, the result being that the amount of labour

expended in procuring each pearl, came to be only the five hundredth part of

what it was before. ‘The ultimate effect of such a change would depend on

whether the fishery were free or not. Were it free to all, as pearls could be got

simply for the labour of fishing for them, a string of them might be had for a

few pence. The very poorest class of society could therefore afford todecorate their persons with them. They would thus soon become extremely

vulgar and unfashionable, and so at last valueless. If however we suppose

that instead of the fishery being free, the legislator owns and has complete

command of the place, where alone pearls are to be procured; as the progress

of discovery advanced, he might impose a duty on them equal to the

diminution of labour necessary to procure them. They would then be as much

esteemed as they were before. What simple beauty they have would remain

unchanged. The difficulty to be surmounted in order to obtain them would be

different, but equally great. and they would therefore equally serve to mark

the opulence of those who possessed them.’ The net revenue obtained by

such a tax ‘would not cost the society anything. If not abused in its

application, it would be a clear addition of so much to the resources of the

community.’ — Rae, New Principles of Political Economy, pp. 369–71.

 

 

                         Chapter 7 – Of a National Debt

 

 

              1. The question must now be considered, how far it is right or

expedient to raise money for the purpose of government, not by laying on

taxes to the amount required, but by taking a portion of the capital of the

country in the form of a loan, and charging the public revenue with only the

interest. Nothing needs be said about providing for temporary wants by

taking up money; for instance, by an issue of exchequer bills, destined to be

paid off, at furthest in a year or two, from the proceeds of the existing taxes.

This is a convenient expedient, and when the government does not possess a

treasure or hoard, is often a necessary one, on the occurrence of extraordinary

expenses, or of a temporary failure in the ordinary sources of revenue. What

we have to discuss is the propriety of contracting a national debt of a

permanent character; defraying the expenses of a war, or of any season of

difficulty, by loans, to be redeemed either very gradually and at a distant

period, or not at all.

              This question has already been touched upon in the First Book. We

remarked, that if the capital taken in loans is abstracted from funds either

engaged in production, or destined to be employed in it, their diversion from

that purpose is equivalent to taking the amount from the wages of the

labouring classes. Borrowing, in this case, is not a substitute for raising the

supplies within the year. A government which borrows does actually take the

amount within the year, and that too by a tax exclusively on the labouring

classes: than which it could have done nothing worse, if it had supplied its

wants by avowed taxation; and in that case the transaction, and its evils,

would have ended with the emergency; while by the circuitous mode

adopted, the value extracted from the labourers is gained, not by the state, but

by the employers of labour, the state remaining charged with the debt

besides, and with its interest in perpetuity. The system of public loans, in

such circumstances, may be pronounced the very worst which, in the present

state of civilization, is still included in the catalogue of financial expedients.

              We however remarked that there are other circumstances in which

loans are not chargeable with these pernicious consequences: namely, first,

when what is borrowed is foreign capital, the overflowings of the generalaccumulation of the world; or, secondly, when it is capital which either

would not have been saved at all unless this mode of investment had been

open to it, or after being saved, would have been wasted in unproductive

enterprises, or sent to seek employment in foreign countries. When the

progress of accumulation has reduced profits either to the ultimate or to the

practical minimum, — to the rate, less than which would either put a stop to

the increase of capital, or send the whole of the new accumulations abroad;

government may annually intercept these new accumulations, without

trenching on the employment or wages of the labouring classes in the country

itself, or perhaps in any other country. To this extent, therefore, the loan

system may be carried, without being liable to the utter and peremptory

condemnation which is due to it when it overpasses this limit. What is wanted

is an index to determine whether, in any given series of years, as during the

last great war for example, the limit has been exceeded or not.

              Such an index exists, at once a certain and an obvious one. Did the

government, by its loan operations, augment the rate of interest? If it only

opened a channel for capital which would not otherwise have been

accumulated, or which, if accumulated, would not have been employed

within the country; this implies that the capital, which the government took

and expended, could not have found employment at the existing rate of

interest. So long as the loans do no more than absorb this surplus, they

prevent any tendency to a fall of the rate of interest, but they cannot occasion

any rise. When they do raise the rate of interest, as they did in a most

extraordinary degree during the French war, this is positive proof that the

government is a competitor for capital with the ordinary channels, of

productive investment, and is carrying off, not merely funds which would

not, but funds which would, have found productive employment within the

country. To the full extent, therefore, to which the loans of government,

during the war, caused the rate of interest to exceed what it was before, and

what it has been since, those loans are chargeable with all the evils which

have been described. If it be objected that interest only rose because profits

rose, I reply that this does not weaken, but strengthens, the argument. If the

government loans produced the rise of profits by the great amount of capital

which they absorbed, by what means can they have had this effect, unless by

lowering the wages of labour? It will perhaps be said, that what kept profits

high during the war was not the drafts made on the national capital by the

loans, but the rapid progress of industrial improvements. This, in a greatmeasure, was the fact; and it no doubt alleviated the hardship to the labouring

classes, and made the financial system which was pursued less. actively

mischievous, but not less contrary to principle. These very improvements in

industry, made room for a larger amount of capital; and the government, by

draining away a great part of the annual accumulations, did not indeed

prevent that capital from existing ultimately, (for it started into existence with

great rapidity after the peace), but prevented it from existing at the time, and

subtracted just so much, while the war lasted, from distribution among

productive labourers. If the government had abstained from taking this capital

by loan, and had allowed it to reach the labourers, but had raised the supplies

which it required by a direct tax on the labouring classes, it would have

produced (in every respect but the expense and inconvenience of collecting

the tax) the very same economical effects which it did produce, except that

we should not now have had the debt. The course it actually took was

therefore worse than the very worst mode which it could possibly have

adopted of raising the supplies within the year: and the only excuse, or

justification, which it admits of, (so far as that excuse could be truly pleaded),

was hard necessity; the impossibility of raising so enormous an annual sum

by taxation, without resorting to taxes which from their odiousness, or from

the facility of evasion, it would have been found impracticable to enforce.

              When government loans are limited to the overflowings of the

national capital, or to those accumulations which would not take place at all

unless suffered to overflow, they are at least not liable to this grave

condemnation: they occasion no privation to any one at the time, except by

the payment of the interest, and may even be beneficial to the labouring class

during the term of their expenditure, by employing in the direct purchase of

labour, as that of soldiers, sailors, &c., funds which might otherwise have

quitted the country altogether. In this case therefore the question really is,

what it is commonly supposed to be in all cases, namely, a choice between a

great sacrifice at once, and a small one indefinitely prolonged. On this matter

it seems rational to think, that the prudence of a nation will dictate the same

conduct as the prudence of an individual; to submit to as much of the

privation immediately, as can easily be borne, and only when any further

burthen would distress or cripple them too much, to provide for the remainder

by mortgaging their future income. It is an excellent maxim to make present

resources suffice for present wants; the future will have its own wants to

provide for. On the other hand, it may reasonably be taken into considerationthat in a country increasing in wealth, the necessary expenses of government

do not increase in the same ratio as capital or population; any burthen,

therefore, is always less and less felt: and since those extraordinary expenses

of government which are fit to be incurred at all, are most beneficial beyond

the existing generation, there is no injustice in making posterity pay a part of

the price, if the inconvenience would be extreme of defraying the whole of it

by the exertions and sacrifices of the generation which first incurred it.

              2. When a country, wisely or unwisely, has burthened itself with a

debt, is it expedient to take steps for redeeming that debt? In principle it is

impossible not to maintain the affirmative. It is true that the payment of the

interest, when the creditors are members of the same community, is no

national loss, but a mere transfer. The transfer, however, being compulsory,

is a serious evil, and the raising a great extra revenue by any system of

taxation necessitates so much expense, vexation, disturbance of the channels

of industry, and other mischiefs over and above the mere payment of the

money wanted by the government, that to get rid of the necessity of such

taxation is at all times worth a considerable effort. The same amount of

sacrifice which would have been worth incurring to avoid contracting the

debt, it is worth while to incur, at any subsequent time, for the purpose of

extinguishing it.

              Two modes have been contemplated of paying off a national debt:

either at once by a general contribution, or gradually by a surplus revenue.

The first would be incomparably the best, if it were practicable; and it would

be practicable if it could justly be done by assessment on property alone. If

property bore the whole interest of the debt, property might, with great

advantage to itself, pay it off; since this would be merely surrendering to a

creditor the principal sum, the whole annual proceeds of which were already

his by law; and would be equivalent to what a landowner does when he sells

part of his estate, to free the remainder from a mortgage. But property, it

needs hardly be said, does not pay, and cannot just be required to pay, the

whole interest of the debt. Some indeed affirm that it can, on the plea that the

existing generation is only bound to pay the debts of its predecessors from the

assets it has received from them, and not from the produce of its own

industry. But has no one received anything from previous generations except

those who have succeeded to property? Is the whole difference between the

earth as it is, with its clearings and improvements, its roads and canals, itstowns and manufactories, and the earth as it was when the first human being

set foot on it, of no benefit to any but those who are called the owners of the

soil? Is the capital accumulated by the labour and abstinence of all former

generations, of no advantage to any but those who have succeeded to the

legal ownership of part of it? And have we not inherited a mass of acquired

know. ledge, both scientific and empirical, due to the sagacity and industry of

those who preceded us, the benefits of which are the common wealth of all?

Those who are born to the ownership of property have, in addition to these

common benefits, a separate inheritance, and to this difference it is right that

advertence should be had in regulating taxation. It belongs to the general

financial system of the country to take due account of this principle, and I

have indicated, as in my opinion a proper mode of taking account of it, a

considerable tax on legacies and inheritances. Let it be determined directly

and openly what is due from property to the state, and from the state to

property, and let the institutions of the state be regulated accordingly.

Whatever is the fitting contribution from property to the general expenses of

the state, in the same and in no greater proportion should it contribute

towards either the interest or the repayment of the national debt.

              This, however, if admitted, is fatal to any scheme for the extinction

of the debt by a general assessment on the community. Persons of property

could pay their share of the amount by a sacrifice of property, and have the

same net income as before; but if those who have no accumulations, but only

incomes, were required to make up by a single payment the equivalent of the

annual charge laid on them by the taxes maintained to pay the interest of the

debt, they could only do so by incurring a private debt equal to their share of

the public debt; while, from the in. sufficiency, in most cases, of the security

which they could give, the interest would amount to a much larger annual

sum than their share of that now paid by the state. Besides, a collective debt

defrayed by taxes, has over the same debt parcelled out among individuals,

the immense advantage, that it is virtually a mutual insurance among the

contributors. If the fortune of a contributor diminishes, his taxes diminish; if

he is ruined, they cease altogether, and his portion of the debt is wholly

transferred to the solvent members of the community. If it were laid on him

as a private obligation, he would still be liable to it even when penniless.

              When the state possesses property, in land or otherwise, which there

are not strong reasons of public utility for its retaining at its disposal, thisshould be employed, as far as it will go, in extinguishing debt. Any casual

gain, or godsend, is naturally devoted to the same purpose. Beyond this, the

only mode which is both just and feasible, of extinguishing or reducing a

national debt, is by means of a surplus revenue.

              3. The desirableness, per se, of maintaining a surplus for this

purpose, does not, I think, admit of a doubt. We sometimes, indeed, hear it

said that the amount should rather be left to ‘fructify in the pockets of the

people’. This is a good argument, as far as it goes, against levying taxes

unnecessarily for purposes of unproductive expenditure, but not against

paying off a national debt. For, what is meant by the word fructify? If it

means anything, it means productive employment; and as an argument

against taxation, we must understand it to assert, that if the amount were left

with the people they would save it, and convert it into capital. It is probable,

indeed, that they would save a part, but extremely improbable that they

would save the whole: while if taken by taxation, and employed in paying off

debt, the whole is saved, and made productive. To the fundholder who

receives the payment it is already capital, not revenue, and he will make it

‘fructify’, that it may continue to afford him an income. The objection,

therefore, is not only groundless, but the real argument is on the other side:

the amount is much more certain of fructifying if it is not ‘left in the pockets

of the people.’

              It is not, however, advisable in all cases to maintain a surplus

revenue for the extinction of debt. The advantage of paying off the national

debt of Great Britain, for instance, is that it would enable us to get rid of the

worse half of our taxation. But of this worse half some portions must be

worse than others, and to get rid of those would be a greater benefit

proportionally than to get rid of the rest. If renouncing a surplus revenue

would enable us to dispense with a tax, we ought to consider the very worst

of all our taxes as precisely the one which we are keeping up for the sake of

ultimately abolishing taxes not so bad as itself. In a country advancing in

wealth, whose increasing revenue gives it the power of ridding itself from

time to time of the most inconvenient portions of its taxation, I conceive that

the increase of revenue should rather be disposed of by taking off taxes, than

by liquidating debt, as long as any very objectionable imposts remain. In the

present state of England, therefore, I hold it to be good policy in the

government, when it has a surplus of an apparently permanent character, totake off taxes, provided these are rightly selected. Even when no taxes remain

but such as are not unfit to form part of a permanent system, it is wise to

continue the same policy by experimental reductions of those taxes, until the

point is discovered at which a given amount of revenue can be raised with the

smallest pressure on the contributors. After this, such surplus revenue as

might arise from any further increase of the produce of the taxes, should not,

I conceive, be remitted, but applied to the redemption of debt. Eventually, it

might be expedient to appropriate the entire produce of particular taxes to this

purpose; since there would be more assurance that the liquidation would be

persisted in, if the fund destined to it the were kept apart, and not blended

with the general revenues of state. The succession duties would be peculiarly

suited to such a purpose, since taxes paid as they are, out of capital, would

such a be better employed in reimbursing capital than in defraying current

expenditure. If this separate appropriation were made, any surplus afterwards

arising from the increasing produce of the other taxes, and from the saving of

interest on the successive portions of debt paid off, might form a ground for a

remission of taxation.

              It has been contended that some amount of national debt is desirable,

and almost indispensable, as an investment for the savings of the poorer or

more inexperienced part of the community. Its convenience in that respect is

undeniable; but (besides that the progress of industry is gradually affording

other modes of investment almost as safe and untroublesome, such as the

obligations of great public companies) the only real superiority of an

investment in the funds consists in the national guarantee, and this could be

afforded by other means than that of a public debt, involving compulsory

taxation. One mode which would answer the purpose, would be a national

bank of deposit and discount, with ramifications throughout the country;

which might receive any money confided to it, and either fund it at a fixed

rate of interest, or allow interest on a floating balance, like the joint-stock

banks; the interest given being of course lower than the rate at which

individuals can borrow, in proportion and to the greater security of a

government investment; the expenses of the establishment being defrayed by

the difference between the interest which the bank would pay, and that which

it would obtain, by lending its deposits on mercantile, landed, or other

security. There are no insuperable objections in principle, nor, I should think,

in practice, to an institution of this sort, as a means of supplying the same

convenient mode of investment now afforded by the public funds. It wouldconstitute the state a great insurance company, to insure that part of the

community who live on the interest of their property, against the risk of

losing it by the bankruptcy of those to whom they might otherwise be under

the necessity of confiding it.

 

 

 Chapter 8 – Of the Ordinary Functions of Government, considered as to

                              their Economical Effects

 

 

              1. Before we discuss the line of demarcation between the things with

which government should, and those with which they should not, directly

interfere, it is necessary to consider the economical effects, whether of a bad

or of a good complexion, arising from the manner in which they acquit

themselves of the duties which devolve on them in all societies, and which no

one denies to be incumbent on them.

              The first of these is the protection of person and property. There is

no need to expatiate on the influence exercised over the economical interests

of society by the degree of completeness with which this duty of government

is performed. Insecurity of person and property, is as much as to say,

uncertainty of the connexion between all human exertion or sacrifice, and the

attainment of the ends for the sake of which they are undergone. It means,

uncertainty whether they who sow shall reap, whether they who produce shall

consume, and they who spare today shall enjoy to.morrow. It means, not only

that labour and frugality are not the road to acquisition, but that violence is.

When person and property are to a certain degree insecure, all the possessions

of the weak are at the mercy of the strong. No one can keep what he has

produced, unless he is more capable of defending it, than others who give no

part of their time and exertions to useful industry are of taking it from him.

The productive classes, therefore, when the insecurity surpasses a certain

point, being unequal to their own protection against the predatory population,

are obliged to place themselves individually in a state of dependence on some

member of the predatory class, that it may be his interest to shield them from

all depredation except his own. In this manner, in the Middle Ages, allodial

property generally became feudal, and numbers of the poorer freemen

voluntarily made themselves and their posterity serfs of some military lord.

              Nevertheless, in attaching to this great requisite, security of person

and property, the importance which is justly due to it, we must not forget that

even for economical purposes there are other things quite as indispensable,

the presence of which will often make up for a very considerable degree ofimperfection in the protective arrangements of government. As was observed

in a previous chapter, the free cities of Italy, Flanders, and the Hanseatic

league, were habitually in a state of such internal turbulence, varied by such

destructive external wars, that person and property enjoyed very imperfect

protection; yet during several centuries they increased rapidly in wealth and

prosperity, brought many of the industrial arts to a high degree of

advancement, carried on distant and dangerous voyages of exploration and

commerce with extraordinary success, became an overmatch in power for the

greatest feudal lords, and could defend themselves even against the

sovereigns of Europe: because in the midst of turmoil and violence, the

citizens of those towns enjoyed a certain rude freedom, under conditions of

union and co-operation, which, taken together, made them a brave, energetic,

and high-spirited people, and fostered a great amount of public spirit and

patriotism. The prosperity of these and other free states in a lawless age,

shows that a certain degree of insecurity, in some combinations of

circumstances, has good as well as bad effects, by making energy and

practical ability the conditions of safety. Insecurity paralyses, only when it is

such in nature and in degree, that no energy of which mankind in general are

capable, affords any tolerable means of self-protection. And this is a main

reason why oppression by the government, whose power is generally

irresistible by any efforts that can be made by individuals, has so much more

baneful an effect on the springs of national prosperity, than almost any degree

of lawlessness and turbulence under free institutions. Nations have acquired

some wealth, and made some progress in improvement, in states of social

union so imperfect as to border on anarchy: but no countries in which the

people were exposed without limit to arbitrary exactions from the officers of

government, ever yet continued to have industry or wealth. A few generations

of such a government never fail to extinguish both. Some of the fairest, and

once the most prosperous, regions of the earth, have, under the Roman and

afterwards under the Turkish dominion, been reduced to a desert, solely by

that cause. I say solely, because they would have recovered with the utmost

rapidity, as countries always do, from the devastations of war, or any other

temporary calamities. Difficulties and hardships are often but an incentive to

exertion: what is fatal to it, is the belief that it will not be suffered to produce

its fruits.

              2. Simple over.taxation by government, though a great evil, is not

comparable in the economical part of its mischiefs to exactions much moremoderate in amount, which either subject the contributor to the arbitrary

mandate of government officers, or are so laid on as to place skill, industry,

and frugality at a disadvantage. The burthen of taxation in our own country is

very great, yet as every one knows its limit, and is seldom made to pay more

than he expects and calculates on, and as the modes of taxation are not of

such a kind as much to impair the motives to industry and economy, the

sources of prosperity are little diminished by the pressure of taxation; they

may even, as some think, be increased, by the extra exertions made to

compensate for the pressure of the taxes. But in the barbarous despotisms of

many countries of the East, where taxation consists in fastening upon those

who have succeeded in acquiring something, in order to confiscate it, unless

the possessor buys its release by submitting to give some large sum as a

compromise, we cannot expect to find voluntary industry, or wealth derived

from any source but plunder. And even in comparatively civilized countries,

bad modes of raising a revenue have had effects similar in kind, though in an

inferior degree. French writers before the Revolution represented the taille as

a main cause of the backward state of agriculture, and of the wretched

condition of the rural population; not from its amount, but because, being

proportioned to the visible capital of the cultivator, it gave him a motive for

appearing poor, which sufficed to turn the scale in favour of indolence. The

arbitrary powers also of fiscal officers, of intendants and subdelegues, were

more destructive of prosperity than a far larger amount of exactions, because

they destroyed security: there was a marked superiority in the condition of

the pays d’etats, which were exempt from this scourge. The universal

venality ascribed to Russian functionaries, must be an immense drag on the

capabilities of economical improvement possessed so abundantly by the

Russian empire: since the emoluments of public officers must depend on the

success with which they can multiply vexations, for the purpose of being

bought off by bribes.

              Yet mere excess of taxation, even when not aggravated by

uncertainty, is, independently of its injustice, a serious economical evil. It

may be carried so far as to discourage industry by insufficiency of reward.

Very long before it reaches this point, it prevents or greatly checks

accumulation, or causes the capital accumulated to be sent for investment to

foreign countries. Taxes which fall on profits, even though that kind of

income may not pay more than its just share, necessarily diminish the motive

to any saving, except for investment in foreign countries where profits arehigher. Holland, for example, seems to have long ago reached the practical

minimum of profits: already in the last century her wealthy capitalists had a

great part of their fortunes invested in the loans and joint.stock speculations

of other countries: and this low rate of profit is ascribed to the heavy taxation,

which had been in some measure forced on her by the circumstances of her

position and history. The taxes indeed, besides their great amount, were many

of them on necessaries, a kind of tax peculiarly injurious to industry and

accumulation. But when the aggregate amount of taxation is very great, it is

inevitable that recourse must be had for part of it to taxes of an objectionable

character. And any taxes on consumption, when heavy, even if not operating

on profits, have something of the same effect, by driving persons of moderate

means to live abroad, often taking their capital with them. Although I by no

means join with those political economists who think no state of national

existence desirable in which there is not a rapid increase of wealth, I cannot

overlook the many disadvantages to an independent nation from being

brought pre. maturely to a stationary state, while the neighbouring countries

continue advancing.

              3. The subject of protection to person and property, considered as

afforded by government, ramifies widely, into a number of indirect channels.

It embraces, for example, the whole subject of the perfection or inefficiency

of the means provided for the ascertainment of rights and the redress of

injuries. Person and property cannot be considered secure where the

administration of justice is imperfect, either from defect of integrity or

capacity in the tribunals, or because the delays, vexation, and expense

accompanying their operation impose a heavy tax on those who appeal to

them, and make it preferable to submit to any endurable amount of the evils

which they are designed to remedy. In England there is no fault to be found

with the administration of justice, in point of pecuniary integrity; a result

which the progress of social improvement may also be supposed to have

brought about in several other nations of Europe. But legal and judicial

imperfections of other kinds are abundant; and, in England especially, are a

large abatement from the value of the services which the government renders

back to the people in return for our enormous taxation. In the first place, the

incognoscibility (as Bentham termed it) of the law, and its extreme

uncertainty, even to those who best know it, render a resort to the tribunals

often necessary for obtaining justice, when, there being no dispute as to facts,

no litigation ought to be required. In the next place, the procedure of thetribunals is so replete with delay, vexation, and expense, that the price at

which justice is at last obtained is an evil outweighing a very considerable

amount of injustice; and the wrong side, even that which the law considers

such, has many chances of gaining its point, through the abandonment of

litigation by the other party for want of funds, or through a compromise in

which a sacrifice is made of just rights to terminate the suit, or through some

technical quirk, whereby a decision is obtained on some other ground than

the merits. This last detestable incident often happens without blame to the

judge, under a system of law, of which a great part rests on no rational

principles adapted to the present state of society, but was originally founded

partly on a kind of whims and conceits, and partly on the principles and

incidents of feudal tenure, (which now survive only as legal fictions;) and has

only been very imperfectly adapted, as cases arose, to the changes which had

taken place in society. Of all parts of the English legal system, the Court of

Chancery, which has the best substantive law, has been incomparably the

worst as to delay, vexation, and expense; and this is the only tribunal for most

of the classes of cases which are in their nature the most complicated, such as

cases of partnership, and the great range and variety of cases which come

under the denomination of trust. The recent reforms in this Court have abated

the mischief, but are still far from having removed it.

              Fortunately for the prosperity of England, the greater part of the

mercantile law is comparatively modern, and was made by the tribunals, by

the simple process of recognizing and giving force of law to the usages

which, from motives of convenience, had grown up among merchants

themselves: so that this part of the law, at least, was substantially made by

those who were most interested in its goodness: while the defects of the

tribunals have been the less practically pernicious in reference to commercial

transactions, because the importance of credit, which depends on character,

renders the restraints of opinion (though, as daily experience proves, an

insufficient) yet a very powerful, protection against those forms of mercantile

dishonesty which are generally recognized as such.

              The imperfections of the law, both in its substance and in its

procedure, fall heaviest upon the interests connected with what is technically

called real property; in the general language of European jurisprudence,

immoveable property. With respect to all this portion of the wealth of the

community, the law fails egregiously in the protection which it undertakes toprovide. It fails, first, by the uncertainty, and the maze of technicalities,

which make it impossible for any one, at however great an expense, to

possess a title to land which he can positively know to be unassailable. It

fails, secondly, in omitting to provide due evidence of transactions, by a

proper registration of legal documents. It fails, thirdly, by creating a necessity

for operose and expensive instruments and formalities (independently of

fiscal burthens) on occasion of the purchase and sale, or even the lease or

mortgage, of immoveable property. And, fourthly, it fails by the intolerable

expense and delay of law proceedings, in almost all cases in which real

property is concerned. There is no doubt that the greatest sufferers by the

defects of the higher courts of civil law are the landowners. Legal expenses,

either those of actual litigation, or of the preparation of legal instruments,

form, I apprehend, no inconsiderable item in the annual expenditure of most

persons of large landed property, and the saleable value of their land is

greatly impaired, by the difficulty of giving to the buyer complete confidence

in the title; independently of the legal expenses which accompany the

transfer. Yet the landowners, though they have been masters of the legislation

of England, to say the least since 1688, have never made a single move in the

direction of law reform, and have been strenuous opponents of some of the

improvements of which they would more particularly reap the benefit;

especially that great one of a registration of contracts affecting land, which

when proposed by a Commission of eminent real property lawyers, and

introduced into the House of Commons by Lord Campbell, was so offensive

to the general body of landlords, and was rejected by so large a majority, as
                                                                258
to have long discouraged any repetition of the attempt. This irrational

hostility to improvement, in a case in which their own interest would be the

most benefited by it, must be ascribed to an intense timidity on the subject of

their titles, generated by the defects of the very law which they refuse to alter;

and to a conscious ignorance, and incapacity of judgment, on all legal

subjects, which makes them helplessly defer to the opinion of their

professional advisers, heedless of the fact that every imperfection of the law,

in proportion as it is burthensome to them, brings gain to the lawyer.

              In so far as the defects of legal arrangements are a mere burthen on

the landowner, they do not much affect the sources of production; but the

uncertainty of the title under which land is held, must often act as a great

discouragement to the expenditure of capital in its improvement; and the

expense of making transfers, operates to prevent land from coming into thehands of those who would use it to most advantage; often amounting, in the

case of small purchases, to more than the price of the land, and tantamount,

therefore, to a prohibition of the purchase and sale of land in small portions,

unless in exceptional circumstances. Such purchases, however, are almost

everywhere extremely desirable, there being hardly any country in which

landed property is not either too much or too little subdivided, requiring

either that great estates should be broken down, or that small ones should be

bought up and consolidated. To make land as easily transferable as stock,

would be one of the greatest economical improvements which could be

bestowed on a country; and has been shown, again and again, to have no

insuperable difficulty attending it.

              Besides the excellences or defects that belong to the law and

judicature of a country as a system of arrangements for attaining direct

practical ends, much also depends, even in an economical point of view, upon

the moral influences of the law. Enough has been said in a former place, on

the degree in which both the industrial and all other combined operations of

mankind depend for efficiency on their being able to rely on one another for

probity and fidelity to engagements; from which we see how greatly even the

economical prosperity of a country is liable to be affected, by anything in its

institutions by which either integrity and trustworthiness, or the contrary

qualities, are encouraged. The law everywhere ostensibly favours at least

pecuniary honesty and the faith of contracts; but if it affords facilities for

evading those obligations, by trick and chicanery, or by the unscrupulous use

of riches in instituting unjust or resisting just litigation; if there are ways and

means by which persons may attain the ends of roguery, under the apparent

sanction of the law; to that extent the law is demoralizing, even in regard to

pecuniary integrity. And such cases are, unfortunately, frequent under the

English system. If, again, the law, by a misplaced indulgence, protects

idleness or prodigality against their natural consequences, or dismisses crime

with inadequate penalties, the effect, both on the prudential and on the social

virtues, is unfavourable. When the law, by its own dispensations and

injunctions, establishes injustice between individual and individual; as all

laws do which recognize any form of slavery; as the laws of all countries do,

though not all in the same degree, in respect to the family relations; and as

the laws of many countries do, though in still more unequal degrees, as

between rich and poor; the effect on the moral sentiments of the people is still

more disastrous. But these subjects introduce considerations so much largerand deeper than those of political economy, that I only advert to them in

order not to pass wholly unnoticed, things superior in importance to those of

which I treat.

        249
               Lord Westbury’s recent Act is a material mitigation of this

grievous defect in English law, and will probably lead to further

improvements.

 

 

                   Chapter 9 – The Same Subject Continued

 

 

              1. Having spoken thus far of the effects produced by the excellences

or defects of the general system of the law, I shall now touch upon those

resulting from the special character of parts of it. As a selection must be

made, I shall confine myself to a few leading topics. The portions of the civil

law of a country which are of most importance economically (next to those

which determine the status of the labourer, as slave, serf, or free), are those

relating to the two subjects of Inheritance and Contract. Of the laws relating

to contract, none are more important economically, than the laws of

partnership, and those of insolvency. It happens that on all these three points,

there is just ground for condemning some of the provisions of the English

law.

              With regard to Inheritance, I have, in an early chapter, considered

the general principles of the subject, and suggested what appear to me to be,

putting all prejudices apart, the best dispositions which the law could adopt.

Freedom of bequest as the general rule, but limited by two things: first, that if

there are descendants, who, being unable to provide for themselves, would

become burthensome to the state, the equivalent of whatever the state would

accord to them should be reserved from the property for their benefit: and

secondly, that no one person should be permitted to acquire, by inheritance,

more than the amount of a moderate independence. In case of intestacy, the

whole property to escheat to the state: which should be bound to make a just

and reasonable provision for descendants, that is, such a provision as the

parent or ancestor ought to have made, their circumstances, capacities, and

mode of bringing up being considered.

              The laws of inheritance, however, have probably several phases of

improvement to go through, before ideas so far removed from present modes

of thinking will be taken into serious consideration: and as, among the

recognized modes of determining the succession to property, some must be

better and others worse, it is necessary to consider which of them deserves

the preference. As an intermediate course, therefore, I would recommend the

extension to all property, of the present English law of inheritance affecting

personal property (freedom of bequest, and in case of intestacy, equaldivision): except that no rights should be acknowledged in collaterals, and

that the property of those who have neither descendants nor ascendants, and

make no will, should escheat to the state.

              The laws of existing nations deviate from these maims in two

opposite ways. In England, and in most of the countries where the influence

of feudality is still felt in the laws, one of the objects aimed at in respect to

land and other immoveable property, is to keep it together in large masses:

accordingly, in cases of intestacy, it passes, generally speaking (for the local

custom of a few places is different), exclusively to the eldest son. And though

the rule of primogeniture is not binding on testators, who in England have

nominally the power of bequeathing their property as they please, any

proprietor may so exercise this power as to deprive his immediate successor

of it, by entailing the property on one particular line of his descendants:

which, besides preventing it from passing by inheritance in any other than the

prescribed manner, is attended with the incidental consequence of precluding

it from being sold; since each successive possessor, having only a life interest

in the property, cannot alienate it for a longer period than his own life. In

some other countries, such as France, the law, on the contrary, compels

division of inheritances; not only, in case of intestacy, sharing the property,

both real and personal, equally among all the children, or (if there are no

children) among all relatives in the same degree of propinquity; but also not

recognizing any power of bequest, or recognizing it over only a limited

portion of the property, the remainder being subjected to compulsory equal

division.

              Neither of these systems, I apprehend, was introduced, or is perhaps

maintained, in the countries where it exists, from any general considerations

of justice, or any foresight of economical consequences, but chiefly from

political motives; in the one case to keep up large hereditary fortunes, and a

landed aristocracy; in the other, to break these down, and prevent their

resurrection. The first object, as an aim of national policy, I conceive to be

eminently undesirable: with regard to the second, I have pointed out what

seems to me a better mode of attaining it. The merit, or demerit, however, of

either purpose, belongs to the general science of politics, not to the limited

department of that science which is here treated of. Each of the two systems

is a real and efficient instrument for the purpose intended by it; but each, as it

appears to me, achieves that purpose at the cost of much mischief.              2. There are two arguments of an economical character, which are

urged in favour of primogeniture. One is, the stimulus applied to the industry

and ambition of younger children, by leaving them to be the architects of

their own fortunes. This argument was put by Dr Johnson in a manner more

forcible than complimentary to an hereditary aristocracy, when he said, by

way of recommendation of primogeniture, that it ‘makes but one fool in a

family’. It is curious that a defender of aristocratic institutions should be the

person to assert that to inherit such a fortune as takes away any necessity for

exertion, is generally fatal to activity and strength of mind: in the present

state of education, however, the proposition, with some allowance for

exaggeration, may be admitted to be true. But whatever force there is in the

argument, counts in favour of limiting the eldest, as well as all the other

children, to a mere provision, and dispensing with even the ‘one fool’ whom

Dr Johnson was willing to tolerate. If unearned riches are so pernicious to the

character, one does not see why, in order to withhold the poison from the

junior members of a family, there should be no way but to unite all their

separate potions, and administer them in the largest possible dose to one

selected victim. It cannot be necessary to inflict this great evil on the eldest

son, for want of knowing what else to do with a large fortune.

              Some writers, however, look upon the effect of primogeniture in

stimulating industry, as depending, not so much on the poverty of the

younger children, as on the contrast between that poverty and the riches of

the elder; thinking it indispensable to the activity and energy of the hive, that

there should be a huge drone here and there, to impress the working bees with

a due sense of the advantages of honey. ‘Their inferiority in point of wealth’,

says Mr M’Culloch, speaking of the younger children, ‘and their desire to

escape from this lower station, and to attain to the same level with their elder

brothers, inspires them with an energy and vigour they could not otherwise

feel. But the advantage of preserving large estates from being frittered down

by a scheme of equal division, is not limited to its influence over the younger

children of their owners. It raises universally the standard of competence, and

gives new force to the springs which set industry in motion. The manner of

living among the great landlords is that in which every one is ambitious of

being able to indulge; and their habits of expense, though sometimes

injurious to themselves, act as powerful incentives to the ingenuity and

enterprise of the other classes, who never think their fortunes sufficiently

ample, unless they will enable them to emulate the splendour of the richestlandlords; so that the custom of primogeniture seems to render all classes

more industrious, and to augment at the same time, the mass of wealth and
                          259
the scale of enjoyment.

              The portion of truth, I can hardly say contained in these

observations, but recalled by them, I apprehend to be, that a state of complete

equality of fortunes would not be favourable to active exertion for the

increase of wealth. Speaking of the mass, it is as true of wealth as of most

other distinctions — of talent, knowledge, virtue — that those who already

have, or think they have, as much of it as their neighbours, will seldom exert

themselves to acquire more. But it is not therefore necessary that society

should provide a set of persons with large fortunes, to fulfil the social duty of

standing to be looked at, with envy and admiration, by the aspiring poor. The

fortunes which people have acquired for themselves, answer the purpose

quite as well, indeed much better; since a person is more powerfully

stimulated by the example of somebody who has earned a fortune, than by

the mere sight of somebody who possesses one; and the former is necessarily

an example of prudence and frugality as well as industry, while the latter

much oftener sets an example of profuse expense, which spreads, with

pernicious effect, to the very class on whom the sight of riches is supposed to

have so beneficial an influence, namely, those whose weakness of mind, and

taste for ostentation, makes ‘the splendour of the richest landlords’ at. tract

them with the most potent spell. In America there are few or no hereditary

fortunes; yet industrial energy, and the ardour of accumulation, are not

supposed to be particularly backward in that part of the world. When a

country has once fairly entered into the industrial career, which is the

principal occupation of the modern, as war was that of the ancient and

medieval world, the desire of acquisition by industry needs no factitious

stimulus: the advantages naturally inherent in riches, and the character they

assume of a test by which talent and success in life are habitually measured,

are an ample security for their being pursued with sufficient intensity and

zeal. As to the deeper consideration, that the diffusion of wealth, and not its

concentration, is desirable, and that the more wholesome state of society is

not that in which immense fortunes are possessed by a few and coveted by

all, but that in which the greatest possible numbers possess and are contented

with a moderate competency, which all may hope to acquire; I refer to it in

this place, only to show, how widely separated, on social questions, is the

entire mode of thought of the defenders of primogeniture, from that which ispartially promulgated in the present treatise.

              The other economical argument in favour of primogeniture, has

special reference to landed property. It is contended that the habit of dividing

inheritances equally, or with an approach to equality, among children,

promotes the subdivision of land into portions too small to admit of being

cultivated in an advantageous manner. This argument, eternally reproduced,

has again and again been refuted by English and Continental writers. It

proceeds on a supposition entirely at variance with that on which all the

theorems of political economy are grounded. It assumes that mankind in

general will habitually act in a manner opposed to their immediate and

obvious pecuniary interest. For the division of the inheritance does not

necessarily imply division of the land; which may be held in common, as is

not unfrequently the case in France and Belgium; or may become the

property of one of the coheirs, being charged with the shares of the others by

way of mortgage; or they may sell it outright, and divide the proceeds. When

the division of the land would diminish its productive power, it is the direct

interest of the heirs to adopt some one of these arrangements. Supposing,

however, what the argument assumes, that either from legal difficulties or

from their own stupidity and barbarism, they would not, if left to themselves,

obey the dictates of this obvious interest, but would insist upon cutting up the

land bodily into equal parcels, with the effect of impoverishing themselves;

this would be an objection to a law such as exists in France, of compulsory

division, but can be no reason why testators should be discouraged from

exercising the right of bequest in general conformity to the rule of equality,

since it would always be in their power to provide that the division of the

inheritance should take place without dividing the land itself. That the

attempts of the advocates of primogeniture to make out a case by facts

against the custom of equal division, are equally abortive, has been shown in

a former place. In all countries, or parts of countries, in which the division of

inheritances is accompanied by small holdings, it is because small holdings

are the general system of the country, even on the estates of the great

proprietors.

              Unless a strong case of social utility can be made out for

primogeniture, it stands sufficiently condemned by the general principles of

justice; being a broad distinction in the treatment of one person and of

another, grounded solely on an accident. There is no need, therefore, to makeout any case of economical evil against primogeniture. Such a case, however,

and a very strong one, may be made. It is a natural effect of primogeniture to

make the landlords a needy class. The object of the institution, or custom, is

to keep the land together in large masses, and this it commonly accomplishes;

but the legal proprietor of a large domain is not necessarily bona fide owner

of the whole income which it yields. It is usually charged, in each generation,

with provisions for the other children. It is often charged still more heavily by

the imprudent expenditure of the proprietor. Great landowners are generally

improvident in their expenses; they live up to their incomes when at the

highest, and if any change of circumstances diminishes their resources, some

time elapses before they make up their minds to retrench. Spendthrifts in

other classes are ruined, and disappear from society; but the spendthrift

landlord usually holds fast to his land, even when he has become a mere

receiver of its rents for the benefit of creditors. The same desire to keep up

the ‘splendour’ of the family, which gives rise to the custom of

primogeniture, indisposes the owner to sell a part in order to set free the

remainder; their apparent are therefore habitually greater than their real

means, and they are under a perpetual temptation to proportion their

expenditure to the former rather than to the latter. From such causes as these,

in almost all countries of great landowners, the majority of landed estates are

deeply mortgaged; and instead of having capital to spare for improvements, it

requires all the increased value of land, caused by the rapid increase of the

wealth and population of the country, to preserve the class from being

impoverished.

              3. To avert this impoverishment, recourse was had to the contrivance

of entails, whereby the order of succession was irrevocably fixed, and each

holder, having only a life interest, was unable to burthen his successor. The

land thus passing, free from debt, into the possession of the heir, the family

could not be ruined by the improvidence of its existing representative. The

economical evils arising from this disposition of property were partly of the

same kind, partly different, but on the whole greater, than those arising from

primogeniture alone. The possessor could not now ruin his successors, but he

could still ruin himself: he was not at all more likely than in the former case

to have the means necessary for improving the property: while, even if he

had, he was still less likely to employ them for that purpose, when the benefit

was to accrue to a person whom the entail made independent of him, while he

had probably younger children to provide for, in whose favour he could notnow charge the estate. While thus disabled from being himself an improver,

neither could he sell the estate to somebody who would; since entail

precludes alienation. In general he has even been unable to grant leases

beyond the term of his own life; ‘for’, says Blackstone, ‘if such leases had

been valid, then, under cover of long leases, the issue might have been

virtually disinherited’; and it has been necessary in Great Britain to relax, by

statute, the rigour of entails, in order to allow either of long leases, or of the

execution of improvements at the expense of the estate. It may be added that

the heir of entail, being assured of succeeding to the family property,

however undeserving of it, and being aware of this from his earliest years,

has much more than the ordinary chances of growing up idle, dissipated, and

profligate.

              In England, the power of entail is more limited by law, than in

Scotland and in most other countries where it exists. A landowner can settle

his property upon any number of persons successively who are living at the

time, and upon one unborn person, on whose attaining the age of twenty-one,

the entail expires, and the land becomes his absolute property. An estate may

in this manner be transmitted through a son, or a son and grandson, living

when the deed is executed, to an unborn child of that grandson. It has been

maintained that this power of entail is not sufficiently extensive to do any

mischief: in truth, however, it is much larger than it seems. Entails very rarely

expire; the first heir of entail, when of age, joins with the existing possessor

in resettling the estate, so as to prolong the entail for a further term. Large

properties, therefore, are rarely free for any considerable period, From the

restraints of a strict settlement; though the mischief is in one respect

mitigated, since in the renewal of the settlement for one more generation, the

estate is usually charged with a provision for younger children.

              In an economical point of view, the best system of landed property is

that in which land is most completely an object of commerce; passing readily

from hand to hand when a buyer can be found to whom it is worth while to

offer a greater sum for the land, than the value of the income drawn from it

by its existing possessor. This of course is not meant of ornamental property,

which is a source of expense, not profit; but only of land employed for

industrial uses, and held for the sake of the income which it affords.

Whatever facilitates the sale of land, tends to make it a more productive

instrument of the community at large; whatever prevents or restricts its sale,subtracts from its usefulness. Now, not only has entail this effect, but primo.

geniture also. The desire to keep land together in large masses, from other

motives than that of promoting its productiveness, often prevents changes and

alienations which would increase its efficiency as an instrument.

              4. On the other hand, a law which, like the French, restricts the

power of bequest to a narrow compass, and compels the equal division of the

whole or the greater part of the property among the children, seems to me,

though on different grounds, also very seriously objectionable. The only

reason for recognizing in the children any claim at all to more than a

provision, sufficient to launch them in life, and enable them to find a

livelihood, is grounded on the expressed or presumed wish of the parent;

whose claim to dispose of what is actually his own, cannot be set aside by

any pretensions of others to receive what is not theirs. To control the rightful

owner’s liberty of gift, by creating in the children a legal right superior to it,

is to postpone a real claim to an imaginary one. To this great and paramount

objection to the law, numerous secondary ones may be added. Desirable as it

is that the parent should treat the children with impartiality, and not make an

eldest son or a favourite, impartial division is not alway synonymous with

equal division. Some of the children may, without fault of their own, be less

capable than others of providing for themselves: some may, by other means

than their own exertions, be already provided for: and impartiality may

therefore require that the rule observed should not be one of equality, but of

compensation. Even when equality is the object, there are sometimes better

means of attaining it, than the inflexible rules by which law must necessarily

proceed. If one of the coheirs, being of a quarrelsome or litigious disposition,

stands upon his utmost rights, the law cannot make equitable adjustments; it

cannot apportion the property as seems best for the collect.ive interest of all

concerned; if there are several parcels of land, and the heirs cannot agree

about their value, the law cannot give a parcel to each, but every separate

parcel must be either put up to sale or divided: if there is a residence, or a

park or pleasure.ground, which would be destroyed, as such, by subdivision,

it must be sold, perhaps at a great sacrifice both of money and of feeling. But

what the law could not do, the parent could. By means of the liberty of be.

quest, all these points might be determined according to reason and the

general interest of the persons concerned; and the spirit of the principle of

equal division might be the better observed, because the testator was

emancipated from its letter. Finally, it would not then be necessary, as underthe compulsory system it is, that the law should interfere authoritatively in

the concerns of individuals, not only on the occurrence of a death, but

throughout life, in order to guard against the attempts of parents to frustrate

the legal claims of their heirs, under colour of gifts and other alienations inter

vivos.

              In conclusion; all owners of property should, I conceive, have power

to dispose by will of every part of it, but not to determine the person who

should succeed to it after the death of all who were living when the will was

made. Under what restrictions it should be allowable to bequeath property to

one person for life, with remainder to another person already in existence, is a

question belonging to general legislation, not to political economy. Such

settlements would be no greater hindrance to alienation than any case of joint

ownership, since the consent of persons actually in existence is all that would

be necessary for any new arrangement respecting the property.

              5. From the subject of Inheritance I now pass to that of Contracts,

and among these, to the important subject of the Laws of Partnership. How

much of good or evil depends upon these laws, and how important it is that

they should be the best possible, is evident to all who recognize in the

extension of the cooperative principle in the larger sense of the term, the great

economical necessity of modern industry. The progress of the productive arts

requiring that many sorts of industrial occupation should be carried on by

larger and larger capitals, the productive power of industry must suffer by

whatever impedes the formation of large capitals through the aggregation of

smaller ones. Capitals of the requisite magnitude belonging to single owners,

do not, in most countries, exist in the needful abundance, and would be still

less numerous if the laws favoured the diffusion instead of the concentration

of property: while it is most undesirable that all those improved processes,

and those means of efficiency and economy in production, which depend on

the possession of large funds, should be monopolies in the hands of a few

rich individuals, through the difficulties experienced by persons of moderate

or small means in associating their capital. Finally, I must repeat my

conviction, that the industrial economy which divides society absolutely into

two portions, the payers of wages and the receivers of them, the first counted

by thousands and the last by millions, is neither fit for, nor capable of,

indefinite duration: and the possibility of changing this system for one of

combination without dependence, and unity of interest instead of organizedhostility, depends altogether upon the future developments of the Partnership

principle.

              Yet there is scarcely any country whose laws do not throw great, and

in most cases, intentional obstacles in the way of the formation of any

numerous partnership. In England it is already a serious discouragement, that

differences among partners are, practically speaking, only capable of

adjudication by the Court of Chancery: which is often worse than placing

such questions out of the pale of all law; since any one of the disputant

parties, who is either dishonest or litigious, can involve the others at his

pleasure in the expense, trouble, and anxiety, which are the unavoidable

accompaniments of a Chancery suit, without their having the power of
                                                                                        260
freeing themselves from the infliction even by breaking up the association.

Besides this, it required, until lately, a separate Act of the legislature before

any joint-stock association could legally constitute itself, and be empowered

to act as one body. By a statute passed a few years ago, this necessity is done

away; but the statute in question is described by competent authorities as a

‘mass of confusion,’ of which they say that there ‘never was such an
                                                      261
infliction’ on persons entering into partnership. When a number of persons,

whether few or many, freely desire to unite their funds for a common

undertaking, not asking any peculiar privilege, nor the power to dispossess

any one of property, the law can have no good reason for throwing

difficulties in the way of the realization of the project. On compliance with a

few simple conditions of publicity, any body of persons ought to have the

power of constituting themselves into a joint-stock company, or societe en

nom collectif, without asking leave either of any public officer or of

parliament. As an association of many partners must practically be under the

management of a few, every facility ought to be afforded to the body for

exercising the necessary control and check over those few, whether they be

themselves members of the association, or merely its hired servants: and in

this point the English system is still at a lamentable distance from the

standard of perfection.

              6. Whatever facilities, however, English law might give to

associations formed on the principles of ordinary partnership, there is one

sort of joint-stock association which until the year 1855 it absolutely

disallowed, and which could only be called into existence by a special act

either of the legislature or of the Crown. I mean, associations with limitedliability.

              Associations with limited liability are of two kinds: in one, the

liability of all the partners is limited, in the other that of some of them only.

The first is the societe anonyme of the French law, which in England had

until lately no other name than that of ‘chartered company’: meaning thereby

a joint-stock company whose shareholders, by a charter from the Crown or a

special enactment of the legislature, stood exempted from any liability for the

debts of the concern, beyond the amount of their subscriptions. The other

species of limited partnership is that known to the French law under the name

of commandite; of this, which in England is still unrecognized and illegal, I

shall speak presently.

              If a number of persons chose to associate for carrying on any

operation of commerce or industry, agreeing among themselves and

announcing to those with whom they deal that the members of the association

do not undertake to be responsible beyond the amount of the subscribed

capital; is there any reason that the law should raise objections to this

proceeding, and should impose on them the unlimited responsibility which

they disclaim? For whose sake? Not for that of the partners themselves; for it

is they whom the limitation of responsibility benefits and protects. It must

therefore be for the sake of third parties; namely, those who may have

transactions with the association, and to whom it may run in debt beyond

what the subscribed capital suffices to pay. But nobody is obliged to deal

with the association: still less is any one obliged to give it unlimited credit.

The class of persons with whom such associations have dealings are in

general perfectly capable of taking care of themselves, and there seems no

reason that the law should be more careful of their interests than they will

themselves be; provided no false representation is held out, and they are

aware from the first what they have to trust to. The law is warranted in

requiring from all joint-stock associations with limited responsibility, not

only that the amount of capital on which they profess to carry on business

should either be actually paid up or security given for it (if, indeed, with

complete publicity, such a requirement would be necessary), but also that

such accounts should be kept, accessible to individuals, and if needful,

published to the world, as shall render it possible to ascertain at any time the

existing state of the company’s affairs, and to learn whether the capital which

is the sole security for the engagements into which they enter, still subsistsunimpaired: the fidelity of such accounts being guarded by sufficient

penalties. When the law has thus afforded to individuals all practicable means

of knowing the circumstances which ought to enter into their prudential

calculations in dealing with the company, there seems no more need for

interfering with individual judgment in this sort of transactions, than in any

other part of the private business of life.

              The reason usually urged for such interference is, that the managers

of an association with limited responsibility, not risking their whole fortunes

in the event of loss, while in case of gain they might profit largely, are not

sufficiently interested in exercising due circumspection, and are under the

temptation of exposing the funds of the association to improper hazards. It is,

however, well ascertained that associations with unlimited responsibility, if

they have rich shareholders, can obtain, even when known to be reckless in

their transactions, improper credit to an extent far exceeding what would be

given to companies equally ill-conducted whose creditors had only the
                                262
subscribed capital to rely on. To whichever side the balance of evil

inclines, it is a consideration of more importance to the shareholders

themselves than to third parties; since, with proper securities for publicity, the

capital of an association with limited liability could not be engaged in hazards

beyond those ordinarily incident to the business it carries on, without the

facts being known, and becoming the subject of comments by which the

credit of the body would be likely to be affected in quite as great a degree as

the circumstances would justify. If, under securities for publicity, it were

found in practice that companies, formed on the principle of unlimited

responsibility, were more skilfully and more cautiously managed, companies

with limited liability would be unable to maintain an equal competition with

them; and would therefore rarely be formed, unless when such limitation was

the only condition on which the necessary amount of capital could be raised:

and in that case it would be very unreasonable to say that their formation

ought to be prevented. It may further be remarked, that although, with

equality of capital, a company of limited liability offers a somewhat less

security to those who deal with it, than one in which every shareholder is

responsible with his whole fortune, yet even the weaker of these two

securities is in some respects stronger than that which an individual capitalist

can afford. In the case of an individual, there is such security as can be

founded on his unlimited liability, but not that derived from publicity of

transactions, or from a known and large amount of paid-up capital. This topicis well treated in an able paper by M. Coquelin, published in the Revue des
                                263
Deux Mondes for July 1843.

              ‘While third parties who trade with individuals,’ says this writer,

‘scarcely ever know, except by approximation, and even that most vague and

uncertain, what is the amount of capital responsible for the performance of

contracts made with them, those who trade with a societe anonyme can obtain

full information if they seek it, and perform their operations with a feeling of

confidence that cannot exist in the other case. Again, nothing is easier than

for an individual trader to conceal the extent of his engagements, as no one

can know it certainly but himself. Even his confidential clerk may be ignorant

of it, as the loans he finds himself compelled to make may not all be of a

character to require that they be entered in his day-book. It is a secret

confined to himself; one which transpires rarely, and always slowly; one

which is unveiled only when the catastrophe has occurred. On the contrary,

the societe anonyme neither can nor ought to borrow, without the fact

becoming known to all the world directors, clerks, shareholders, and the

public. Its operations partake in some respects, of the nature of those of

governments. The light of day penetrates in every direction, and there can be

no secrets from those who seek for information. Thus all is fixed, recorded,

known, of the capital and debts in the case of the societe anonyme, while all

is uncertain and unknown in the case of the individual trader. Which of the

two, we would ask the reader, presents the most favourable aspect, or the

surest guarantee, to the view of those who trade with them?

              ‘Again, availing himself of the obscurity in which his affairs are

shrouded, and which he desires to increase, the private trader is enabled, so

long as his business appears prosperous, to produce impressions in regard to

his means far exceeding the reality, and thus to establish a credit not justified

by those means. When losses occur, and he sees himself threatened with

bankruptcy, the world is still ignorant of his condition, and he finds himself

enabled to contract debts far beyond the possibility of payment. The fatal day

arrives, and the creditors find a debt much greater than had been anticipated,

while the means of payment are as much less. Even this is not all. The same

obscurity which has served him so well thus far, when desiring to magnify

his capital and increase his credit, now affords him the opportunity of placing

a part of that capital beyond the reach of his creditors. It becomes diminished,

if not annihilated. It hides itself, and not even legal remedies, nor the activityof creditors, can bring it forth from the dark corners in which it is placed....

Our readers can readily determine for themselves if practices of this kind are

equally easy in the case of the societe anonyme. We do not doubt that such

things are possible, but we think that they will agree with us that from its

nature, its organization, and the necessary publicity that attends all its actions,

the liability to such occurrences is very greatly diminished.’

              The laws of most countries, England included, have erred in a

twofold manner with regard to joint-stock companies. While they have been

most unreasonably jealous of allowing such associations to exist, especially

with limited responsibility, they have generally neglected the enforcement of

publicity; the best security to the public against any danger which might arise

from this description of partnerships; and a security quite as much required in

the case of those associations of the kind in question, which, by an exception

from their general practice, they suffered to exist. Even in the instance of the

Bank of England, which holds a monopoly from the legislature, and has had

partial control over a matter of so much public interest as the state of the

circulating medium, it is only within these few years that any publicity has

been enforced; and the publicity was at first of an extremely incomplete

character, though now, for most practical purposes, probably at length

sufficient.

              7. The other kind of limited partnership which demands our

attention, is that in which the managing partner or partners are responsible

with their whole fortunes for the engagements of the concern, but have others

associated with them who contribute only definite sums, and are not liable for

anything beyond, though they participate in the profits according to any rule

which may be agreed on. This is called partnership en commandite: and the

partners with limited liability (to whom, by the French law, all interference in

the management of the concern is interdicted) are known by the name

commanditaires. Such partnerships are not allowed by English law: in all

private partnerships, whoever shares in the profits is liable for the debts, to as

plenary an extent as the managing partner.

              For such prohibition no satisfactory defence has ever, so far as I am

aware, been made. Even the insufficient reason given against limiting the

responsibility of shareholders in a joint-stock company does not apply here;

there being no diminution of the motives to circumspect management, since

all who take any part in the direction of the concern are liable with theirwhole fortunes. To third parties again; the security is improved by the

existence of a commanditei since the amount subscribed by commanditaires

is all of it available to creditors, the commanditaires losing their whole

investment before any creditor can lose anything; while, if instead of

becoming partners to that amount, they had lent the sum at an interest equal

to the profit they derived from it, they would have shared with the other

creditors in the residue of the estate, diminishing pro rata the dividend

obtained by all. While the practice of commandite thus conduces to the

interest of creditors, it is often highly desirable for the contracting parties

themselves. The managers are enabled to obtain the aid of a much greater

amount of capital than they could borrow on their own security; and persons

are induced to aid useful undertakings, by embarking limited portions of

capital in them, when they would not, and often could not prudently, have

risked their whole fortunes on the chances of the enterprise.

              It may perhaps be thought that where due facilities are afforded to

joint-stock companies, commandite partnerships are not required. But there

are classes of cases to which the commandite principle must always be better

adapted than the joint-stock principle. ‘Suppose,’ says M. Coquelin, ‘an

inventor seeking for a capital to carry his invention into practice. To obtain

the aid of capitalists, he must offer them a share of the anticipated benefit;

they must associate themselves with him in the chances of its success. In such

a case, which of the forms would he select? Not partnership, certainly’; for

various reasons, and especially the extreme difficulty of finding a partner

with capital, willing to risk his whole fortune on the success of the
          264
invention. ‘Neither would he select the societe anonyme,’ or any other

form of joint-stock company, ‘in which he might be superseded as manager.

He would stand, in such an association, on no better footing than any other

shareholder, and he might be lost in the crowd; whereas, the association

existing, as it were, by and for him, the management would appear to belong

to him as a matter of right. Cases occur in which a merchant or a

manufacturer, without being precisely an inventor, has undeniable claims to

the management of an undertaking, from the possession of qualities

peculiarly calculated to promote its success. So great, indeed,’ continues M.

Coquelin, ‘is the necessity, in many cases, for the limited partnership, that it

is difficult to conceive how we could dispense with or replace it’: and in

reference to his own country he is probably in the right.              Where there is so great a readiness as in England, on the part of the

public, to form joint-stock associations, even without the encouragement of a

limitation of responsibility; commandite partnership, though its prohibition is

in principle quite indefensible, cannot be deemed to be, in a merely

economical point of view, of the imperative necessity which M. Coquelin

ascribes to it. Yet the inconveniences are not small, which arise indirectly

from provisions of law by which every one who shares in the profits of a

concern is subject to the full liabilities of an unlimited partnership. It is

impossible to say how many or what useful modes of combination are

rendered impracticable by such a state of the law. It is sufficient for its

condemnation that, unless in some way relaxed, it is inconsistent with the

payment of wages in part by a percentage on profits; in other words, the
                                                                            265
association of the operatives as virtual partners with the capitalist.

              It is, above all, with reference to the improvement and elevation of

the working classes that complete freedom in the conditions of partnership is

indispensable. Combinations such as the associations of workpeople,

described in a former chapter, are the most powerful means of effecting the

social emancipation of the labourers through their own moral qualities. Nor is

the liberty of association important solely for its examples of success, but

fully as much so for the sake of attempts which would not succeed; but by

their failure would give instruction more impressive than can be afforded by

anything short of actual experience. Every theory of social improvement, the

worth of which is capable of being brought to an experimental test, should be

permitted, and even encouraged, to submit itself to that test. From such

experiments the active portion of the working classes would derive lessons,

which they would be slow to learn from the teaching of persons supposed to

have interests and prejudices adverse to their good; would obtain the means

of correcting, at no cost to society, whatever is now erroneous in their notions

of the means of establishing their independence; and of discovering the

conditions, moral, intellectual, and industrial, which are indispensably

necessary for effecting without injustice, or for effecting at all, the social
                              266
regeneration they aspire to.

              The French law of partnership is superior to the English in

permitting commandite; and superior, in having no such unmanageable

instrument as the Court of Chancery, all cases arising from commercial

transactions being adjudicated in a comparatively cheap and expeditiousmanner by a tribunal of merchants. In other respects the French system was,

and I believe, still is, far worse than the English. A joint-stock company with

limited responsibility cannot be formed without the express authorization of

the department of government called the Conseil d’Etat, a body of

administrators, generally entire strangers to industrial transactions, who have

no interest in promoting enterprises, and are apt to think that the purpose of

their institution is to restrain them; whose consent cannot in any case be

obtained without an amount of time and labour which is a very serious

hindrance to the commencement of an enterprise, while the extreme

uncertainty of obtaining that consent at all is a great discouragement to

capitalists who would be willing to subscribe. In regard to joint-stock

companies without limitation of responsibility, which in England exist in

such numbers and are formed with such facility, these associations cannot, in

France, exist at all; for, in cases of unlimited partnership, the French law does

not permit the division of the capital into transferable shares.

              The best existing laws of partnership appear to be those of the New
                                              267
England States. According to Mr Carey, ‘nowhere is association so little

trammelled by regulations as in New England; the consequence of which is,

that it is carried to a greater extent there, and particularly in Massachusetts

and Rhode Island, than in any other part of the world. In these states, the soil

is covered with compagnies anonymes — chartered companies — for almost

every conceivable purpose. Every town is a corporation for the management

of its roads, bridges, and schools: which are, therefore, under the direct

control of those who pay for them, and are consequently well managed.

Academies and churches, lyceums and libraries, saving-fund societies, and

trust companies, exist in numbers proportioned to the wants of the people,

and all are corporations. Every district has its local bank, of a size to suit its

wants, the stock of which is owned by the small capitalists of the

neighbourhood, and managed by themselves; the consequence of which is,

that in no part of the world is the system of banking so perfect — so little

liable to vibration in the amount of loans — the necessary effect of which is,

that in none is the value of property so little affected by changes in the

amount or value of the currency resulting from the movements of their own

banking institutions. In the two states to which we have particularly referred,

they are almost two hundred in number. Massachusetts, alone, offers to our

view fifty-three insurance offices, of various forms, scattered through the

state, and all incorporated. Factories are incorporated, and are owned inshares; and every one that has any part in the management of their concerns,

from the purchase of the raw material to the sale of the manufactured article,

is a part owner; while every one employed in them has a prospect of

becoming one, by the use of prudence, exertion, and economy. Charitable

associations exist in large numbers, and all are incorporated. Fishing vessels

are owned in shares by those who navigate them; and the sailors of a whaling

ship depend in a great degree, if not altogether, upon the success of the

voyage for their compensation. Every master of a vessel trading in the

Southern Ocean is a part owner, and the interest he possesses is a strong

inducement to exertion and economy, by aid of which the people of New

England are rapidly driving out the competition of other nations for the trade

of that part of the world. Wherever settled, they exhibit the same tendency to

combination of action. In New York they are the chief owners of the lines of

packet ships, which are divided into shares, owned by the shipbuilders, the

merchants, the master, and the mates; which last generally acquire the means

of becoming themselves masters, and to this is due their great success. The

system is the most perfectly democratic of any in the world. It affords to

every labourer, every sailor, every operative, male or female, the prospect of

advancement; and its results are precisely such as we should have reason to

expect. In no part of the world are talent, industry, and prudence, so certain to

be largely rewarded.’

              The cases of insolvency and fraud on the part of chartered

companies in America, which have caused so much loss and so much scandal

in Europe, did not occur in the part of the Union to which this extract refers,

but in other States, in which the right of association is much more fettered by

legal restrictions, and in which, accordingly, joint-stock associations are not

comparable in number or variety to those of New England. Mr Carey adds,

‘A careful examination of the systems of the several states, can scarcely, we

think, fail to convince the reader of the advantage resulting from permitting

men to determine among themselves the terms upon which they will

associate, and allowing the associations that may be formed to contract with

the public as to the terms upon which they will trade together, whether of the

limited or unlimited liability of the partners.’ This principle has been adopted

as the foundation of all recent English legislation on the subject

              8. I proceed to the subject of Insolvency Laws.

              Good laws on this subject are important, first and principally, on thescore of public morals; which are on no point more under the influence of the

law, for good and evil, than in a matter belonging so preeminently to the

province of law as the preservation of pecuniary integrity. But the subject is

also, in a merely economical point of view, of great importance. First,

because the economical well-being of a people, and of mankind, depends in

an especial manner upon their being able to trust each other’s engagements.

Secondly, because one of the risks, or expenses, of industrial operations is the

risk or expense of what are commonly called bad debts, and every saving

which can be effected in this liability is a diminution of cost of production;

by dispensing with an item of outlay which in no way conduces to the desired

end, and which must be paid for either by the consumer of the commodity, or

from the general profits of capital, according as the burthen is peculiar or

general.

              The laws and practice of nations on this subject have almost always

been in extremes. The ancient laws of most countries were all severity to the

debtor. They invested the creditor with a power of coercion, more or less

tyrannical, which he might use against his insolvent debtor, either to extort

the surrender of hidden property, or to obtain satisfaction of a vindictive

character, which might console him for the non.payment of the debt. This

arbitrary power has extended, in some countries, to making the insolvent

debtor serve the creditor as his slave: in which plan there were at least some

grains of common sense, since it might possibly be regarded as a scheme for

making him work out the debt by his labour. In England the coercion

assumed the milder form of ordinary imprisonment. The one and the other

were the barbarous expedients of a rude age, repugnant to justice, as well as

to humanity. Unfortunately the reform of them, like that of the criminal law

generally, has been taken in hand as an affair of humanity only, not of justice:

and the modish humanity of the present time, which is essentially a thing of

one idea, has in this as in other cases, gone into a violent reaction against the

ancient severity, and might almost be supposed to see in the fact of having

lost or squandered other people’s property, a peculiar title to indulgence.

Everything in the law which attached disagreeable consequences to that fact,

was gradually relaxed, or entirely got rid of: until the demoralizing effects of

this laxity became so evident as to determine, by more recent legislation, a

salutary though very insufficient movement in the reverse direction.

              The indulgence of the laws to those who have made themselvesunable to pay their just debts, is usually defended, on the plea that the sole

object of the law should be, in case of insolvency, not to coerce the person of

the debtor, but to get at his property, and distribute it fairly among the

creditors. Assuming that this is and ought to be the sole object, the mitigation

of the law was in the first instance carried so far as to sacrifice that object.

Imprisonment at the discretion of a creditor was really a powerful engine for

extracting from the debtor any property which he had concealed or otherwise

made away with; and it remains to be shown by experience whether, in

depriving creditors of this instrument, the law, even as last amended, has

furnished them with a sufficient equivalent. But the doctrine, that the law has

done all that ought to be expected from it, when it has put the creditors in

possession of the property of an insolvent, is in itself a totally inadmissible

piece of spurious humanity. It is the business of law to prevent wrong-doing,

and not simply to patch up the consequences of it when it has been

committed. The law is bound to take care that insolvency shall not be a good

pecuniary speculation; that men shall not have the privilege of hazarding

other people’s property without their knowledge or consent, taking the profits

of the enterprise if it is successful, and if it fails throwing the loss upon the

rightful owners; and that they shall not find it answer to make themselves

unable to pay their just debts, by spending the money of their creditors in

personal indulgence. It is admitted that what is technically called fraudulent

bankruptcy, the false pretence of inability to pay, is, when detected, properly

subject to punishment. But does it follow that insolvency is not the

consequence of misconduct because the inability to pay may be real? If a man

has been a spendthrift, or a gambler, with property on which his creditors had

a prior claim, shall he pass scot-free because the mischief is consummated

and the money gone? Is there any very material difference in point of

morality between this conduct, and those other kinds of dishonesty which go

by the names of fraud and embezzlement?

              Such cases are not a minority, but a large majority among

insolvencies. The statistics of bankruptcy prove the fact. ‘By far the greater

part of all insolvencies arise from notorious misconduct; the proceedings of

the Insolvent Debtors Court and of the Bankruptcy Court will prove it.

Excessive and unjustifiable overtrading, or most absurd speculation in

commodities, merely because the poor speculator “thought they would get

up”, but why he thought so he cannot tell; speculation in hops, in tea, in silk,

in corn — things with which he is altogether unacquainted; wild and absurdinvestments in foreign funds, or in joint stocks; these are among the most
                                    268
innocent causes of bankruptcy.’ The experienced and intelligent writer

from whom I quote, corroborates his assertion by the testimony of several of

the official assignees of the Bankruptcy Court. One of them says, ‘As far as I

can collect from the books and documents furnished by the bankrupts, it

seems to me that’ in the whole number of cases which occurred during a

given time in the court to which he was attached, ‘fourteen have been ruined

by speculations in thing with which they were unacquainted; three by

neglecting bookkeeping; ten by trading beyond their capital and means, and

the consequent loss and expense of accommodation bills; forty-nine by

expending more than they could reasonably hope their profits would be,

though their business yielded a fair return; none by any general distress, or

the falling off of any particular branch of trade.’ Another of these officers

says that, during a period of eighteen months, ‘fifty-two cases of bankruptcy

have come under my care. It is my opinion that thirty-two of these have

arisen from an imprudent expenditure, and five partly from that cause, and

partly from a pressure on the business in which the bankrupts were employed.

Fifteen I attribute to improvident speculations, combined in many instances

with an extravagant mode of life.’

              To these citations the author adds the following statements from his

personal means of knowledge. ‘Many insolvencies are produced by

tradesmen’s indolence: they keep no books, or at least imperfect ones, which

they never balance; they never take stock; they employ servants, if their trade

be extensive, whom they are too indolent even to supervise, and then become

insolvent. It is not too much to say, that one-half of all the persons engaged in

trade, even in London, never take stock at all: they go on year after year

without knowing how their affairs stand, and at last, like the child at school,

they find to their surprise, but one halfpenny left in their pocket. I will

venture to say that not one-fourth of all the persons in the provinces, either

manufacturers, tradesmen, or farmers, ever take stock; nor in fact does one-

half of them ever keep account-books, deserving any other name than

memorandum books. I know sufficient of the concerns of five hundred small

tradesmen in the provinces, to be enabled to say, that not one.fifth of them

ever take stock, or keep even the most ordinary accounts. I am prepared to

say of such tradesmen, from carefully prepared tables, giving every

advantage where there has been any doubt as to the causes of their

insolvency, that where nine happen from extravagance or dishonesty, one’ at                                                  269
most ‘may be referred to misfortune alone.’

              Is it rational to expect among the trading classes any high sense of

justice, honour, or integrity, if the law enables men who act in this manner to

shuffle off the consequences of their misconduct upon those who have been

so unfortunate as to trust them; and practically proclaims that it looks upon

insolvency thus produced, as a ‘misfortune’, not an offence?

              It is, of course, not denied, that insolvencies do arise from causes

beyond the control of the debtor, and that, in many more cases, his culpability

is not of a high order; and the law ought to make a distinction in favour of

such cases, but not without a searching investigation; nor should the case ever

be let go without having ascertained, in the most complete manner

practicable, not the fact of insolvency, but the cause of it. To have been

trusted with money or money’s worth, and to have lost or spent it, is prima

facie evidence of something wrong: and it is not for the creditor to prove,

which he cannot do in one case out of ten, that there has been criminality, but

for the debtor to rebut the presumption, by laying open the whole state of

affairs, and showing either that there has been no misconduct, or that the

misconduct has been of an excusable kind. If he fail in this, he ought never to

be dismissed without a punishment proportioned to the degree of blame

which seems justly imputable to him; which punishment, however, might be

shortened or mitigated in proportion as he appeared likely to exert himself in

repairing the injury done.

              It is a common argument with those who approve a relaxed system

of insolvency laws, that credit, except in the great operations of commerce, is

an evil; and that to deprive creditors of legal redress is a judicious means of

preventing credit from being given. That which is given by retail dealers to

unproductive consumers is, no doubt, to the excess to which it is carried, a

considerably evil. This, however, is only true of large, and especially of long,

credits; for there is credit whenever goods are not paid for before they quit

the shop, or, at least, the custody of the seller; and there would be much

inconvenience in putting an end to this sort of credit. But a large proportion

of the debts on which insolvency laws take effect, are those due by small

tradesmen to the dealers who supply them: and on no class of debts does the

demoralization occasioned by a bad state of the law, operate more

perniciously. These are commercial Credits, which no one wishes to see

curtailed; their existence is of great importance to the general industry of thecountry, and to numbers of honest, well.conducted persons of small means, to

whom it would be a great injury that they should be prevented from obtaining

the accommodation they need, and would not abuse, through the omission of

the law to provide just remedies against dishonest or reckless borrowers.

              But though it were granted that retail transactions, on any footing but

that of ready money payment, are an evil, and their entire suppression a fit

subject for legislation to aim at; a worse mode of compassing that object

could scarcely be invented, than to permit those who have been trusted by

others to cheat and rob them with impunity. The law does not generally select

the vices of mankind as the appropriate instrument for inflicting chastisement

on the comparatively innocent. When it seeks to discourage any course of

action, it does so by applying inducements of its own, not by outlawing those

who act in the manner it deems objectionable, and letting loose the predatory

instincts of the worthless part of mankind to feed upon them. If a man has

committed murder the law condemns him to death; but it does not promise

impunity to anybody who may kill him for the sake of taking his purse. The

offence of believing another’s word, even rashly, is not so heinous that for

the sake of discouraging it the spectacle should be brought home to every

door, of triumphant rascality, with the law on its side, mocking the victims it

has made. This pestilent example has been very widely exhibited since the

relaxation of the insolvency laws. It is idle to expect that, even by absolutely

depriving creditors of all legal redress, the kind of credit which is considered

objectionable would really be very much checked. Rogues and swindlers are

still an exception among mankind, and people will go on trusting each other’s

promises. Large dealers, in abundant business, would refuse credit, as many

of them already do: but in the eager competition of a great town, or the

dependent position of a village shopkeeper, what can be expected from the

tradesman to whom a single customer is of importance, the beginner,

perhaps, who is striving to get into business? He will take the risk, even if it

were still greater; he is ruined if he cannot sell his goods, and he can be

ruined if he is defrauded. Nor does it avail to say, that he ought to make

proper inquiries, and ascertain the character of those to whom he supplies

good on trust. In some of the most flagrant cases of profligate debtors which

have come before the Bankruptcy Court, the swindler had been able to give,

and had given, excellent references.

        250
               Principles of Political Economy, ed. 1843, p. 264. There is muchmore to the same effect in the more recent treatise by the same author, ‘On

the Succession to Property vacant by Death’.

        251
               Mr Cecil Fane, the Commissioner of the Bankruptcy Court, in his

evidence before the Committee on the Law of Partnership, says “I remember

a short time ago reading a written statement by two eminent solicitors, who

said that they had known many partnership accounts go into Chancery, but

that they never knew one come out... Very few of the persons who would be

disposed to engage in partnerships of this kind’ (co-operative associations of

working men) ‘have any idea of the truth, namely that the decision of

questions arising amongst partners is really impracticable.

              ‘Do they not know that one partner may rob the other without any

possibility of his obtaining redress? — The fact is so; but whether they know

it or not, I cannot undertake to say.’

              This flagrant injustice is, in Mr Fane’s opinion, wholly attributable

to the defects of the tribunal. ‘My opinion is, that if there is one thing more

easy than another, it is the settlement of partnership questions, and for the

simple reason, that everything which is done in a partnership is entered mode

of in the books; the evidence therefore is at hand; if therefore a rational mode

of proceeding were once adopted, the difficulty would altogether vanish.’ —

Minutes of Evidence annexed to the Report of the Select Committee on the

Law of Partnership (1851), pp. 85–7.

        252
               Report, ut supra, p. 167.

        253
               See the Report already referred to, pp. 145–158.

        254
               The quotation is from a translation published by Mr H.C. Carey,

in an American periodical, Hunt’s Merchant’s Magazine, for May and June

1845.

        255
               ‘There has been a great deal of commiseration professed,’ says

Mr Duncan, solicitor, ‘towards the poor inventor; he has been oppressed by

the high cost of patents; but his chief oppression has been the partnership

law, which prevents his getting any one to help him to develop his invention.

He is a poor man, and therefore cannot give security to a creditor; no one will

lend him money; the rate of interest offered, however high it may be, is not

an attraction. But if by the alteration of the law he could allow capitalists to

take an interest with him and share the profits, while the risk should beconfined to the capital they embarked, there is very little doubt at all that he

would frequently get assistance from capitalists; whereas at the present

moment, with the law as it stands, he is completely destroyed, and his

invention is useless to him; he struggles month after month; he applies again

and again to the capitalist without avail. I know it practically in two or three

cases oF patented inventions; especially one where parties with capital were

desirous oF entering into an undertaking of great moment in Liverpool, but

five or six different gentlemen were deterred from doing so, all feeling the

strongest objection to what each one called the cursed partnership law.’

Report, p. 155.

              Mr Fane says, ‘in the course of my professional life, as a

Commissioner of the Court of Bankruptcy, I have learned that the most

unfortunate man in the world is an inventor. The difficulty which an inventor

finds in getting at capital involves him in all sorts of embarrassments, and he

ultimately is for the most part a ruined man, and somebody else gets

possession of his invention.’ ib. p. 82.

        256
               It has been found possible to effect this through the Limited

Liability Act, by erecting the capitalist and his workpeople into a Limited

Company; as proposed by Messrs Briggs.

        257
               By an Act of the year 1852, called the industrial and Provident

Societies Act, for which the nation is indebted to the public-spirited exertions

of Mr Slaney, industrial associations of working people are admitted to the

statutory privileges of Friendly Societies. This not only exempts them from

the formalities applicable to joint-stock companies, but provides for the

settlement of disputes among the partners without recourse to the Court of

Chancery. There are still some defects in the provisions of this Act, which

hamper the proceedings of the Societies in several respects; as is pointed out

in the Almanack of the Rochdale Equitable Pioneers for 1861.

        258
               In a note appended to his translation of M. Coquelin’s paper.

        259
               From a volume published in 1845, entitled Credit the Life of

Commerce, by Mr J. H. Elliot.

        260
               pp. 50–1.

 

  Chapter 10 – Of Interferences of Government Grounded on Erroneous

                                        Theories

 

 

              1. From the necessary functions of government, and the effects

produced on the economical interests of society by their good or ill discharge,

we proceed to the functions which belong to what I have termed, for want of

a better designation, the optional class; those which are sometimes assumed

by governments and sometimes not, and which it is not unanimously

admitted that they ought to exercise.

              Before entering on the general principles of the question, it will be

advisable to clear from our path all those cases, in which government

interference works ill because grounded on false views of the subject

interfered with. Such cases have no connexion with any theory respecting the

proper limits of interference. There are some things with which governments

ought not to meddle, and other things with which they ought; but whether

right or wrong in itself, the interference must work for ill, if government, not

understanding the subject which it meddles with, meddles to bring about a

result which would be mischievous. We will therefore begin by passing in

review various false theories, which have from time to time formed the

ground of acts of government more or less economically injurious.

              Former writers on political economy have found it needful to devote

much trouble and space to this department of their subject. It has now happily

become possible, at least in our own country, greatly to abridge this purely

negative part of our discussions. The false theories of political economy

which have done so much mischief in times past, are entirely discredited

among all who have not lagged behind the general progress of opinion; and

few of the enactments which were once grounded on those theories still help

to deform the statute-book. As the principles on which their condemnation

rests have been fully set forth in other parts of this Treatise, we may here

content ourselves with a few brief indications.

              Of these false theories, the most notable is the doctrine of Protection

to Native Industry; a phrase meaning the prohibition, or the discouragement

by heavy duties, of such foreign commodities as are capable of beingproduced at home. If the theory involved in this system had been correct, the

practical conclusions grounded on it would not have been unreasonable. The

theory was, that to buy things produced at home was a national benefit, and

the introduction of foreign commodities generally a national loss. It being at

the same time evident that the interest of the consumer is to buy foreign

commodities in preference to domestic whenever they are either cheaper or

better, the interest of the consumer appeared in this respect to be contrary to

the public interest; he was certain, if left to his own inclinations, to do what

according to the theory was injurious to the public.

              It was shown, however, in our analysis of the effects of inter.

national trade, as it had been often shown by former writers, that the

importation of foreign commodities, in the common course of traffic, never

takes place, except when it is, economically speaking, a national good, by

causing the same amount of commodities to be obtained at a smaller cost of

labour and capital to the country. To prohibit, therefore, this importation, or

impose duties which prevent it, is to render the labour and capital of the

country less efficient in production than they would otherwise be; and compel

a waste, of the difference between the labour and capital necessary for the

home production of the commodity, and that which is required for producing

the things with which it can be purchased from abroad. The amount of

national loss thus occasioned is measured by the excess of the price at which

the commodity is produced, over that at which it could be imported. In the

case of manufactured goods, the whole difference between the two prices is

absorbed in indemnifying the producers for waste of labour, or of the capital

which supports that labour. Those who are supposed to be benefited, namely,

the makers of the protected articles, (unless they form an exclusive company,

and have a monopoly against their own countrymen as well as against

foreigners,) do not obtain higher profits than other people. All is sheer loss, to

the country as well as to the consumer. When the protected article is a

product of agriculture — the waste of labour not being incurred on the whole

produce, but only on what may be called the last instalment of it — the extra

price is only in part an indemnity for waste, the remainder being a tax paid to

the landlords.

              The restrictive and prohibitory policy was originally grounded on

what is called the Mercantile System, which representing the advantage of

foreign trade to consist solely in bringing money into the country, gaveartificial encouragement to exportation of goods, and discountenanced their

importation. The only exceptions to the system were those required by the

system itself. The materials and instruments of production were the subjects

of a contrary policy, directed however to the same end; they were freely

imported, and not permitted to be exported, in order that manufacturers,

being more cheaply supplied with the requisites of manufacture, might be

able to sell cheaper, and therefore to export more largely. For a similar

reason, importation was allowed and even favoured, when confined to the

productions of countries, which were supposed to take from the country still

more than it took from them, thus enriching it by a favourable balance of

trade. As part of the same system, colonies were founded, for the supposed

advantage of compelling them to buy our commodities, or at all events not to

buy those of any other country: in return for which restriction, we were

generally willing to come under an equivalent obligation with respect to the

staple productions of the colonists. The consequences of the theory were

pushed so far, that it was not unusual even to give bounties on exportation,

and induce foreigners to buy from us rather than from other countries, by a

cheapness which we artificially produced, by paying part of the price for

them out of our own taxes. This is a stretch beyond the point yet reached by

any private tradesman in his competition for business. No shopkeeper, I

should think, ever made a practice of bribing customers by selling goods to

them at a permanent loss, making it up to himself from other funds in his

possession. The principle of the Mercantile Theory is now given up even by

writers and governments who still cling to the restrictive system. Whatever

hold that system has over men’s minds, independently of the private interests

exposed to real or apprehended loss by its abandonment, is derived from

fallacies other than the old notion of the benefits of heaping up money in the

country. The most effective of these is the specious plea of employing our

own countrymen and our national industry, instead of feeding and supporting

the industry of foreigners. The answer to this, from the principles laid down

in former chapters, is evident. Without reverting to the fundamental theorem

discussed in an early part of the present treatise, respecting the nature and

sources of employment for labour, it is sufficient to say, what has usually

been said by the advocates of free trade, that the alternative is not between

employing our own people and foreigners, but between employing one class

and another of our own people. The imported commodity is always paid for,

directly or indirectly, with the produce of our own industry: that industrybeing at the same time rendered more productive, since, with the same labour

and outlay, we are enabled to possess ourselves of a greater quantity of the

article. Those who have not well considered the subject are apt to suppose

that our exporting an equivalent in our own produce, for the foreign articles

we consume, depends on contingencies — on the consent of foreign countries

to make some corresponding relaxation of their own restrictions, or on the

question whether those from whom we buy are induced by that circumstance

to buy more from us; and that, if these things, or things equivalent to them,

do not happen, the payment must be made in money. Now, in the first place,

there is nothing more objectionable in a money payment than in payment by

any other medium, if the state of the market makes it the most advantageous

remittance; and the money itself was first acquired, and would again be

replenished, by the export of an equivalent value of our own products. But, in

the next place, a very short interval of paying in money would so lower prices

as either to stop a part of the importation, or raise up a foreign demand for

our produce, sufficient to pay for the imports. I grant that this disturbance of

the equation of international demand would be in some degree to our

disadvantage, in the purchase of other imported articles; and that a country

which prohibits some foreign commodities, does, caeteris paribus, obtain

those which it does not prohibit, at a less price than it would otherwise have

to pay. To express the same thing in other words; a country which destroys or

prevents altogether certain branches of foreign trade, thereby annihilating a

general gain to the world, which would be shared in some proportion between

itself and other countries — does, in some circumstances, draw to itself, at

the expense of foreigners, a larger share than would else belong to it of the

gain arising from that portion of its foreign trade which it suffers to subsist.

But even this it can only be enabled to do, if foreigners do not maintain

equivalent prohibitions or restrictions against its commodities. In any case,

the justice or expediency of destroying one of two gains, in order to engross a

rather larger share of the other, does not require much discussion: the gain,

too, which is destroyed, being, in proportion to the magnitude of the

transactions, the larger of the two, since it is the one which capital, left to

itself, is supposed to seek by preference.

              Defeated as a general theory, the Protectionist doctrine finds support

in particular cases, from considerations which, when really in point, involve

greater interests than mere saving of labour; the interests of national

subsistence and of national defence. The discussions on the Corn Laws havefamiliarized everybody with the plea, that we ought to be independent of

foreigners for the food of the people; and the Navigation Laws were

grounded, in theory and profession, on the necessity of keeping up a ‘nursery

of seamen’ for the navy. On this last subject I at once admit, that the object is

worth the sacrifice; and that a country exposed to invasion by sea, if it cannot

otherwise have sufficient ships and sailors of its own to secure the means of

manning on an emergency an adequate fleet, is quite right in obtaining those

means, even at an economical sacrifice in point of cheapness of transport.

When the English Navigation Laws were enacted, the Dutch, from their

maritime skill and their low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for

other nations, England included, at cheaper rates than those nations could

carry for themselves: which placed all other countries at a great comparative

disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for their ships of war. The

Navigation Laws, by which this deficiency was remedied, and at the same

time a blow struck against the maritime power of a nation with which

England was then frequently engaged in hostilities, were probably, though

economically disadvantageous, politically expedient. But English ships and

sailors can now navigate as cheaply as those of any other country;

maintaining at least an equal competition with the other maritime nations

even in their own trade. The ends which may once have justified Navigation

Laws, require them no longer, and afforded no reason for maintaining this

invidious exception to the general rule of free trade.

              With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists has been so

often and so triumphantly met, that it requires little notice here. That country

is the most steadily as well as the most abundantly supplied with food, which

draws its supplies from the largest surface. It is ridiculous to found a general

system of policy on so improbable a danger as that of being at war with all

the nations of the world at once; or to suppose that, even if inferior at sea, a

whole country could be blockaded like a town, or that the growers of food in

other countries would not be as anxious not to lose an advantageous market,

as we should be not to be deprived of their corn. On the subject, however, of

subsistence, there is one point which deserves more especial consideration. In

cases of actual or apprehended scarcity, many countries of Europe are

accustomed to stop the exportation of food. Is this, or not, sound policy?

There can be no doubt that in the present state of international morality, a

people cannot, any more than an individual, be blamed for not starving itself

to feed others. But if the greatest amount of good to mankind on the whole,were the end aimed at in the maxims of international conduct, such collective

churlishness would certainly be condemned by them. Suppose that in

ordinary circumstances the trade in food were perfectly free, so that the price

in one country could not habitually exceed that in any other by more than the

cost of carriage, together with a moderate profit to the importer. A general

scarcity ensues, affecting all countries, but in unequal degrees. If the price

rose in one country more than in others, it would be a proof that in that

country the scarcity was severest, and that by permitting food to go freely

thither from any other country, it would be spared from a less urgent

necessity to relieve a greater. When the interests, therefore, of all countries

are considered, free exportation is desirable. To the sporting country

considered separately, it may, at least on the particular occasion, be an

inconvenience: but taking into account that the country which is now the

giver, will in some future season be the receiver, and the one that is benefited

by the freedom, I cannot but think that even to the apprehension of food

rioters it might be made apparent, that in such cases they should do to others

what they would wish done to themselves.

              In countries in which the Protection theory is declining, but not yet

given up, such as the United States, a doctrine has come into notice which is

a sort of compromise between free trade and restriction, namely, that

protection for protection’s sake is improper, but that there is nothing

objectionable in having as much protection as may incidentally result from a

tariff framed solely for revenue. Even in England, regret is sometimes

expressed that a ‘moderate fixed duty’ was not preserved on corn, on account

of the revenue it would yield. Independently, however, of the general

impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, this doctrine overlooks the fact,

that revenue is received only on the quantity imported, but that the tax is paid

on the entire quantity consumed. To make the public pay much that the

treasury may receive a little, is not an eligible mode of obtaining a revenue.

In the case of manufactured articles the doctrine involves a palpable

inconsistency. The object of the duty as a means of revenue, is inconsistent

with its affording, even incidentally, any protection. It can only operate as

protection in so far as it prevents importation; and to whatever degree it

prevents importation, it affords no revenue.

              The only case in which, on mere principles of political economy,

protecting duties can be defensible, is when they are imposed temporarily(especially in a young and rising nation) in hopes of naturalizing a foreign

industry, in itself perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the country. The

superiority of one country over another in a branch of production, often arises

only from having begun it sooner. There may be no inherent advantage on

one part, or disadvantage on the other, but only a present superiority of

acquired skill and experience. A country which has this skill and experience

yet to acquire, may in other respects be better adapted to the production than

those which were earlier in the field: and besides, it is a just remark of Mr

Rae, that nothing has a greater tendency to promote improvements in any

branch of production, than its trial under a new set of conditions. But it

cannot be expected that individuals should, at their own risk, or rather to their

certain loss, introduce a new manufacture, and bear the burthen of carrying it

on until the producers have been educated up to the level of those with whom

the processes are traditional. A protecting duty, continued for a reasonable

time, might sometimes be the least inconvenient mode in which the nation

can tax itself for the support of such an experiment. But it is essential that the

protection should be confined to cases in which there is good ground of

assurance that the industry which it fosters will after a time be able to

dispense with it; nor should the domestic producers ever be allowed to expect

that it will be continued to them beyond the time necessary for a fair trial of

what they are capable of accomplishing.

              The only writer, of any reputation as a political economist, who now

adheres to the Protectionist doctrine, Mr H.C. Carey, rests its defence, in an

economic point of view, principally on two reasons. One is, the great saving

in cost of carriage, consequent on producing commodities at or very near to

the place where they are to be consumed. The whole of the cost of carriage,

both on the commodities imported and on those exported in exchange for

them, he regards as a direct burthen on the producers, and not, as is obviously

the truth, on the consumers. On whomsoever it falls, it is, without doubt, a

burthen on the industry of the world. But it is obvious (and that Mr Carey

does not see it, is one of the many surprising things in his book) that the

burthen is only borne for a more than equivalent advantage. If the commodity

is bought in a foreign country with domestic produce in spite of the double

cost of carriage, the fact proves that, heavy as that cost may be, the saving in

cost of production outweighs it, and the collective labour of the country is on

the whole better remunerated than if the article were produced at home. Cost

of carriage is a natural protecting duty, which free trade has no power toabrogate: and unless America gained more by obtaining her manufactures

through the medium of her corn and cotton than she loses in cost of carriage,

the capital employed in producing corn and cotton in annually increased

quantities for the foreign market, would turn to manufactures instead. The

natural advantages attending a mode of industry in which there is less cost of

carriage to pay, can at most be only a justification for a temporary and merely

tentative protection. The expenses of production being always greatest at

first, it may happen that the home production, though really the most

advantageous, may not become so until after a certain duration of pecuniary

loss, which it is not to be expected that private speculators should incur in

order that their successors may be benefited by their ruin. I have therefore

conceded that in a new country a temporary protecting duty may sometimes

be economically defensible; on condition, however, that it be strictly limited

in point of time, and provision be made that during the latter part of its

existence it be on a gradually decreasing scale. Such temporary protection is

of the same nature as a patent, and should be governed by similar conditions.

              The remaining argument of Mr Carey in support of the economic

benefits of Protectionism, applies only to countries whose exports consist of

agricultural produce. He argues, that by a trade of this description they

actually send away their soil: the distant consumers not giving back to the

land of the country, as home consumers would do, the fertilizing elements

which they abstract from it. This argument deserves attention on account of

the physical truth on which it is founded; a truth which has only lately come

to be understood, but which is henceforth destined to be a permanent element

in the thoughts of statesmen, as it must always have been in the destinies of

nations. To the question of Protectionism, however, it is irrelevant. That the

immense growth of raw produce in America to be consumed in Europe, is

progresssively exhausting the soil of the Eastern, and even of the older

Western States, and that both are already far less productive than formerly, is

credible in itself, even if no one bore witness to it. But what I have already

said respecting cost of carriage, is true also of the cost of manuring. Free

trade does not compel America to export corn: she would cease to do so if it

ceased to be to her advantage. As, then, she would not persist in exporting

raw produce and importing manufactures, any longer than the labour she

saved by doing so exceeded what the carriage cost her, so when it became

necessary for her to replace in the soil the elements of fertility which she had

sent away, if the saving in cost of production were more than equivalent tothe cost of carriage and of manure together, manure would be imported; and

if not, the export of corn would cease. It is evident that one of these two

things would already have taken place, if there had not been near at hand a

constant succession of new soils, not yet exhausted of their fertility, the

cultivation of which enables her, whether judiciously or not, to postpone the

question of manure. As soon as it no longer answers better to break up new

soils than to manure the old, America will either become a regular importer

of manure, or will, without protecting duties, grow corn for herself only, and

manufacturing for herself, will make her manure, as Mr Carey desires, at
      270
home.

              For these obvious reasons, I hold Mr Carey’s economic arguments

for Protectionism to be totally invalid. The economic, however, is far from

being the strongest point of his case. American Protectionists often reason

extremely ill; but it is an injustice to them to suppose that their Protectionist

creed rests upon nothing superior to an economic blunder. Many of them

have been led to it, much more by consideration for the higher interests of

humanity, than by purely economic reasons. They, and Mr Carey at their

head, deem it a necessary condition of human improvement that towns should

abound; that men should combine their labour, by means of interchange —

with near neighbours, with people of pursuits, capacities, and mental

cultivation different from their own, sufficiently close at hand for mutual

sharpening of wits and enlarging of ideas — rather than with people on the

opposite side of the globe. They believe that a nation all engaged in the same,

or nearly the same, pursuit — a nation all agricultural — cannot attain a high

state of civilization and culture. And for this there is a great foundation of

reason. If the difficulty can be overcome, the United States, with their free

institutions, the universal schooling and their omnipresent press, are the

people to do it; but whether this is possible or not is still a problem. So far,

however, as it is an object to check the excessive dispersion of the

population, Mr Wakefield has pointed out a better way; to modify the

existing method of disposing of the unoccupied lands, by raising the price,

instead of lowering it, or giving away the land gratuitously, as is largely done

since the passing of the Homestead Act. To cut the knot in Mr Carey’s

fashion, by Protectionism, it would be necessary that Ohio and Michigan

should be protected against Massachusetts as well as against England: for the

manufactories of New England, no more than those of the old country,

accomplish his desideratum of bringing a manufacturing population to thedoors of the Western farmer. Boston and New York do not supply the want of

local towns to the Western prairies, any better than Manchester; and it is as

difficult to get back the manure from the one place as from the other.

              There is only one part of the Protectionist scheme which requires

any further notice: its policy towards colonies, and foreign dependencies; that

of compelling them to trade exclusively with the dominant country. A

country which thus secures to itself an extra foreign demand for its

commodities, undoubtedly gives itself some advantage in the distribution of

the general gains of the commercial world, Since, however, it causes the

industry and capital of the colony to be diverted from channels, which are

proved to be the most productive, inasmuch as they are those into which

industry and capital spontaneously tend to flow; there is a loss, on the whole,

to the productive powers of the world, and the mother country does not gain

so much as she makes the colony lose. If, therefore, the mother country

refuses to acknowledge any reciprocity of obligation, she imposes a tribute

on the colony in an indirect mode, greatly more oppressive and injurious that

the direct. But if, with a more equitable spirit, she submits herself to

corresponding restrictions for the benefit of the colony, the result of the

whole transaction is the ridiculous one, that each party loses much, in order

that the other may gain a little.

              2. Next to the system of Protection, among mischievous

interferences with the spontaneous course of industrial transactions, may be

noticed certain interferences with contracts. One instance is that of the Usury

Laws. These originated in a religious prejudice against receiving interest on

money, derived from that fruitful source of mischief in modern Europe, the

attempted adaptation to Christianity of doctrines and precepts drawn from the

Jewish law. In Mahomedan nations the receiving of interest is formally

interdicted, and rigidly abstained from: and Sismondi has noticed, as one

among the causes of the industrial inferiority of the Catholic, compared with

the Protestant parts of Europe, that the Catholic Church in the middle ages

gave its sanction to the same prejudice; which subsists, impaired but not

destroyed, wherever that religion is acknowledged. Where law or

conscientious scruples prevent lending at interest, the capital which belongs

to persons not in business is lost to productive purposes, or can be applied to

them only in peculiar circumstances of personal connexion, or by a

subterfuge. Industry is thus limited to the capital of the undertakers, and towhat they can borrow from persons not bound by the same laws or religion as

themselves. In Mussulman countries the bankers and money dealers are either

Hindoos, Armenians, or Jews.

              In more improved countries, legislation no longer discountenances

the receipt of an equivalent for money lent; but it has everywhere interfered

with the free agency of the lender and borrower, by fixing a legal limit to the

rate of interest, and making the receipt of more than the appointed maximum

a penal offence. This restriction, though approved by Adam Smith, has been

condemned by all enlightened persons since the triumphant onslaught made

upon it by Bentham in his ‘Letters on Usury’, which may still be referred to

as the best extant writing on the subject.

              Legislators may enact and maintain Usury Laws from one of two

motives: ideas of public policy, or concern for the interest of the parties in the

contract; in this case, of one party only, the borrower. As a matter of policy,

the notion may possibly be, that it is for the general good that interest should

be low. It is however a misapprehension of the causes which influence

commercial transactions, to suppose that the rate of interest is really made

lower by law, than it would be made by the spontaneous play of supply and

demand. If the competition of borrowers, left unrestrained, would raise the

rate of interest to six per cent, this proves that at five there would be a greater

demand for loans, than there is capital in the market to supply. If the law in

these circumstances permits no interest beyond five per cent, there will be

some lenders, who not choosing to disobey the law, and not being in a

condition to employ their capital otherwise, will content themselves with the

legal rate: but others, finding that in a season of pressing demand, more may

be made of their capital by other means than they are permitted to make by

lending it, will not lend it at all; and the loanable capital, already too small for

the demand, will be still further diminished. Of the disappointed candidates

there will be many at such periods, who must have their necessities supplied

at any price, and these will readily find a third section of lenders, who will

not be averse to join in a violation of the law, either by circuitous transactions

partaking of the nature of fraud, or by relying on the honour of the borrower.

The extra expense of the roundabout mode of proceeding, and an equivalent

for the risk of non-payment and of legal penalties, must be paid by the

borrower, over and above the extra interest which would have been required

of him by the general state of the market. The laws which were intended tolower the price paid by him for pecuniary accommodation, end thus in greatly

increasing it. These laws have also a directly demoralizing tendency.

Knowing the difficulty of detecting an illegal pecuniary transaction between

two persons, in which no third person is involved, so long as it is the interest

of both to keep the secret, legislators have adopted the expedient of tempting

the borrower to become the informer, by making the annulment of the debt a

part of the penalty for the offence; thus rewarding men for first obtaining the

property of others by false promises, and then not only refusing payment, but

invoking legal penalties on those who have helped them in their need. The

moral sense of mankind very rightly infamizes those who resist an otherwise

just claim on the ground of usury, and tolerates such a plea only when

resorted to as the best legal defence available against an attempt really

considered as partaking of fraud or extortion. But this very severity of public

opinion renders the enforcement of the laws so difficult, and the infliction of

the penalties so rare, that when it does occur it merely victimizes an

individual, and has no effect on general practice.

              In so far as the motive of the restriction may be supposed to be, not

public policy, but regard for the interest of the borrower, it would be difficult

to point out any case in which such tenderness on the legislator’s part is more

misplaced. A person of sane mind, and of the age at which persons are legally

competent to conduct their own concerns, must be presumed to be a sufficient

guardian of his pecuniary interests. If he may sell an estate, or grant a release,

or assign away all his property, without control from the law, it seems very

unnecessary that the only bargain which he cannot make without its

intermeddling, should be a loan of money. The law seems to presume that the

money-lender, dealing with necessitous persons, can take advantage of their

necessities, and exact conditions limited only by his own pleasure. It might

be so if there were only one money-lender within reach. But when there is the

whole monied capital of a wealthy community to resort to, no borrower is

placed under any disadvantage in the market merely by the urgency of his

need. If he cannot borrow at the interest paid by other people, it must be

because he cannot give such good security: and competition will limit the

extra demand to a fair equivalent for the risk of his proving insolvent.

Though the law intends favour to the borrower, it is to him above all that

injustice is, in this case, done by it. What can be more unjust than that a

person who cannot give perfectly good security, should be prevented from

borrowing of persons who are willing to lend money to him, by their notbeing permitted to receive the rate of interest which would be a just

equivalent for their risk? Through the mistaken kindness of the law, he must

either go without the money which is perhaps necessary to save him from

much greater losses, or be driven to expedients of a far more ruinous

description, which the law either has not found it possible, or has not

happened, to interdict.

              Adam Smith rather hastily expressed the opinion, that only two

kinds of persons, ‘prodigals and projectors’, could require to borrow money

at more than the market rate of interest. He should have included all persons

who are in any pecuniary difficulties, however temporary their necessities

may be. It may happen to any person in business, to be disappointed of the

resources on which he had calculated for meeting some engagement, the non-

fulfilment of which on a fixed day would be bankruptcy. In periods of

commercial difficulty, this is the condition of many prosperous mercantile

firms, who become competitors for the small amount of disposable capital

which, in a time of general distrust, the owners are willing to part with. Under

the English usury laws, now happily abolished, the limitations imposed by

those laws were felt as a most serious aggravation of every commercial crisis.

Merchants who could have obtained the aid they required at an interest of

seven or eight per cent for short periods, were obliged to give 20 or 30 per

cent, or to resort to forced sales of goods at a still greater loss. Experience

having obtruded these evils on the notice of Parliament, the sort of

compromise took place, of which English legislation affords so many

instances, and which helps to make our laws and policy the mass of

inconsistency that they are. The law was reformed as a person reforms a tight

shoe, who cuts a hole in it where it pinches hardest, and continues to wear it.

Retaining the erroneous principle as a general rule, Parliament allowed an

exception in the case in which the practical mischief was most flagrant. It left

the usury laws unrepealed, but exempted bills of exchange, of not more than

three months date, from their operation. Some years afterwards the laws were

repealed in regard to all other contracts, but left in force as to all those which

relate to land. Not a particle of reason could be given for making this

extraordinary distinction: but the ‘agricultural mind’ was of opinion that the

interest on mortgages, though it hardly ever came up to the permitted point,

would came up to a still higher point; and the usury laws were maintained

that the landlords might as they thought, be enabled to borrow below the

market rate, as the corn-laws were kept up that the same class might be ableto sell corn above the market rate. The modesty of the pretension was quite

worthy of the intelligence which could think that the end aimed at was in any

way forwarded by the means used.

              With regard to the ‘prodigals and projectors’ spoken of by Adam

Smith; no law can prevent a prodigal from ruining himself, unless it lays him

or his property under actual restraint, according to the unjustifiable practice

of the Roman Law and some of the Continental systems founded on it. The

only effect of usury laws upon a prodigal, is to make his ruin rather more

expeditious, by driving him to a disreputable class of money-dealers, and

rendering the conditions more onerous by the extra risk created by the law.

As for projectors, (a term, in its unfavourable sense, rather unfairly applied to

every person who has a project); such laws may put a veto upon the

prosecution of the most promising enterprise, when planned, as it generally

is, by a person who does not possess capital adequate to its successful

completion. Many of the greatest improvements were at first looked shyly on

by capitalists, and had to wait long before they found one sufficiently

adventurous to be the first in a new path: many years elapsed before

Stephenson could convince even the enterprising mercantile public of

Liverpool and Manchester, of the advantage of substituting railways for

turnpike roads; and plans on which great labour and large sums have been

expended with little visible result (the epoch in their progress when

predictions of failure are most rife) may be indefinitely suspended, or

altogether dropped, and the outlay all lost, if, when the original funds are

exhausted, the law will not allow more to be raised on the terms on which

people are willing to expose it to the chances of an enterprise not yet secure

of success.

              3. Loans are not the only kind of contract, of which governments

have thought themselves qualified to regulate the conditions better than the

persons interested. There is scarcely any commodity which they have not, at

some place or time, endeavoured to make either dearer or cheaper than it

would be if left to itself. The most plausible case for artificially cheapening a

commodity, is that of food. The desirableness of the object is in this case

undeniable. But since the average price of food, like that of other things,

conforms to the cost of production, with the addition of the usual profit; if

this price is not expected by the farmer, he will, unless compelled by law,

produce no more than he requires for his own consumption: and the law,therefore, if absolutely determined to have food cheaper, must substitute, for

the ordinary motives to cultivation, a system of penalties. If it shrinks from

doing this, it has no resource but that of taxing the whole nation, to give a

bounty or premium to the grower or importer of corn, thus giving everybody

cheap bread at the expense of all: in reality a largess to those who do not pay

taxes, at the expense of those who do; one of the forms of a practice

essentially bad, that of converting the working classes into unworking classes

by making them a present of subsistence.

              It is not however so much the general or average price of food, as its

occasional high price in times of emergency, which governments have

studied to reduce. In some cases, as for example the famous ‘maximum’ of

the revolutionary government of 1793, the compulsory regulation was an

attempt by the ruling powers to counteract the necessary consequences of

their own acts; to scatter an indefinite abundance of the circulating medium

with one hand, and keep down prices with the other; a thing manifestly

impossible under any regime except one of unmitigated terror. In case of

actual scarcity, governments are often urged, as they were in the Irish

emergency of 1847, to take measures of some sort for moderating the price of

food. But the price of a thing cannot be raised by deficiency of supply,

beyond what is sufficient to make a corresponding reduction of the

consumption; and if a government prevents this reduction from being brought

about by a rise of price, there remains no mode of effecting it unless by

taking possession of all the food, and serving it out in rations, as in a besieged

town. In a real scarcity, nothing can afford general relief, except a

determination by the richer classes to diminish their own consumption. If

they buy and consume their usual quantity of food, and content themselves

with giving money, they do no good. The price is forced up until the poorest

competitors have no longer the means of competing, and the privation of food

is thrown exclusively upon the indigent, the other classes being only affected

pecuniarily. When the supply is insufficient, somebody must consume less,

and if every rich person is determined not to be that somebody, all they do by

subsidizing their poor competitors is to force up the price so much the higher,

with no effect but to enrich the corn.dealers, the very reverse of what is

desired by those who recommend such measures. All that governments can

do in these emergencies, is to counsel a general moderation in consumption,

and to interdict such kinds of it as are not of primary importance. Direct

measures at the cost of the state, to procure food from a distance, areexpedient when from peculiar reasons the thing is not likely to be done by

private speculation. In any other case they are a great error. Private

speculators, will not, in such cases, venture to compete with the government;

and though a government can do more than any one merchant, it cannot do

nearly so much as all merchants.

              4. Governments, however, are oftener chargeable with having

attempted, too successfully, to make things dear, than with having aimed by

wrong means at making them cheap. The usual instrument for producing

artificial dearness is monopoly. To confer a monopoly upon a producer or

leader, or upon a set of producers or dealers not too numerous to combine, is

to give them the power of levying any amount of taxation on the public, for

their individual benefit, which will not make the public forego the use of the

commodity. When the sharers in the monopoly are so numerous and so

widely scattered that they are prevented from combining, the evil is

considerably less: but even then the competition is not so active among a

limited as among an unlimited number. Those who feel assured of a fair

average proportion in the general business, are seldom eager to get a larger

share by foregoing a portion of their profits. A limitation of competition,

however partial, may have mischievous effects quite disproportioned to the

apparent cause. The mere exclusion of foreigners, from a branch of industry

open to the free competition of every native, has been known, even in

England, to render that branch a conspicuous exception to the general

industrial energy of the country. The silk manufacture of England remained

far behind that of other countries of Europe, so long as the foreign fabrics

were prohibited. In addition to the tax levied for the profit, real or imaginary,

of the monopolists, the consumer thus pays an additional tax for their laziness

and incapacity. When relieved from the immediate stimulus of competition,

producers and dealers grow indifferent to the dictates of their ultimate

pecuniary interest; preferring to the most hopeful prospects, the present ease

of adhering to routine. A person who is already thriving, seldom puts himself

out of his way to commence even a lucrative improvement, unless urged by

the additional motive of fear lest some rival should supplant him by getting

possession of it before him.

              The condemnation of monopolies ought not to extend to patents, by

which the originator of an improved process is allowed to enjoy, for a limited

period, the exclusive privilege of using his own improvement. This is notmaking the commodity dear for his benefit, but merely postponing a part of

the increased cheapness which the public owe to the inventor, in order to

compensate and reward him for the service. That he ought to be both

compensated and rewarded for it, will not be denied, and also that if all were

at once allowed to avail themselves of his ingenuity, without having shared

the labours or the expenses which he had to incur in bringing his idea into a

practical shape, either such expenses and labours would be undergone by

nobody except very opulent and very public-spirited persons, or the state

must put a value on the service rendered by an inventor, and make him a

pecuniary grant. This has been done in some instances, and may be done

without inconvenience in cases of very conspicuous public benefit; but in

general an exclusive privilege, of temporary duration, is preferable; because it

leaves nothing to any one’s discretion; because the reward conferred by it

depends upon the invention’s being found useful, and the greater the

usefulness the greater the reward; and because it is paid by the very persons

to whom the service is rendered, the consumers of the commodity. So

decisive, indeed, are these considerations, that if the system of patents were

abandoned for that of rewards by the state, the best shape which these could

assume would be that of a small temporary tax, imposed for the inventor’s

benefit, on all persons making use of the invention. To this, however, or to

any other system which would vest in the state the power of deciding whether

an inventor should derive any pecuniary advantage from the public benefit

which he confers, the objections are evidently stronger and more fundamental

that the strongest which can possibly be urged against patents. It is generally

admitted that the present Patent Laws need much improvement; but in this

case, as well as in the closely analogous one of Copyright, it would be a gross

immorality in the law to set everybody free to use a person’s work with. out

his consent, and without giving him an equivalent. I have seen with real

alarm several recent attempts, in quarters carrying some authority, to impugn

the principle of patents altogether; attempts which, if practically successful,

would enthrone free stealing under the prostituted name of free trade, and

make the men of brains, still more than at present, the needy retainers and

dependents of the men of money-bags.

              5. I pass to another kind of government interference, in which the

end and the means are alike odious, but which existed in England until not

more than a generation ago, and in France up to the year 1864. I mean the

laws against combinations of workmen to raise wages; laws enacted andmaintained for the declared purpose of keeping wages low, as the famous

Statute of Labourers was passed by a legislature of employers, to prevent the

labouring class, when its numbers had been thinned by a pestilence, from

taking advantage of the diminished competition to obtain higher wages. Such

laws exhibit the infernal spirit of the slave master, when to retain the working

classes in avowed slavery has ceased to be practicable.

              If it were possible for the working classes, by combining among

themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs hardly be

said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be welcomed and

rejoiced at. Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such

means. The multitudes who compose the working class are too numerous and

too widely scattered to combine at all, much more to combine effectually. If

they could do so, they might doubtless succeed in diminishing the hours of

labour, and obtaining the same wages for less work. They would also have a

limited power of obtaining, by combination, an increase of general wages at

the expense of profits. But the limits of this power are narrow; and were they

to attempt to strain it beyond those limits, this could only be accomplished by

keeping a part of their number permanently out of employment. As support

from public charity would of course be refused to those who could get work

and would not accept it, they would be thrown for support upon the trades

union of which they were members; and the workpeople collectively would

be no better off than before, having to support the same numbers out of the

same aggregate wages. In this way, however, the class would have its

attention forcibly drawn to the fact of a superfluity of numbers, and to the

necessity, if they would have high wages, of proportioning the supply of

labour to the demand.

              Combinations to keep up wages are sometimes successful, in trades

where the workpeople are few in number, and collected in a small number of

local centres. It is questionable if combinations ever had the smallest effect

on the permanent remuneration of spinners or weavers; but the journeymen

type.founders, by a close combination, are able, it is said, to keep up a rate of

wages much beyond that which is usual in employments of equal hardness

and skill; and even the tailors, a much more numerous class, are understood

to have had, to some extent, a similar success. A rise of wages, thus confined

to particular employments, is not (like a rise of general wages) defrayed from

profits, but raises the value and price of the particular article, and falls on theconsumer; the capitalist who produces the commodity being only injured in

so far as the high price tends to narrow the market; and not even then, unless

it does so in a greater ratio than that of the rise of price: for though, at higher

wages, he employs, with a given capital, fewer workpeople, and obtains less

of the commodity, yet if he can sell the whole of this diminished quantity at

the higher price, his profits are as great as before.

              This partial rise of wages, if not gained at the expense of the

remainder of the working class, ought not to be regarded as an evil. The

consumer, indeed, must pay for it; but cheapness of goods is desirable only

when the cause of it is that their production costs little labour, and not when

occasioned by that labour’s being ill remunerated. It may appear, indeed, at

first sight, that the high wages of the type.founders (for example) are

obtained at the general cost of the labouring class. This high remuneration

either causes fewer persons to find employment in the trade, or if not, must

lead to the investment of more capital in it, at the expense of other trades: in

the first case, it throws an additional number of labourers on the general

market; in the second, it withdraws from that market a portion of the demand:

effects, both of which are injurious to the working classes. Such, indeed,

would really be the result of a successful combination in a particular trade or

trades, for some time after its formation; but when it is a permanent thing, the

principles so often insisted upon in this treatise, show that it can have no such

effect. The habitual earnings of the working classes at large can be affected

by nothing but the habitual requirements of the labouring people: these

indeed may be altered, but while they remain the same, wages never fall

permanently below the standard of these requirements, and do not long

remain above that standard. If there had been no combinations in particular

trades, and the wages of those trades had never been kept above the common

level, there is no reason to suppose that the common level would have been at

all higher than it now is. There would merely have been a greater number of

people altogether, and a smaller number of exceptions to the ordinary low

rate of wages.

              If, therefore, no improvement were to be hoped for in the general

circumstances of the working classes, the success of a portion of them,

however small, in keeping their wages by combination above the market rate,

would be wholly a matter of satisfaction. But when the elevation of the

character and condition of the entire body has at last become a thing notbeyond the reach of rational effort, it is time that the better paid classes of

skilled artisans should seek their own advantage in common with, and not by

the exclusion of, their fellow-labourers. While they continue to fix their

hopes on hedging themselves in against competition, and protecting their own

wages by shutting out others from access to their employment, nothing better

can be expected from them than that total absence of any large and generous

aims, that almost open disregard of all other objects than high wages and

little work for their own small body, which were so deplorably evident in the

proceedings and manifestoes of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers

during their quarrel with their employers. Success, even if attainable, in

raising up a protected class of working people, would now be a hindrance,

instead of a help, to the emancipation of the working classes at large.

              But though combinations to keep up wages are seldom effectual, and

when effectual, are, for the reasons which I have assigned, seldom desirable,

the right of making the attempt is one which cannot be refused to any portion

of the working population without great injustice, or without the probability

of fatally misleading them respecting the circumstances which determine

their condition. So long as combinations to raise wages were prohibited by

law, the law appeared to the operatives to be the real cause of the low wages

which there was no denying that it had done its best to produce. Experience

of strikes has been the best teacher of the labouring classes on the subject of

the relation between wages and the demand and supply of labour: and it is

most important that this course of instruction should not be disturbed.

              It is a great error to condemn, per se and absolutely, either trades

unions or the collective action of strikes. Even assuming that a strike must

inevitably fail whenever it attempts to raise wages above that market rate

which is fixed by the demand and supply; demand and supply are not

physical agencies, which thrust a given amount of wages into a labourer’s

hand without the participation of his own will and actions. The market rate is

not fixed for him by some self-acting instrument, but is the result of

bargaining between human beings — of what Adam Smith calls ‘the higgling

of the market”; and those who do not ‘higgle’ will long continue to pay, even

over a counter, more than the market price for their purchases. Still more

might poor labourers who have to do with rich employers, remain long

without the amount of wages which the demand for their labour would

justify, unless, in vernacular phrase, they stood-out for it, and how can theystand out for terms without organized concert? What chance would any

labourer have, who struck singly for an advance of wages? How could he

even know whether the state of the market admitted of a rise, except by

consultation with his fellows, naturally leading to concerted action? I do not

hesitate to say that associations of labourers, of a nature similar to trades

unions, far from being a hindrance to a free market for labour, are the

necessary instrumentality of that free market; the indispensable means of

enabling the sellers of labour to take due care of their own interests under a

system of competition. There is an ulterior consideration of much

importance, to which attention was for the first time drawn by Professor

Fawcett, in an article in the Westminster Review. Experience has at length

enabled the more intelligent trade to take a tolerably correct measure of the

circumstances on which the success of a strike for an advance of wages

depends. The work. men are now nearly as well informed as the master, of

the state of the market for his commodities; they can calculate his gains and

his expenses, they know when his trade is or is not prosperous, and only

when it is, are they ever again likely to strike for higher wages; which wages

their known readiness to strike makes their employers for the most part

willing, in that case, to concede. The tendency, therefore, of this state of

things is to make a rise of wages in any particular trade usually consequent

upon a rise of profits, which, as Mr Fawcett observes, is a commencement of

that regular participation of the labourers in the profits derived from their

labour, every tendency to which, for the reasOns stated in a previous
        271
chapter, it is so important to encourage, since to it we have chiefly to look

for any radical improvement in the social and economical relations between

labour and capital. Strikes, therefore, and the trade societies which render

strikes possible, are for these various reasons not a mischievous, but on the

contrary, a valuable part of the existing machinery of society.

              It is, however, an indispensable condition of tolerating combinations,

that they should be voluntary. No severity, necessary to the purpose, is too

great to be employed against attempts to compel workmen to join a union, or

take part in a strike by threats or violence. Mere moral compulsion, by the

expression of opinion, the law ought not to interfere with; it belongs to more

enlightened opinion to restrain it, by rectifying the moral sentiments of the

people. Other questions arise when the combination, being voluntary,

proposes to itself objects really contrary to the public good. High wages and

short hours are generally good objects, or, at all events, may be so: but inmany trades unions, it is among the rules that there shall be no task work, or

no difference of pay between the most expert workmen and the most

unskilful, or that no member of the union shall earn more than a certain sum

per week, in order that there may be more employment for the rest; and the

abolition of piece work, under more or less of modification, held a

conspicuous place among the demands of the Amalgamated Society. These

are combinations to effect objects which are pernicious. Their success, even

when only partial, is a public mischief; and were it complete, would be equal

in magnitude to almost any of the evils arising from bad economical

legislation. Hardly anything worse can be said of the worst laws on the

subject of industry and its remuneration, consistent with the personal freedom

of the labourer, than that they place the energetic and the idle, the skilful and

the incompetent, on a level: and this, in so far as it is in itself possible, it is

the direct tendency of the regulations of these unions to do. It does not,

however, follow as a consequence that the law would be warranted in making

the formation of such associations illegal and punishable. Independently of

all considerations of constitutional liberty, the best interests of the human

race imperatively require that all economical experiments, voluntarily

undertaken, should have the fullest licence, and that force and fraud should

be the only means of attempting to benefit themselves, which are interdicted
                                                      272
to the less fortunate classes of the community.

              6. Among the modes of undue exercise of the power of government,

on which I have commented in this chapter, I have included only such as rest

on theories which have still more or less of footing in the most enlightened

countries. I have not spoken of some which have done still greater mischief

in times not long past, but which are now generally given up, at least in

theory, though enough of them still remains in practice to make it impossible

as yet to class them among exploded errors.

              The notion, for example, that a government should choose opinions

for the people, and should not suffer any doctrines in politics, morals, law, or

religion, but such as it approves, to be printed or publicly professed, may be

said to be altogether abandoned as a general thesis. It is now well understood

that a regime of this sort is fatal to all prosperity, even of an economical kind:

that the human mind when prevented either by fear of the law or by fear of

opinion from exercising its faculties freely on the most important subjects,

acquires a general torpidity and imbecility, by which, when they reach acertain point, it is disqualified from making any considerable advances even

in the common affairs of life, and which, when greater still, make it gradually

lose even its previous attainments. There cannot be a more decisive example

than Spain and Portugal, for two centuries after the Reformation. The decline

of those countries in national greatness, and even in material civilization,

while almost all the other nations of Europe were uninterruptedly advancing,

has been ascribed to various causes, but there is one which lies at the

foundation of them all: the Holy Inquisition, and the system of mental slavery

of which it is the symbol.

              Yet although these truths are very widely recognized, and freedom

both of opinion and of discussion is admitted as an axiom in all free

countries, this apparent liberality and tolerance has acquired so little of the

authority of a principle, that it is always ready to give way to the dread or

horror inspired by some particular sort of opinions. Within the last fifteen or

twenty years several individuals have suffered imprisonment, for the public

profession, sometimes in a very temperate manner, of disbelief in religion;

and it is probable that both the public and the government, at the first panic

which arises on the subject of Chartism or Communism, will fly to similar

means for checking the propagation of democratic or anti-property doctrines.

In this country, however, the effective restraints on mental freedom proceed

much less from the law or the government, than from the intolerant temper of

the national mind; arising no longer from even as respectable a source as

bigotry or fanaticism, but rather from the general habit, both in opinion and

conduct, of making adherence to custom the rule of life, and enforcing it, by

social penalties, against all persons who, without a party to back them, assert

their individual independence.

        261
               To this Mr Carey would reply (indeed he has already so replied in

advance) that of all commodities manure is the least susceptible of being

conveyed to a distance. this is true of sewage, and of stable manure, but not

true of the ingredients to which those manures owe their efficiency. These, on

the contrary, are chiefly substances containing great fertilizing power in small

bulk; substances of which the human body requires but a small quantity, and

hence peculiarly susceptible of being imported; the mineral alkalies and the

phosphates, the question indeed mainly concerns the phosphates, for of the

alkalies, soda is procurable everywhere; while potass, being one of the

constituents of granite and the other feldspathic rocks, exists in manysubsoils, by whose progressive decomposition it is renewed, a large quantity

also being brought down in the deposits of rivers. As for the phosphates,

they, in the very convenient form of pulverized bones, are a regular article of

commerce, largely imported into England; as they are sure to be into any

country where the conditions of industry make it worth while to pay the

price.

        262
               Supra, Bk. V, Ch. VII.

        263
               Whoever desires to understand the question of Trade

Combinations as seen from the point of view of the working people, should

make himself acquainted with a pamphlet published in 1860, under the title

‘Trades Unions and Strikes, their Philosophy and Intention; by T.J. Dunning,

Secretary to the London Consolidated Society of Bookbinders’. There are

many opinions in this able tract in which I only partially, and some in which I

do not at all, coincide. But there are also many sound arguments, and an

instructive exposure of the common fallacies of opponents. Readers of other

classes will see with surprise, not only how great a portion of truth the

Unions have on their side, but how much less flagrant and condemnable even

their errors appear, when seen under the aspect in which it is only natural that

the working classes should themselves regard them.

 

 

   Chapter 11 – Of the Grounds and Limits of the Laisser-faire or Non-

                                interference Principle

 

 

              1. We have now reached the last part of our undertaking; the

discussion, so far as suited to this treatise (that is, so far as it is a question of

principle, not detail) of the limits of the province of government: the

question, to what objects governmental intervention in the affairs of society

may or should extend, over and above those which necessarily appertain to it.

No subject has been more keenly contested in the present age: the contest,

however, has chiefly taken place round certain select points, with only flying

excursions into the rest of the field. Those indeed who have discussed any

particular question of government interference, such as state education

(spiritual or secular), regulation of hours of labour, a public provision for the

poor, &c., have often dealt largely in general arguments, far outstretching the

special application made of them, and have shown a sufficiently strong bias

either in favour of letting things alone, or in favour of meddling; but have

seldom declared, or apparently decided in their own minds, how far they

would carry either principle. The supporters of interference have been content

with asserting a general right and duty on the part of government to

intervene, wherever its intervention would be useful: and when those who

have been called the laisser-faire school have attempted any definite

limitation of the province of government, they have usually restricted it to the

protection of person and property against force and fraud; a definition to

which neither they nor any one else can deliberately adhere, since it excludes,
                                                273
as has been shown in a preceding chapter, some of the most indispensable

and unanimously recognized of the duties of government.

              Without professing entirely to supply this deficiency of a general

theory, on a question which does not, as I conceive, admit of any universal

solution, I shall attempt to afford some little aid towards the resolution of this

class of questions as they arise, by examining, in the most general point of

view in which the subject can be considered, what are the advantages, and

what the evils or inconveniences, of government interference.

              We must set out by distinguishing between two kinds of interventionby the government, which, though they may relate to the same subject, differ

widely in their nature and effects, and require, for their justification, motives

of a very different degree of urgency. The intervention may extend to

controlling the free agency of individuals. Government may interdict all

persons from doing certain things; or from doing them without its

authorization; or may prescribe to them certain things to be done, or a certain

manner of doing things which it is left optional with them to do or to abstain

from. This is the authoritative interference of government. There is another

kind of intervention which is not authoritative: when a government, instead

of issuing a command and enforcing it by penalties, adopts the course so

seldom resorted to by governments, and of which such important use might

be made, that of giving advice and promulgating information; or when,

leaving individuals free to use their own means of pursuing any object of

general interest, the government, not meddling with them, but not trusting the

object solely to their care, establishes, side by side with their arrangements,

an agency of its own for a like purpose. Thus, it is one thing to maintain a

Church Establishment, and another to refuse toleration to other religions, or

to persons professing no religion. It is one thing to provide schools or

colleges, and another to require that no person shall act as an instructor of

youth without a government licence. There might be a national bank, or a

government manufactory, without any monopoly against private banks and

manufactories. There might be a post-office, without penalties against the

conveyance of letters by any other means. There may be a corps of

government engineers for civil purposes, while the profession of a civil

engineer is free to be adopted by every one. There may be public hospitals,

without any restriction upon private medical or surgical practice.

              2. It is evident, even at first sight, that the authoritative form of

government intervention has a much more limited sphere of legitimate action

than the other. It requires a much stronger necessity to justify it in any case;

while there are large departments of human life from which it must be

unreservedly and imperiously excluded. Whatever theory we adopt respecting

the foundation of the social union, and under whatever political institutions

we live, there is a circle around every individual human being, which no

government, be it that of one, of a few, or of the many, ought to be permitted

to overstep: there is a part of the life of every person who has come to years

of discretion, within which the individuality of that person ought to reign

uncontrolled either by any other individual or by the public collectively. Thatthere is, or ought to be, some space in human existence thus entrenched

around, and sacred from authoritative intrusion, no one who professes the

smallest regard to human freedom or dignity will call in question: the point to

be determined is, where the limit should be placed; how large a province of

human life this reserved territory should include. I apprehend that it ought to

include all that part which concerns only the life, whether inward or outward,

of the individual, and does not affect the interests of others, or affects them

only through the moral influence of example. With respect to the domain of

the inward consciousness, the thoughts and feelings, and as much of external

conduct as is personal only, involving no consequences, none at least of a

painful or injurious kind, to other people: I hold that it is allowable in all, and

in the more thoughtful and cultivated often a duty, to assert and promulgate,

with all the force they are capable of, their opinion of what is good or bad,

admirable or contemptible, but not to compel others to conform to that

opinion; whether the force used is that of extra.legal coercion, or exerts itself

by means of the law.

              Even in those portions of conduct which do affect the interest of

others, the onus of making out a case always lies on the defenders of legal

prohibitions. It is not a merely constructive or presumptive injury to others,

which will justify the interference of law with individual freedom. To be

prevented from doing what one is inclined to, from acting according to one’s

own judgment of what is desirable, is not only always irksome, but always

tends, pro tanto, to starve the development of some portion of the bodily or

mental faculties, either sensitive or active; and unless the conscience of the

individual goes freely with the legal restraint, it partakes, either in a great or

in a small degree, of the degradation of slavery. Scarcely any degree of

utility, short of absolute necessity, will justify a prohibitory regulation, unless

it can also be made to recommend itself to the general conscience; unless

persons of ordinary good intentions either believe already, or can be induced

to believe, that the thing prohibited is a thing which they ought not to wish to

do.

              It is otherwise with governmental interferences which do not restrain

individual free agency. When a government provides means of fulfilling a

certain end, leaving individuals free to avail themselves of different means if

in their opinion preferable, there is no infringement of liberty, no irksome or

degrading restraint. One of the principal objections to governmentinterference is then absent. There is, however, in almost all forms of

government agency, one thing which is compulsory. the provision of the

pecuniary means. These are derived from taxation; or, if existing in the form

of an endowment derived from public property, they are still the cause of as

much compulsory taxation as the sale or the annual proceeds of the property
                                        274
would enable to be dispensed with. And the objection necessarily attaching

to compulsory contributions, is almost always greatly aggravated by the

expensive precautions and onerous restrictions, which are indispensable to

prevent evasion of a compulsory tax.

              3. A second general objection to government agency, is that every

increase of the functions devolving on the government is an increase of its

power, both in the form of authority, and still more, in the indirect form of

influence. The importance of this consideration, in respect of political

freedom, has in general been quite sufficiently recognized, at least in

England, but many, in latter times, have been prone to think that limitation of

the powers of the government is only essential when the government itself is

badly constituted; when it does not represent the people, but is the organ of a

class, or coalition of classes: and that a government of sufficiently popular

constitution might be trusted with any amount of power over the nation, since

its power would be only that of the nation over itself. This might be true, if

the nation, in such cases, did not practically mean a mere majority of the

nation, and if minorities were only capable of oppressing, but not of being

oppressed. Experience, however, proves that the depositaries of power who

are mere delegates of the people, that is of a majority, are quite as ready

(when they think they can count on popular support) as any organs of

oligarchy, to assume arbitrary power, and encroach unduly on the liberty of

private life. The public collectively is abundantly ready to impose, not only

its generally narrow views of its interests, but its abstract opinions, and even

its tastes, as laws binding upon individuals. And the present civilization tends

so strongly to make the power of persons acting in masses the only

substantial power in society, that there never was more necessity for

surrounding individual independence of thought, speech, and conduct, with

the most powerful defences, in order to maintain that originality of mind and

individuality of character, which are the only source of any real progress, and

of most of the qualities which make the human race much superior to any

herd of animals. Hence it is no less important in a democratic than in any

other government, that all tendency on the part of public authorities to stretchtheir interference, and assume a power of any sort which can easily be

dispensed with, should be regarded with unremitting jealousy. Perhaps this is

even more important in a democracy than in any other form of political

society; because where public opinion is sovereign, an individual who is

oppressed by the sovereign does not, as in most other states of things, find a

rival power to which he can appeal for relief, or, at all events, for sympathy.

              4. A third general objection to government agency, rests on the

principle of the division of labour. Every additional function undertaken by

the government, is a fresh occupation imposed upon a body already

overcharged with duties. A natural consequence is that most things are ill

done; much not done at all, because the government is not able to do it

without delays which are fatal to its purpose; that the more troublesome and

less showy, of the functions undertaken, are postponed or neglected, and an

excuse is always ready for the neglect; while the heads of the administration

have their minds so fully taken up with official details, in however

perfunctory a manner superintended, that they have no time or thought to

spare for the great interests of the state, and the preparation of enlarged

measures of social improvement.

              But these inconveniences, though real and serious, result much more

from the bad organization of governments, than from the extent and variety

of the duties undertaken by them. Government is not a name for some one

functionary, or definite number of functionaries: there may be almost any

amount of division of labour within the administrative body itself. The evil in

question is felt in great magnitude under some of the governments of the

Continent, where six or eight men, living at the capital and known by the

name of ministers, demand that the whole public business of the country shall

pass, or be supposed to pass, under their individual eye. But the

inconvenience would be reduced to a very manageable compass, in a country

in which there was a proper distribution of functions between the central and

local officers of government, and in which the central body was divided into

a sufficient number of departments. When Parliament thought it expedient to

confer on the government an inspecting and partially controlling authority

over railways, it did not add railways to the department of the Home

Minister, but created a Railway Board. When it determined to have a central

superintending authority for pauper administration, it established the Poor

Law Commission. There are few countries in which a greater number offunctions are discharged by public officers, than in some states of the

American Union, particularly the New England States; but the division of

labour in public business is extreme; most of these officers being not even

amenable to any common superior, but performing their duties freely, under

the double check of election by their townsmen, and civil as well as criminal

responsibility to the tribunals.

              It is, no doubt, indispensable to good government that the chiefs of

the administration, whether permanent or temporary, should extend a

commanding, though general, view over the ensemble of all the interests

confided, in any degree, to the responsibility of the central power. But with a

skilful internal organization of the administrative machine, leaving to

subordinates, and as far as possible, to local subordinates, not only the

execution, but to a greater degree the control, of details; holding them

accountable for the results of their acts rather than for the acts themselves,

except where these come within the cognizance of the tribunals; taking the

most effectual securities for honest and capable appointments; opening a

broad path to promotion from the inferior degrees of the administrative scale

to the superior; leaving, at each step, to the functionary, a wider range in the

origination of measures, so that, in the highest grade of all, deliberation might

be concentrated on the great collective interests of the country in each

department; if all this were done, the government would not probably be

overburthened by any business, in other respects fit to be undertaken by it;

though the overburthening would remain as a serious addition to the

inconveniences incurred by its undertaking any which was unfit.

              5. But though a better organization of governments would greatly

diminish the force of the objection to the mere multiplication of their duties,

it would still remain true that in all the more advanced communities, the great

majority of things are worse done by the intervention of government, than the

individuals most interested in the matter would do them, or cause them to be

done, if left to themselves. The grounds of this truth are expressed with

tolerable exactness in the poplar dictum, that people understand their own

business and their own interests better, and care for them more, than the

government does, or can be expected to do. This maxim holds true

throughout the greatest part of the business of life, and wherever it is true we

ought to condemn every kind of government intervention that conflicts with

it. The inferiority of government agency, for example, in any of the commonoperations of industry or commerce, is proved by the fact, that it is hardly

ever able to maintain.. itself in equal competition with individual agency,

where the individuals possess the requisite degree of industrial enterprise, and

can command the necessary assemblage of means. All the facilities which a

government enjoys of access to information; all the means which it possesses

of remunerating, and therefore of commanding, the best available talent in the

market — are not an equivalent for the one great disadvantage of an inferior

interest in the result.

              It must be remembered, besides, that even if a government were

superior in intelligence and knowledge to any single individual in the nation,

it must be inferior to all the individuals of the nation taken together. It can

neither possess in itself, nor enlist in its service, more than a portion of the

acquirements and capacities which the country contains, applicable to any

given purpose. There must be many persons equally qualified for the work

with those whom the government employs, even if it selects its instruments

with no reference to any consideration but their fitness. Now these are the

very persons into whose hands, in the cases of most common occurrence, a

system of individual agency naturally tends to throw the work, because they

are capable of doing it better or on cheaper terms than any other persons. So

far as this is the case, it is evident that government, by excluding or even by

superseding individual agency, either substitutes a less qualified

instrumentality for one better qualified, or at any rate substitutes its own

mode of accomplishing the work, for all the variety of modes which would be

tried by a number of equally qualified persons aiming at the same end; a

competition by many degrees more propitious to the progress of

improvement, than any uniformity of system.

              6. I have reserved for the last place one of the strongest of the

reasons against the extension of government agency, Even if the government

could comprehend within itself, in each department, all the most eminent

intellectual capacity and active talent of the nation, it would not be the less

desirable that the conduct of a large portion of the affairs of the society

should be left in the hands of the persons immediately interested in them. The

business of life is an essential part of the practical education of a people;

without which, book and school instruction, though most necessary and

salutary, does not suffice to qualify them for conduct, and for the adaptation

of means to ends. Instruction is only one of the desiderata of mentalimprovement; another, almost as indispensable, is a vigorous exercise of the

active energies; labour, contrivance, judgment, self-control: and the natural

stimulus to these is the difficulties of life. This doctrine is not to be

confounded with the complacent optimism, which represents the evils of life

as desirable things, because they call forth qualities adapted to combat with

evils. It is only because the difficulties exist, that the qualities which combat

with them are of any value. As practical beings it is our business to free

human life from as many as possible of its difficulties, and not to keep up a

stock of them as hunters preserve game, for the exercise of pursuing it. But

since the need of active talent and practical judgment in the affairs of life can

only be diminished, and not, even on the most favourable supposition, done

away with, it is important that those endowments should be cultivated not

merely in a select few, but in all, and that the cultivation should be more

varied and complete than most persons are able to find in the narrow sphere

of their merely individual interests. A people among whom there is no habit

of spontaneous action for a collective interest — who look habitually to their

government to command or prompt them in all matters of joint concern —

who expect to have everything done for them, except what can be made an

affair of mere habit and routine — have their faculties only half developed;

their education is defective in one of its most important branches.

              Not only is the cultivation of the active faculties by exercise,

diffused through the whole community, in itself one of the most valuable of

national possessions: it is rendered, not less, but more, necessary, when a

high degree of that indispensable culture is systematically kept up in the

chiefs and functionaries of the state. There cannot be a combination of

circumstances more dangerous to human welfare, than that in which

intelligence and talent are maintained at a high standard within a governing

corporation, but starved and discouraged outside the pale. Such a system,

more completely than any other, embodies the idea of despotism, by arming

with intellectual superiority as an additional weapon, those who have already

the legal power. It approaches as nearly as the organic difference between

human beings and other animals admits, to the government of sheep by their

shepherd, without anything like so strong an interest as the shepherd has in

the thriving condition of the flock. The only security against political slavery,

is the check maintained over governors, by the diffusion of intelligence,

activity, and public spirit among the governed. Experience proves the

extreme difficulty of permanently keeping up a sufficiently high standard ofthose qualities; a difficulty which increases, as the advance of civilization and

security removes one after another of the hardships, embarrassments, and

dangers against which individuals had formerly no resource but in their own

strength, skill, and courage. It is therefore of supreme importance that all

classes of the community, down to the lowest, should have much to do for

themselves; that as great a demand should be made upon their intelligence

and virtue as it is in any respect equal to; that the government should not only

leave as far as possible to their own faculties the conduct of whatever

concerns themselves alone, but should suffer them, or rather encourage them,

to manage as many as possible of their joint concerns by voluntary co-

operation; since this discussion and management of collective interests is the

great school of that public spirit, and the great source of that intelligence of

public affairs, which are always regarded as the distinct. ive character of the

public of free countries.

              A democratic constitution, not supported by democratic institutions

in detail, but confined to the central government, not only is not political

freedom, but often creates a spirit precisely the reverse, carrying down to the

lowest grade in society the desire and ambition of political domination. In

some countries the desire of the people is for not being tyrannized over, but

in others it is merely for an equal chance to everybody of tyrannizing.

Unhappily this last state of the desires is fully as natural to man. kind as the

former, and in many of the conditions even of civilized humanity, is far more

largely exemplified. In proportion as the people are accustomed to manage

their affairs by their own active intervention, instead of leaving them to the

government, their desires will turn to repelling tyranny, rather than to

tyrannizing: while in proportion as all real initiative and direction resides in

the government, and individuals habitually feel and act as under its perpetual

tutelage, popular institutions develop in them not the desire of freedom, but

an unmeasured appetite for place and power: diverting the intelligence and

activity of the country from its principal business, to a wretched competition

for the selfish prizes and the petty vanities of office.

              7. The preceding are the principal reasons, of a general character, in

favour of restricting to the narrowest compass the intervention of a public

authority in the business of the community: and few will dispute the more

than sufficiency of these reasons, to throw, in every instance, the burthen of

making out a strong case, not on those who resist, but on those whorecommend, government interference. Laisser-faire, in short, should be the

general practice: every departure from it, unless required by some great good,

is a certain evil.

              The degree in which the maxim, even in the cases to which it is most

manifestly applicable, has heretofore been infringed by governments, future

ages will probably have difficulty in crediting. Some idea may be formed of
                                            275
it from the description of M. Dunoyer of the restraints imposed on the

operations of manufacture under the old government of France, by the

meddling and regulating spirit of legislation. ‘La societe exercait sur la

fabrication la juridiction la plus illimitee et la plus arbitraire: elle disposait

sans scrupule des facultes des fabricants; elle decidait qui pourrait travailler,

quelle chose on pourrait faire, quels materiaux on devrait employer, quels

procedes il faudrait suivre, quelles formes on donnerait aux produits, etc. Il

ne suffisait pas de faire bien, de faire mieux, il fallait faire suivant les regles.

Qui ne connait ce reglement de 1670, qui prescrivait de saisir et de clouer au

poteau, avec le nom des auteurs, les marchandises non conformes aux regles

tracees, et qui, a la seconde recidive, voulait que les fabricants y fussent

attaches eux memes? Il ne s’agissait pas de consulter le gout des

consommateurs, mais de se conformer aux volontes de la loi. Des legions

d’inspecteurs, de commissaires, de controleurs, de jures, de gardes, etainet

charges de les faire executer; on brisait les metiers, on brulait les produits qui

n’y etaient pas conformes: les ameliorations etaient punies; on mettait les

inventeurs a l’amende. On soumettait a des regles differentes la fabrication

des objets destines a la consommation interieure et celle des produits destines

au commerce etranger. Un artisan n’etait pas le maitre de choisir le lieu de

son etablissement, ni de travailler en toute saison, ni de travailler pour tout le

monde. Il existe un decret du 30 Mars 1700, qui borne a dix-huit villes le

nombre des lieux ou l’on pourra faire des bas au metier; un arret du 18 Juin

1723 enjoint aux fabricants de Rouen de suspendre leurs travaux du 1er

Juillet au 15 Septembre, affin de faciliter ceux de la recolte; Louis XIV,

quand il voulut entreprendre la colonnade du Louvre, defendit aux

particuliers d’employer des ouvriers sans sa permission, sous peine de 10,000

livres d’amende, et aux ouvriers de travailler pour les particuliers, sous peine,

pour la premiere fois, de la prison, et pour la seconde, des galeres.’

              That these and similar regulations were not a dead letter, and that the

officious and vexatious meddling was prolonged down to the French                                                                                276
Revolution, we have the testimony of Roland, the Girondist minister. ‘I

have seen’, says he, ‘eighty, ninety, a hundred pieces of cotton or woollen

stuff cut up, and completely destroyed. I have witnessed similar scenes every

week for a number of years. I have seen manufactured goods confiscated;

heavy fines laid on the manufacturers; some pieces of fabric were burnt in

public places, and at the hours of market: others were fixed to the pillory,

with the name of the manufacturer inscribed upon them, and he himself was

threatened with the pillory, in case of a second offence. All this was done

under my eyes, at Rouen, in conformity with existing regulations, or

ministerial orders. What crime deserved so cruel a punishment? Some defects

in the materials employed, or in the texture of the fabric, or even in some of

the threads of the warp.

              ‘I have frequently seen manufacturers visited by a band of satellites

who put all in confusion in their establishments, spread terror in their

families, cut the stuffs from the frames, tore off the warp from the looms, and

carried them away as proofs of infringement; the manufacturers were

summoned, tried, and condemned: their goods confiscated; copies of their

judgment of confiscation posted up in every public place; fortune, reputation,

credit, all was lost and destroyed. And for what offence? Because they had

made of worsted, a kind of cloth called shag, such as the English used to

manufacture, and even sell in France, while the French regulations stated that

that kind of cloth should be made with mohair. I have seen other

manufacturers treated in the same way, because they had made camlets of a

particular width, used in England and Germany, for which there was a great

demand from Spain, Portugal, and other countries, and from several parts of

France, while the French regulations prescribed other widths for camlets.’

              The time is gone by, when such applications as these of the principle

of ‘paternal government’ would be attempted, in even the least enlightened

country of the European commonwealth of nations. In such cases as those

cited, all the general objections to government interference are valid, and

several of them in nearly their highest degree. But we must now turn to the

second part of our task, and direct our attention to cases, in which some of

those general objections are altogether absent, while those which can never

be got rid of entirely, are overruled by counter-considerations of still greater

importance.

              We have observed that, as a general rule, the business of life is betterperformed when those who have an immediate interest in it are left to take

their own course, uncontrolled either by the mandate of the law or by the

meddling of any public functionary. The persons, or some of the persons,

who do the work, are likely to be better judges than the government, of the

means of attaining the particular end at which they aim. Were we to suppose,

what is not very probable, that the government has possessed itself of the best

knowledge which had been acquired up to a given time by the persons most

skilled in the occupation; even then, the individual agents have so much

stronger and more direct an interest in the result, that the means are far more

likely to be improved and perfected if left to their uncontrolled choice. But if

the workman is generally the best selector of means, can it be affirmed with

the same universality, that the consumer, or person served, is the most

competent judge of the end? Is the buyer always qualified to judge of the

commodity? If not, the presumption in favour of the competition of the

market does not apply to the case; and if the commodity be one, in the quality

of which society has much at stake, the balance of advantages may be in

favour of some mode and degree of intervention, by the authorized

representatives of the collective interest of the state.

              8. Now, the proposition that the consumer is a competent judge of

the commodity, can be admitted only with numerous abatements and

exceptions. He is generally the best judge (though even this is not true

universally) of the material objects produced for his use. These are destined

to supply some physical want, or gratify some taste or inclination, respecting

which wants or inclinations there is no appeal from the person who feels

them; or they are the means and appliances of some occupation, for the use of

the persons engaged in it, who may be presumed to be judges of the things

required in their own habitual employment. But there are other things, of the

worth of which the demand of the market is by no means a test; things of

which the utility does not consist in ministering to inclinations, nor in serving

the daily uses of life, and the want of which is least felt where the need is

greatest. This is peculiarly true of those things which are chiefly useful as

tending to raise the character of human beings. The uncultivated cannot be

competent judges of cultivation. Those who most need to be made wiser and

better, usually desire it least, and if they desired it, would be incapable of

finding the way to it by their own lights. It will continually happen, on the

voluntary system, that the end not being desired, the means will not be

provided at all, or that, the persons requiring improvement having animperfect or altogether erroneous conception of what they want, the supply

called forth by the demand of the market will be anything but what is really

required. Now any well-intentioned and tolerably civilized government may

think, without presumption, that it does or ought to possess a degree of

cultivation above the average of the community which it rules, and that it

should therefore be capable of offering better education and better instruction

to the people, than the greater number of them would spontaneously demand.

Education, therefore, is one of those things which it is admissible in principle

that a government should provide for the people. The case is one to which the

reasons of the non.interference principle do not necessarily or universally
      277
extend.

              With regard to elementary education, the exception to ordinary rules

may, I conceive, justifiably be carried still further. There are certain primary

elements and means of knowledge, which it is in the highest degree desirable

that all human beings born into the community should acquire during

childhood. If their parents, or those on whom they depend, have the power of

obtaining for them this instruction, and fail to do it, they commit a double

breach of duty, towards the children themselves, and towards the members of

the community generally, who are all liable to suffer seriously from the

Consequences of ignorance and want of education in their fellow-citizens. It

is therefore an allowable exercise of the powers of government, to impose on

parents the legal obligation of giving elementary instruction to children. This,

however, cannot fairly be done, without taking measures to insure that such

instruction shall be always accessible to them, either gratuitously or at a

trifling expense.

              It may indeed be objected that the education of children is one of

those expenses which parents, even of the labouring class, ought to defray;

that it is desirable that they should feel it incumbent on them to provide by

their own means for the fulfilment of their duties, and that by giving

education at the cost of others, just as much by giving subsistence, the

standard of necessary wages is proportionally lowered, and the springs of

exertion and self-restraint is so much relaxed. This argument could, at best,

be only valid if the question were that of substituting a public provision for

what individuals would otherwise do for themselves; if all parents in the

labouring class recognized and practised the duty of giving instruction to

their children at their own expense. But inasmuch as parents do not practisethis duty, and do not include education among those necessary expenses

which their wages must provide for, therefore the general rate of wages is not

high enough to bear those expenses, and they must be borne from some other

source. And this is not one of the cases in which the tender of help

perpetuates the state of things which renders help necessary. Instruction,

when it is really such, does not enervate, but strengthens as well as enlarges

the active faculties: in whatever manner acquired, its effect on the mind is

favourable to the spirit of independence: and when, unless had gratuitously, it

would not be had at all, help in this form has the opposite tendency to that

which in so many other cases makes it objectionable; it is help towards doing

without help.

              In England, and most European countries, elementary instruction

cannot be paid for, at its full cost, from the common wages of unskilled

labour, and would not if it could. The alternative, therefore, is not between

government and private speculation, but between a government provision and

voluntary charity: between interference by government, and interference by

associations of individuals, subscribing their own money for the purpose, like

the two great School Societies. It is, of course, not desirable that anything

should be done by funds derived from compulsory taxation, which is already

sufficiently well done by individual liberality. How far this is the case with

school instruction, is, in each particular instance, a question of fact. The

education provided in this country on the voluntary principle has of late been

so much discussed, that it is needless in this place to criticize it minutely, and

I shall merely express my conviction, that even in quantity it is, and is likely

to remain, altogether insufficient, while in quality, though with some slight

tendency to improvement, it is never good except by some rare accident, and

generally so bad as to be little more than nominal. I hold it therefore the duty

of the government to supply the defect, by giving pecuniary support to

elementary schools, such as to render them accessible to all the children of

the poor, either freely, or for a payment too inconsiderable to be sensibly felt.

              One thing must be strenuously insisted on; that the government must

claim no monopoly for its education, either in the lower or in the higher

branches; must exert neither authority nor influence to induce the people to

resort to its teachers in preference to others, and must confer no peculiar

advantages on those who have been instructed by them. Though the

government teachers will probably be superior to the average of privateinstructors, they will not embody all the knowledge and sagacity to be found

in all instructors taken together, and it is desirable to leave open as many

roads as possible to the desired end. It is not endurable that a government

should, either de jure or de facto, have a complete control over the education

of the people. To possess such a control, and actually exert it, is to be

despotic. A government which can mould the opinions and sentiments of the

people from their youth upwards, can do with them whatever it pleases.

Though a government, therefore, may, and in many cases ought to, establish

schools and colleges, it must neither compel nor bribe any person to come to

them; nor ought the power of individuals to set up rival establishments, to

depend in any degree upon its authorization. It would be justified in requiring

from all the people that they shall possess instruction in certain things, but

not in prescribing to them how or from whom they shall obtain it.

              9. In the matter of education, the intervention of government is

justifiable, because the case is not one in which the interest and judgment of

the consumer are a sufficient security for the goodness of the commodity. Let

us now consider another class of cases, where there is no person in the

situation of a consumer, and where the interest and judgment to be relied on

are those of the agent himself; as in the conduct of any business in which he

is exclusively interested, or in entering into any contract or engagement by

which he himself is to be bound.

              The ground of the practical principle of non-interference must here

be, that most persons take a juster and more intelligent view of their own

interest, and of the means of promoting it, than can either be prescribed to

them by a general enactment of the legislature, or pointed out in the particular

case by a public functionary. The maxim is unquestionably sound as a

general rule; but there is no difficulty in perceiving some very large and

conspicuous exceptions to it. These may be classed under several heads.

              First: — The individual who is presumed to be the best judge of his

own interests may be incapable of judging or acting for himself; may be a

lunatic, an idiot, an infant: or though not wholly incapable, may be of

immature years and judgment. In this case the foundation of the laisser.faire

principle breaks down entirely. The person most interested is not the best

judge of the matter, nor a competent judge at all. Insane persons are
                                                                        278
everywhere regarded as proper objects of the care of the state. In the case

of children and young persons, it is common to say, that though they cannotjudge for themselves, they have their parents or other relatives to judge for

them. But this removes the question into a different category; making it no

longer a question whether the government should interfere with individuals in

the direction of their own conduct and interests, but whether it should leave

absolutely in their power the conduct and interests of somebody else. Parental

power is as susceptible of abuse as any other power, and is, as a matter of

fact, constantly abused. If laws do not succeed in preventing parents from

brutally ill-treating, and even from murdering their children, far less ought it

to be presumed that the interests of children will never be sacrificed, in more

commonplace and less revolting ways, to the selfishness or the ignorance of

their parents. Whatever it can be clearly seen that parents ought to do or

forbear for the interest of children, the law is warranted, if it is able, in

compelling to be done or forborne, and is generally bound to do so. To take

an example from the peculiar province of political economy; it is right that

children, and young persons not yet arrived at maturity, should be protected

so far as the eye and hand of the state can reach, from being over-worked.

Labouring for too many hours in the day, or on work beyond their strength,

should not be permitted to them, for if permitted it may always be compelled.

Freedom, of contract, in the case of children, is but another word for freedom

of coercion. Education also, the best which circumstances admit of their

receiving, is not a thing which parents or relatives, from indifference,

jealousy, or avarice, should have it in their power to withhold.

              The reasons for legal intervention in favour of children, apply not

less strongly to the case of those unfortunate slaves and victims of the most

brutal part of mankind, the lower animals. It is by the grossest

misunderstanding of the principles of liberty, that the infliction of exemplary

punishment on ruffianism practised towards these defenceless creatures, has

been treated as a meddling by government with things beyond its province;

an interference with domestic life. The domestic life of domestic tyrants is

one of the things which it is the most imperative on the law to interfere with;

and it is to be regretted that metaphysical scruples respecting the nature and

source of the authority of government, should induce many warm supporters

of laws against cruelty to animals, to seek for a justification of such laws in

the incidental consequences of the indulgence of ferocious habits to the

interests of human beings, rather than in the intrinsic merits of the case itself.

What it would be the duty of a human being, possessed of the requisite

physical strength, to prevent by force if attempted in his presence, it cannotbe less incumbent on society generally to repress. The existing laws of

England on the subject are chiefly defective in the trifling, often almost

nominal, maximum, to which the penalty even in the worst cases is limited.

              Among those members of the community whose freedom of contract

ought to be controlled by the legislature for their own protection, on account

(it is said) of their dependent position, it is frequently proposed to include

women: and in the existing Factory Acts, their labour, in common with that

of young persons, has been placed under peculiar restrictions. But the

classing together, for this and other purposes, of women and children,

appears to me both indefensible in principle and mischievous in practice.

Children below a certain age cannot judge or act for themselves; up to a

considerably greater age they are inevitably more or less disqualified for

doing so; but women are as capable as men of appreciating and managing

their own concerns, and the only hindrance to their doing so arises from the

injustice of their present social position. When the law makes everything

which the wife acquires, the property of the husband, while by compelling

her to live with him it forces her to submit to almost any amount of moral and

even physical tyranny which he may chose to inflict, there is some ground for

regarding every act done by her as done under coercion: but it is the great

error of reformers and philanthropists in our time, to nibble at the

consequences of unjust power, instead of redressing the injustice itself. If

women had as absolute a control as men have, over their own persons and

their own patrimony or acquisitions, there would be no plea for limiting their

hours of labouring for themselves, in order that they might have time to

labour for the husband, in what is called, by the advocates of restriction, his

home. Women employed in factories are the only women in the labour. ing

rank of life whose position is not that of slaves and drudges; precisely

because they cannot easily be compelled to work and earn wages in factories

against their will. For improving the condition of women, it should, in the

contrary, be an object to give them the readiest access to independent

industrial employment, instead of closing, either entirely or partially, that

which is already open to them.

              10. A second exception to the doctrine that individuals are the best

judges of their own interest, is when an individual attempts to decide

irrevocably now, what will be best for his interest at some future and distant

time. The presumption in favour of individual judgment is only legitimate,where the judgment is grounded on actual, and especially on present,

personal experience; not where it is formed antecedently to experience, and

not suffered to be reversed even after experience has condemned it. When

persons have bound themselves by a contract, not simply to do some one

thing, but to continue doing something for ever or for a prolonged period,

without any power of revoking the engagement, the presumption which their

perseverance in that course of conduct would otherwise raise in favour of its

being advantageous to them, does not exist; and any such presumption which

can be grounded on their having voluntarily entered into the contract, perhaps

at an early age, and without any real knowledge of what they undertook, is

commonly next to null. The practical maxim of leaving contracts free, is not

applicable without great limitations in case of engagement in perpetuity; and

the law should be extremely jealous of such engagements; should refuse its

sanction to them, when the obligations they impose are such as the

contracting party cannot be a competent judge of; if it ever does sanction

them, it should take every possible security for their being contracted with

foresight and deliberation; and in compensation for not permitting the parties

themselves to revoke their engagement, should grant them a release from it,

on a sufficient case being made out before an impartial authority. These

considerations are eminently applicable to marriage, the most important of all

cases of engagement for life.

              11. The third exception which I shall notice, to the doctrine that

government cannot manage the affairs of individuals as well as the

individuals themselves, has reference to the great class of cases in which the

individuals can only manage the concern by delegated agency, and in which

the so-called private management is, in point of fact, hardly better entitled to

be called management by the persons interested, than administration by a

public officer. Whatever, if left to spontaneous agency, can only be done by

joint-stock associations, will often be as well, and sometimes better done, as

far as the actual work is concerned, by the state. Government management is,

indeed, proverbially jobbing, careless, and ineffective, but so likewise has

generally been joint-stock management. The directors of a joint.stock

company, it is true, are always shareholders; but also the members of a

government are invariably taxpayers; and in the case of directors, no more

than in that of governments, is their proportional share of the benefits of good

management, equal to the interest they may possibly have in

mismanagement, even without reckoning the interest of their case. It may beobjected, that the shareholders, in their collective character, exercise a certain

control over the directors, and have almost always full power to remove them

from office. Practically, however, the difficulty of exercising this power is

found to be so great, that it is hardly ever exercised except in cases of such

flagrantly unskilful, or, at least, unsuccessful management, as would

generally produce the ejection from office of managers appointed by the

government. Against the very ineffectual security afforded by meetings of

shareholders, and by their individual inspection and inquiries, may be placed

the greater publicity and more active discussion and comment, to be expected

in free countries with regard to affairs in which the general government takes

part. The defects, therefore, of government management, do not seem to be

necessarily much greater, if necessarily greater at all, than those of

management by joint-stock.

              The true reasons in favour of leaving to voluntary associations all

such things as they are competent to perform, would exist in equal strength if

it were certain that the work itself would be as well or better done by public

officers. These reasons have been already pointed out: the mischief of

overloading the chief functionaries of government with demands on their

attention, and diverting them from duties which they alone can discharge, to

objects which can be sufficiently well attained without them; the danger of

unnecessarily swelling the direct power and in. direct influence of

government, and multiplying occasions of collision between its agents and

private citizens; and the inexpediency of concentrating in a dominant

bureaucracy, all the skill and experience in the management of large interests,

and all the power of organized action, existing in the community; a practice

which keeps the citizens in a relation to the government like that of children

to their guardians, and is a main cause of the inferior capacity for political life

which has hitherto characterized the over-governed countries of the

Continent, whether with or without the forms of representative
              279
government. But although, for these reasons, most things which are likely

to be even tolerably done by voluntary associations, should, generally

speaking, be left to them; it does not follow that the manner in which those

associations perform their work should be entirely uncontrolled by the

government. There are many cases in which the agency, of whatever nature,

by which a service is performed, is certain, from the nature of the case, to be

virtually single; in which a practical monopoly, with all the power it confers

of taxing the community, cannot be prevented from existing. I have alreadymore than once adverted to the case of the gas and water companies, among

which, though perfect freedom is allowed to competition, none really takes

place, and practically they are found to be even more irresponsible, and

unapproachable by individual complaints, than the government. There are the

expenses without the advantages of plurality of agency; and the charge made

for services which cannot be dispensed with, is, in substance, quite as much

compulsory taxation as if imposed by law; there are few householders who

make any distinction between their ‘water rate’ and other local taxes. In the

case of these particular services, the reasons preponderate in favour of their

being performed, like the paving and cleansing of the streets, not certainly by

the general government of the state, but by the municipal authorities of the

town, and the expense defrayed, as even now it in fact is, by a local rate. But

in the many analogous cases which it is best to resign to voluntary agency,

the community needs some other security for the fit performance of the

service than the interest of the managers; and it is the part of the government,

either to subject the business to reasonable conditions for the general

advantage, or to retain such power over it, that the profits of the monopoly

may at least be obtained for the public. This applies in the case of a road, a

canal, or a railway. These are always, in a great degree, practical monopolies;

and a government which concedes such monopoly unreservedly to a private

company, does much the same thing as if it allowed an individual or an

association to levy any tax they chose, for their own benefit, on all the malt

produced in the country, or on all the cotton imported into it. To make the

concession for a limited time is generally justifiable, on the principle which

justifies patents for invention: but the state should either reserve to itself a

reversionary property in such public works, or should retain, and freely

exercise, the right of fixing a maximum of fares and charges, and, from time

to time, varying that maximum. It is perhaps necessary to remark, that the

state may be the proprietor of canals or railways without itself working them;

and that they will almost always be better worked by means of a company,

renting the railway or canal for a limited period from the state.

              12. To a fourth case of exception I must request particular attention,

it being one to which as it appears to me, the attention of political economists

has not yet been sufficiently drawn. There are matters in which the

interference of law is required, not to overrule the judgment of individuals

respecting their own interest, but to give effect to that judgment: they being

unable to give effect to it except by concert, which concert again cannot beeffectual unless it receives validity and sanction from the law. For

illustration, and without prejudging the particular point, I may advert to the

question of diminishing the hours of labour. Let us suppose, what is at least

supposable, whether it be the fact or not — that a general reduction of the

hours of factory labour, say from ten to nine, would be for the advantage of

the workpeople: that they would receive as high wages, or nearly as high, for

nine hours. labour as they receive for ten. If this would be the result, and if

the operatives generally are convinced that it would, the limitation, some may

say, will be adopted spontaneously. I answer, that it will not be adopted

unless the body of operatives bind themselves to one another to abide by it. A

workman who refused to work more than nine hours while there were others

who worked ten, would either not be employed at all, or if employed, must

submit to lose one-tenth of his wages. However convinced, therefore, he may

be that it is the interest of the class to work short time, it is contrary to his

own interest to set the example, unless he is well assured that all or most

others will follow it. But suppose a general agreement of the whole class:

might not this be effectual without the sanction of law? Not unless enforced

by opinion with a rigour practically equal to that of law. For however

beneficial the observance of the regulation might be to the class collectively,

the immediate interest of every individual would lie in violating it: and the

more numerous those were who adhered to the rule, the more would

individuals gain by departing from it. If nearly all restricted themselves to

nine hours, those who chose to work for ten would gain all the advantages of

the restriction, together with the profit from infringing it; they would get ten

hours’ wages for nine hours’ work, and an hour’s wages besides. I grant that

if a large majority adhered to the nine hours, there would be no harm done;

the benefit would be, in the main, secured to the class, while those

individuals who preferred to work harder and earn more, would have an

opportunity of doing so. This certainly would be the state of things to be

wished, for; and assuming that a reduction of hours without any diminution

of wages could take place without expelling the commodity from some of its

markets — which is in every particular instance a question of fact, not of

principle — the manner in which it would be most desirable that this effect

should be brought about, would be by a quiet change in the general custom of

the trade; short hours becoming, by spontaneous choice, the general practice,

but those who chose to deviate from it having the fullest liberty to do so.

Probably, however, so many would prefer the ten hours’ work on theimproved terms, that the limitation could not be maintained as a general

practice: what some did from choice, others would soon be obliged to do

from necessity, and those who had chosen long hours for the sake of

increased wages, would be forced in the end to work long hours for no

greater wages than before. Assuming then that it really would be the interest

of each to work only nine hours if he could be assured that all others would

do the same, there might be no means of attaining this object but by

converting their supposed mutual agreement into an engagement under

penalty, by consenting to have it enforced by law. I am not expressing any

opinion in favour of such an enactment, which has never in this country been

demanded, and which I certainly should not, in present circumstances,

recommend: but it serves to exemplify the manner in which classes of

persons may need the assistance of law, to give effect to their deliberate

collective opinion of their own interest, by affording to every individual a

guarantee that his competitors will pursue the same course, without which he

cannot safely adopt it himself.

              Another exemplification of the same principle is afforded by what is

known as the Wakefield system of colonization. This system is grounded on

the important principle, that the degree of productiveness of land and labour

depends on their being in a due proportion to one another; that if a few

persons in a newly-settled country attempt to occupy and appropriate a large

district, or if each labourer becomes too soon an occupier and cultivator of

land, there is a loss of productive power, and a great retardation of the

progress of the colony in wealth and civilization: that nevertheless the instinct

(as it may almost be called) of appropriation, and the feelings associated in

old countries with landed proprietorship, induce almost every emigrant to

take possession of as much land as he has the means of acquiring, and every

labourer to become at once a proprietor, cultivating his own land with no

other aid than that of his family. If this propensity to the immediate

possession of land could be in some degree restrained, and each labourer

induced to work a certain number of years on hire before he became a landed

proprietor, a perpetual stock of hired labourers could be maintained, available

for roads, canals, works of irrigation, &c., and for the establishment and

carrying on of the different branches of town industry; whereby the labourer,

when he did at last become a landed proprietor, would find his land much

more valuable, through access to markets, and facility of obtaining hired

labour. Mr Wakefield therefore proposed to check the premature occupationof land, and dispersion of the people, by putting upon all unappropriated

lands a rather high price, the proceeds of which were to be expended in

conveying emigrant labourers from the mother country.

              This salutary provision, however, has been objected to, in the name

and on the authority of what was represented as the great principle of political

economy, that individuals are the best judges of their own interest. It was

said, that when things are left to themselves, land is appropriated and

occupied by the spontaneous choice of individuals, in the quantities and at the

times most advantageous to each person, and therefore to the community

generally; and that to interpose artificial obstacles to their obtaining land, is

to prevent them from adopting the course which in their own judgment is

most beneficial to them, from a self.conceited notion of the legislator, that he

knows what is most for their interest, better than they do themselves. Now

this is a complete misunderstanding, either of the system itself, or of the

principle with which it is alleged to conflict. The oversight is similar to that

which we have just seen exemplified on the subject of hours of labour.

However beneficial it might be to the colony in the aggregate, and to each

individual composing it, that no one should occupy more land than he can

properly cultivate, nor become a proprietor until there are other labourers

ready to take his place in working for hire; it can never be the interest of an

individual to exercise this forbearance, unless he is assured that others will do

so too. Surrounded by settlers who have each their thousand acres, how is he

benefited by restricting himself to fifty? or what does a labourer gain by

deferring the acquisition altogether for a few years, if all other labourers rush

to convert their first earnings into estates in the wilderness, several miles

apart from one another? If they, by seizing on land, prevent the formation of

a class of labourers for wages, he will not, by postponing the time of his

becoming a proprietor, be enabled to employ the land with any greater

advantage when he does obtain it; to what end therefore should he place

himself in what will appear to him and others a position of inferiority, by

remaining a hired labourer, when all around him are proprietors? It is the

interest of each to do what is good for all, but only if others will do likewise.

              The principle that each is the best judge of his own interest,

understood as these objectors understand it, would prove that governments

ought not to fulfil any of their acknowledged duties — ought not, in fact, to

exist at all. It is greatly the interest of the community, collectively andindividually, not to rob or defraud one another. but there is not the less

necessity for laws to punish robbery and fraud; because, though it is the

interest of each that nobody should rob or cheat, it is not any one’s interest to

refrain from robbing and cheating others when all others are permitted to rob

and cheat him. Penal laws exist at all, chiefly for this reason — because even

an unanimous opinion that a certain line of conduct is for the general interest,

does not always make it people’s individual interest to adhere to that line of

conduct.

              13. Fifthly; the argument against government interference grounded

on the maxim that individuals are the best judges of their own interest, cannot

apply to the very large class of cases, in which those acts of individuals with

which the government claims to interfere, are not done by those individuals

for their own interest, but for the interest of other people. This includes,

among other things, the important and much agitated subject of public

charity. Though individuals should, in general, be left to do for themselves

whatever it can reasonably be expected that they should be capable of doing,

yet when they are at any rate not to be left to themselves, but to be helped by

other people, the question arises whether it is better that they should receive

this help exclusively from individuals, and therefore uncertainly and casually,

or by systematic arrangements, in which society acts through its organ, the

state.

              This brings us to the subject of Poor Laws; a subject which would be

of very minor importance if the habits of all classes of the people were

temperate and prudent, and the diffusion of property satisfactory; but of the

greatest moment in a state of things so much the reverse of this, in both

points, as that which the British islands present.

              Apart from any metaphysical considerations respecting the

foundation of morals or of the social union, it will be admitted to be right that

human beings should help one another; and the more so, in proportion to the

urgency of the need: and none needs help so urgently as one who is starving.

The claim to help, therefore, created by destitution, is one of the strongest

which can exist; and there is prima facie the amplest reason for making the

relief of so extreme an exigency as certain to those who require it, as by any

arrangements of society it can be made.

              On the other hand, in all cases of helping, there are two sets ofconsequences to be considered; the consequences of the assistance, and the

consequences of relying on the assistance. The former are generally

beneficial, but the latter, for the most part, injurious; so much so, in many

cases, as greatly to outweigh the value of the benefit. And this is never more

likely to happen than in the very cases where the need of help is the most

intense. There are few things for which it is more mischievous that people

should rely on the habitual aid of others, than for the means of subsistence,

and unhappily there is no lesson which they more easily learn. The problem

to be solved is therefore one of peculiar nicety as well as importance; how to

give the greatest amount of needful help, with the smallest encouragement to

undue reliance on it.

              Energy and self-dependence are, however, liable to be impaired by

the absence of help, as well as by its excess. It is even more fatal to exertion

to have no hope of succeeding by it, than to be assured of succeeding without

it. When the condition of any one is so disastrous that his energies are

paralysed by discouragement, assistance is a tonic, not a sedative: it braces

instead of deadening the active faculties: always provided that the assistance

is not such as to dispense with self-help, by substituting itself for the person’s

own labour, skill, and prudence, but is limited to affording him a better hope

of attaining success by those legitimate means. This accordingly is a test to

which all plans of philanthropy and benevolence should be brought, whether

intended for the benefit of individuals or of classes, and whether conducted

on the voluntary or on the government principle.

              In so far as the subject admits of any general doctrine or maxim, it

would appear to be this — that if assistance is given in such a manner that the

condition of the person helped is as desirable as that of the person who

succeeds in doing the same thing without help, the assistance, if capable of

being previously calculated on, is mischievous: but if, while available to

every. body, it leaves to every one a strong motive to do without it if he can,

it is then for the most part beneficial. This principle, applied to a system of

public charity, is that of the Poor Law of 1834. If the condition of a person

receiving relief is made as eligible as that of the labourer who supports

himself by his own exertions, the system strikes at the root of all individual

industry and self-government; and, if fully acted up to, would require as its

supplement an organized system of compulsion, for governing and setting to

work like cattle, those who had been removed from the influence of themotives that act on human beings. But if, consistently with guaranteeing all

persons against absolute want, the condition of those who are supported by

legal charity can be kept considerably less desirable than the condition of

those who find support for themselves, none but beneficial consequences can

arise from a law which renders it impossible for any person, except by his

own choice, to die from insufficiency of food. That in England at least this

supposition can be realized, is proved by the experience of a long period

preceding the close of the last century, as well as by that of many highly

pauperized districts in more recent times, which have been dispauperized by

adopting strict rules of poor-law administration, to the great and permanent

benefit of the whole labouring class. There is probably no country in which,

by varying the means suitably to the character of the people, a legal provision

for the destitute might not be made compatible with the observance of the

conditions necessary to its being innocuous.

              Subject to these conditions, I conceive it to be highly desirable, that

the certainty of subsistence should be held out by law to the destitute able-

bodied, rather than that their relief should depend on voluntary charity. In the

first place, charity almost always does too much or too little: it lavishes its

bounty in one place, and leaves people to starve in another. Secondly, since

the state must necessarily provide subsistence for the criminal poor while

undergoing punishment, not to do the same for the poor who have not

offended is to give a premium on crime. And lastly, if the poor are left to

individual charity, a vast amount of mendacity is inevitable. What the state

may and should abandon to private charity, is the task of distinguishing

between one case of real necessity and another. Private charity can give more

to the more deserving. The state must act by general rules. It cannot

undertake to discriminate between the deserving and the undeserving

indigent. It owes no more than subsistence to the first, and can give no less to

the last. What is said about the injustice of a law which has no better

treatment for the merely unfortunate poor than for the ill-conducted, is

founded on a misconception of the province of law and public authority. The

dispensers of public relief have no business to be inquisitors. Guardians and

overseers are not fit to be trusted to give or withhold other people’s money

according to their verdict on the morality of the person soliciting it; and it

would show much ignorance of the ways of mankind to suppose that such

persons, even in the almost impossible case of their being qualified, will take

the trouble of ascertaining and sifting the past conduct of a person in distress,so as to form a rational judgment on it. Private charity can make these

distinctions; and in bestowing its own money, is entitled to do so according to

its own judgment. It should understand that this is its peculiar and appropriate

province, and that it is commendable or the contrary, as it exercises the

function with more or less discernment. But the administrators of a public

fund ought not to be required to do more for anybody, than that minimum

which is due even to the worst. If they are, the indulgence very speedily

becomes the rule, and refusal the more or less capricious or tyrannical

exception.

              14. Another class of cases which fall within the same general

principle as the case of public charity, are those in which the acts done by

individuals, though intended solely for their own benefit, involve

consequences extending indefinitely beyond them, to interests of the nation

or of posterity, for which society in its collective capacity is alone able, and

alone bound, to provide. One of these cases is that of Colonization. If it is

desirable, as no one will deny it to be, that the planting of colonies should be

conducted, not with an exclusive view to the private interests of the first

founders, but with a deliberate regard to the permanent welfare of the nations

afterwards to arise from these small beginnings; such regard can only be

secured by placing the enterprise, from its commencement, under regulations

constructed with the foresight and enlarged views of philosophical

legislators; and the government alone has power either to frame such

regulations, or to enforce their observance.

              The question of government intervention in the work of Colonization

involves the future and permanent interests of civilization itself, and far

outstretches the comparatively narrow limits of purely economical

considerations. But even with a view to those considerations alone, the

removal of population from the overcrowded to the unoccupied parts of the

earth’s surface is one of those works of eminent social usefulness, which

most require, and which at the same time best repay, the intervention of

government.

              To appreciate the benefits of colonization, it should be considered in

its relation, not to a single country, but to the collective economical interests

of the human race. The question is in general treated too exclusively as one of

distribution; of relieving one labour market and supplying another. It is this,

but it is also a question of production, and of the most efficient employmentof the productive resources of the world. Much has been said of the good

economy of importing commodities from the place where they can be bought

cheapest; while the good economy of producing them where they can be

produced cheapest, is comparatively little thought of. If to carry consumable

goods from the places where they are superabundant to those where they are

scarce, is a good pecuniary speculation, is it not an equally good speculation

to do the same thing with regard to labour and instruments? The exportation

of labourers and capital from old to new countries, from a place where their

productive power is less, to a place where it is greater, increases by so much

the aggregate produce of the labour and capital of the world. It adds to the

joint wealth of the old and the new country, what amounts in a short period to

many times the mere cost of effecting the transport. There needs be no

hesitation in affirming that Colonization, in the present state of the world, is

the best affair of business, in which the capital of an old and wealthy country

can engage.

              It is equally obvious, however, that Colonization on a great scale can

be undertaken, as an affair of business, only by the government, or by some

combination of individuals in complete understanding with the government;

except under such very peculiar circumstances as those which succeeded the

Irish famine. Emigration on the voluntary principle rarely has any material

influence in lightening the pressure of population in the old country, though

as far as it goes it is doubtless a benefit to the colony. Those labouring

persons who voluntarily emigrate are seldom the very poor; they are small

farmers with some little capital, or labourers who have saved something, and

who, in removing only their own labour from the crowded labour market,

withdraw from the capital of the country a fund which maintained and

employed more labourers than themselves. Besides, this portion of the

community is so limited in number, that it might be removed entirely,

without making any sensible impression upon the numbers of the population,

or even upon the annual increase. Any considerable emigration of labour is

only practicable, when its cost is defrayed, or at least advanced, by others

than the emigrants themselves. Who then is to advance it? Naturally, it may

be said, the capitalists of the colony, who require the labour, and who intend

to employ it. But to this there is the obstacle, that a capitalist, after going to

the expense of carrying out labourers, has no security that he shall be the

person to derive any benefit from them. If all the capitalists of the colony

were to combine, and bear the expense by subscription, they would still haveno security that the labourers, when there, would continue to work for them.

After working for a short time and earning a few pounds, they always, unless

prevented by the government, squat on unoccupied land, and work only for

themselves. The experiment has been repeatedly tried whether it was possible

to enforce contracts for labour, or the repayment of the passage money of

emigrants to those who advanced it, and the trouble and expense have always

exceeded the advantage. The only other resource is the voluntary

contributions of parishes or individuals, to rid themselves of surplus labourers

who are already, or who are likely to become, locally chargeable on the

poor.rate. Were this speculation to become general, it might produce a

sufficient amount of emigration to clear off the existing unemployed

population, but not to raise the wages of the employed: and the same thing

would require to be done over again in less than another generation.

              One of the principal reasons why Colonization should be a national

undertaking, is that in this manner alone, save in highly exceptional cases,

can emigration be self-supporting. The exportation of capital and labour to a

new country being, as before observed, one of the best of all affairs of

business, it is absurd that it should not, like other affairs of business, repay its

own expenses. Of the great addition which it makes to the produce of the

world, there can be no reason why a sufficient portion should not be

intercepted, and employed in reimbursing the outlay incurred in effecting it.

For reasons already given, no individual, or body of individuals, can

reimburse themselves for the expense; the government, however, can. It can

take from the annual increase of wealth, caused by the emigration, the

fraction which suffices to repay with interest what the emigration has cost.

The expenses of emigration to a colony ought to be borne by the colony; and

this, in general, is only possible when they are borne by the colonial

government.

              Of the modes in which a fund for the support of colonization can be

raised in the colony, none is comparable in advantage to that which was first

suggested, and so ably and perseveringly advocated, by Mr Wakefield: the

plan of putting a price on all unoccupied land, and devoting the proceeds to

emigration. The unfounded and pedantic objections to this plan have been

answered in a former part of this chapter: we have now to speak of its

advantages. First, it avoids the difficulties and discontents incident to raising

a large annual amount by taxation; a thing which is almost useless to attemptwith a scattered population of settlers in the wilderness, who, as experience

proves, can seldom be compelled to pay direct taxes, except at a cost

exceeding their amount; while in an infant community indirect taxation soon

reaches its limit. The sale of lands is thus by far the easiest mode of raising

the requisite funds. But it has other and still greater recommendations. It is a

beneficial check upon the tendency of a population of colonists to adopt the

tastes and inclinations of savage life, and to disperse so widely as to lose all

the advantages of commerce, of markets, of separation of employments, and

combination of labour. By making it necessary for those who emigrate at the

expense of the fund, to earn a considerable sum before they can become

landed proprietors, it keeps up a perpetual succession of labourers for hire,

who in every country are a most important auxiliary even to peasant

proprietors: and by diminishing the eagerness of agricultural speculators to

add to their domain, it keeps the settlers within reach of each other for

purposes of co-operation, arranges a numerous body of them within easy

distance of each centre of foreign commerce and non-agricultural industry,

and insures the formation and rapid growth of towns and town products. This

concentration, compared with the dispersion which uniformly occurs when

unoccupied land can be had for nothing, greatly accelerates the attainment of

prosperity, and enlarges the fund which may be drawn upon for further

emigration. Before the adoption of the Wakefield system, the early years of

all new colonies were full of hardship and difficulty: the last colony founded

on the old principle, the Swan River settlement, being one of the most

characteristic instances. In all subsequent colonization, the Wakefield

principle has been acted upon, though imperfectly, a part only of the proceeds

of the sale of land being devoted to emigration: yet wherever it has been

introduced at all, as in South Australia, Victoria, and New Zealand, the

restraint put upon the dispersion of the settlers, and the influx of capital

caused by the assurance of being able to obtain hired labour, has, in spite of

many difficulties and much mismanagement, produced a suddenness and
                                                          280
rapidity of prosperity more like fable than reality.

              The self-supporting system of Colonization, once established, would

increase in efficiency every year; its effect would tend to increase in

geometrical progression: for since every able-bodied emigrant, until the

country is fully peopled, adds in a very short time to its wealth, over and

above his own consumption, as much as would defray the expense of

bringing out another emigrant, it follows that the greater the number alreadysent, the greater number might continue to be sent, each emigrant laying the

foundation of a succession of other emigrants at short intervals without fresh

expense, until the colony is filled up. It would therefore be worth while, to

the mother country, to accelerate the early stages of this progression, by loans

to the colonies for the purpose of emigration, repayable from the fund formed

by the sales of land. In thus advancing the means of accomplishing a large

immediate emigration, it would be investing that amount of capital in the

mode, of all others, most beneficial to the colony; and the labour and savings

of these emigrants would hasten the period at which a large sum would be

available from sales of land. It would be necessary, in order not to overstock

the labour market, to act in concert with the persons disposed to remove their

own capital to the colony. The knowledge that a large amount of hired labour

would be available, in so productive a field of employment, would insure a

large emigration of capital from a country, like England, of low profits and

rapid accumulation: and it would only be necessary not to send out a greater

number of labourers at one time, than this capital could absorb and employ at

high wages.

              Inasmuch as, on this system, any given amount of expenditure, once

incurred, would provide not merely a single emigration, but a perpetually

flowing stream of emigrants, which would increase in breadth and depth as it

flowed on; this mode of relieving overpopulation has a recommendation, not

possessed by any other plan ever proposed for making head against the

consequences of increase without restraining the increase itself: there is an

element of indefiniteness in it; no one can perfectly foresee how far its

influence, as a vent for surplus population, might possibly reach. There is

hence the strongest obligation on the government of a country like our own,

with a crowded population, and unoccupied continents under its command, to

build, as it were, and keep open, in concert with the colonial governments, a

bridge from the mother country to those continents, by establishing the self-

supporting system of colonization on such a scale, that as great an amount of

emigration as the colonies can at the time accommodate, may at all times be

able to take place without cost to the emigrants themselves.

              The importance of these considerations, as regards the British

islands, has been of late considerably diminished by the unparalleled amount

of spontaneous emigration from Ireland; an emigration not solely of small

farmers, but of the poorest class of agricultural labourers, and which is atonce voluntary and self-supporting, the succession of emigrants being kept up

by funds contributed from the earnings of their relatives and connexions who

had gone before. To this has been added a large amount of voluntary

emigration to the seats of the gold discoveries, which has partly supplied the

wants of our most distant colonies, where, both for local and national

interests, it was most of all required. But the stream of both these emigrations

has already considerably slackened, and though that from Ireland has since

partially revived, it is not certain that the aid of government in a systematic

form, and on the self-supporting principle, will not again become necessary

to keep the communication open between the hands needing work in

England, and the work which needs hands elsewhere.

              15. The same principle which points out colonization, and the relief

of the indigent, as cases to which the principal objection to government

interference does not apply, extends also to a variety of cases, in which

important public services are to be performed, while yet there is no individual

specially interested in performing them, nor would any adequate

remuneration naturally or spontaneously attend their performance. Take for

instance a voyage of geographical or scientific exploration. The information

sought may be of great public value, yet no individual would derive any

benefit from it which would repay the expense of fitting out the expedition;

and there is no mode of intercepting the benefit on its way to those who profit

by it, in order to levy a toll for the remuneration of its authors. Such voyages

are, or might be, undertaken by private subscription; but this is a rare and

precarious resource. Instances are more frequent in which the expense has

been borne by public companies or philanthropic associations; but in general

such enterprises have been conducted at the expense of government, which is

thus enabled to entrust them to the persons in its judgment best qualified for

the task. Again, it is a proper office of government to build and maintain

lighthouses, establish buoys, &c. for the security of navigation: for since it is

impossible that the ships at sea which are benefited by a lighthouse, should

be made to pay a toll on the occasion of its use, no one would build

lighthouses from motives of personal interest, unless indemnified and

rewarded from a compulsory levy made by the state. There are many

scientific researches, of great value to a nation and to mankind, requiring

assiduous devotion of time and labour, and not unfrequently great expense,

by persons who can obtain a high price for their services in other ways. If the

government had no power to grant indemnity for expense, and remunerationfor time and labour thus employed, such researches could only be undertaken

by the very few persons who, with an independent fortune, unite technical

knowledge, laborious habits, and either great public spirit, or an ardent desire

of scientific celebrity.

              Connected with this subject is the question of providing, by means

of endowments or salaries, for the maintenance of what has been called a

learned class. The cultivation of speculative knowledge, though one of the

most useful of all employments, is a service rendered to a community

collectively, not individually, and one consequently for which it is, prima

facie, reasonable that the community collectively should pay; since it gives

no claim on any individual for a pecuniary remuneration; and unless a

provision is made for such services from some public fund, there is not only

no encouragement to them, but there is as much discouragement as is implied

in the impossibility of gaining a living by such pursuits, and the necessity

consequently imposed on most of those who would be capable of them, to

employ the greatest part of their time in gaining a subsistence. The evil,

however, is greater in appearance than in reality. The greatest things, it has

been said, have generally been done by those who had the least time at their

disposal; and the occupation of some hours every day in a routine

employment, has often been found compatible with the most brilliant

achievements in literature and philosophy. Yet there are investigations and

experiments which require not only a long but a continuous devotion of time

and attention: there are also occupations which so engross and fatigue the

mental faculties, as to be inconsistent with any vigorous employment of them

upon other subjects, even in any intervals of leisure. It is highly desirable,

therefore, that there should be a mode of insuring to the public the services of

scientific discoverers, and perhaps of some other classes of savants, by

affording them the means of support consistently with devoting a sufficient

portion of time to their peculiar pursuits. The fellowships of the Universities

are an institution excellently adapted for such a purpose; but are hardly ever

applied to it, being bestowed, at the best, as a reward for past proficiency, in

committing to memory what has been done by others, and not as the salary of

future labours in the advancement of knowledge. In some countries,

Academies of science, antiquities, history, &c., have been formed, with

emoluments annexed. The most effectual plan, and at the same time least

liable to abuse, seems to be that of conferring Professorships, with duties of

instruction attached to them. The occupation of teaching a branch ofknowledge, at least in its higher departments, is a help rather than an

impediment to the systematic cultivation of the subject itself. The duties of a

professorship almost always leave much time for original researches; and the

greatest advances which have been made in the various sciences, both moral

and physical, have originated with those who were public teachers of them;

from Plato and Aristotle to the great names of the Scotch, French, and

German Universities. I do not mention the English, because until very lately

their professorships have been, as is well known, little more than nominal. In

the case, too, of a lecturer in a great institution of education, the public at

large has the means of judging, if not the quality of the teaching, at least the

talents and industry of the teacher; and it is more difficult to misemploy the

power of appointment to such an office, than to job in pensions and salaries

to persons not so directly before the public eye.

              It may be said generally, that anything which it is desirable should

be done for the general interests of mankind or of future generations, or for

the present interests of those members of the community who require external

aid but which is not of a nature to remunerate individuals or associations for

undertaking it, is in itself a suitable thing to be undertaken by government:

though, before making the work their own, governments ought always to

consider if there be any rational probability of its being done on what is

called the voluntary principle, and if so, whether it is likely to be done in a

better or more effectual manner by government agency, than by the zeal and

liberality of individuals.

              16. The preceding heads comprise, to the best of my judgment, the

whole of the exceptions to the practical maxim, that the business of society

can be best performed by private and voluntary agency. It is, however,

necessary to add, that the intervention of government cannot always

practically stop short at the limit which defines the cases intrinsically suitable

for it. In the particular circumstances of a given age or nation, there is

scarcely anything really important to the general interest, which it may not be

desirable, or even necessary, that the government should take upon itself, not

because private individuals cannot effectually perform it, but because they

will not. At some times and places, there will be no roads, docks, harbours,

canals, works of irrigation, hospitals, schools, colleges, printing-presses,

unless the government establishes them; the public being either too poor to

command the necessary resources, or too little advanced in intelligence toappreciate the ends, or not sufficiently practised in joint action to be capable

of the means. This is true, more or less, of all countries inured to despotism,

and particularly of those in which there is a very wide distance in civilization

between the people and the government: as in those which have been

conquered and are retained in subjection by a more energetic and more

cultivated people. In many parts of the world, the people can do nothing for

themselves which requires large means and combined action: all such things

are left undone, unless done by the state. In these cases, the mode in which

the government can most surely demonstrate the sincerity with which it

intends the greatest good of its subjects, is by doing the things which are

made incumbent on it by the helplessness of the public, in such a manner as

shall tend not to increase and perpetuate, but to correct, that helplessness. A

good government will give all its aid in such a shape, as to encourage and

nurture any rudiments it may find of a spirit of individual exertion. It will be

assiduous in removing obstacles and discouragements to voluntary enterprise,

and in giving whatever facilities and whatever direction and guidance may be

necessary: its pecuniary means will be applied, when practicable, in aid of

private efforts rather than in supersession of them, and it will call into play its

machinery of rewards and honours to elicit such efforts. Government aid,

when given merely in default of private enterprise, should be so given as to

be as far as possible a course of education for the people in the art of

accomplishing great objects by individual energy and voluntary co-operation.

              I have not thought it necessary here to insist on that part of the

functions of government which all admit to be indispensable, the function of

prohibiting and punishing such conduct on the part of individuals in the

exercise of their freedom, as is clearly injurious to other persons, whether the

case be one of force, fraud, or negligence. Even in the best state which

society has yet reached, it is lamentable to think how great a proportion of all

the efforts and talents in the world are employed in merely neutralizing one

another. It is the proper end of government to reduce this wretched waste to

the smallest possible amount, by taking such measures as shall cause the

energies now spent by mankind in injuring one another, or in protecting

themselves against injury, to be turned to the legitimate employment of the

human faculties, that of compelling the powers of nature to be more and more

subservient to physical and moral good.

        264
               Supra, Bk, v, Ch. I.        265
               The only cases in which government agency involves nothing of a

compulsory nature, are the rare cases in which, without any artificial

monopoly, it pays its own expenses. A bridge built with public money, on

which tolls are collected sufficient to pay not only all current expenses, but

the interest of the original outlay, is one case in point. The government

railways in Belgium and Germany are another example. The Post Office, if

its monopoly were abolished, and it still paid its expenses, would be another.

        266
               De la Liberte du Travail, Vol. II, pp. 353–4.

        267
               I quote at second hand, from Mr Carey’s Essay on the Rate of

Wages, pp. 195–6.

        268
               In opposition to these opinions, a writer, with whom on many

points I agree, but whose hostility to government intervention seems to me

too indiscriminate and unqualified, M. Dunoyer, observes, that instruction,

however good in itself, can only be useful to the public in so far as they are

willing to receive it, and that the best proof that the instruction is suitable to

their wants is its success as a pecuniary enterprise. This argument seems no

more conclusive respecting instruction for the mind, than it would be

respecting medicine for the body. No medicine will do the patient any good if

he cannot be induced to take it; but we are not bound to admit as a corollary

from this, that the patient will select the right medicine without assistance. Is

it not probable that a recommendation, from any quarter which he respects,

may induce him to accept a better medicine than he would spontaneously

have chosen? This is, in respect to education, the very point in debate.

Without doubt, instruction which is so far in advance of the people that they

cannot be induced to avail themselves of it, is to them of no more worth than

if it did not exist. But between what they spontaneously choose, and what

they will refuse to accept when offered, there is a breadth of interval

proportioned to their deference for the recommender. Besides, a thing of

which the public are bad judges, may require to be shown to them and

pressed on their attention for a long time, and to prove its advantages by long

experience, before they learn to appreciate it, yet they may learn at last;

which they might never have done, if the thing had not been thus obtruded

upon them in act, but only recommended in theory. Now, a pecuniary

speculation cannot wait years, or perhaps generations for success; it must

succeed rapidly, or not at all. Another consideration which M. Dunoyer

seems to have overlooked, is, that institutions and modes of tuition whichnever could be made sufficiently popular to repay, with a profit, the expenses

incurred on them, may be invaluable to the many by giving the highest

quality of education to the few and keeping up the perpetual succession of

superior minds, by whom knowledge is advanced, and the community urged

forward in civilization.

        269
               The practice of the English law with respect to insane persons,

especially on the all-important point of the ascertainment of insanity, most

urgently demands reform. At present no persons, whose property is worth

coveting, and whose nearest relations are unscrupulous, or on bad terms with

them, are secure against a commission of lunacy. At the instance of the

persons who would profit by their being declared insane, a jury may be

impanelled and an investigation held at the expense of the property, in which

all their personal peculiarities, with all the additions made by the lying gossip

of low servants, are poured into the credulous ears of twelve petty

shopkeepers, ignorant of all ways of life except those of their own class, and

regarding every trait of individuality in character or taste as eccentricity, and

all eccentricity as either insanity or wickedness. lf this sapient tribunal gives

the desired verdict, the property is handed over to perhaps the last persons

whom the rightful owner would have desired or suffered to possess it. Some

recent instances of this kind of investigation have been a scandal to the

administration of justice. Whatever other changes in this branch of law may

be made, two at least are imperative: firSt, that, as in other legal proceedings,

the expenses should not be borne by the person on trial, but by the promoters

of the inquiry, subject to recovery of costs in case of success: and secondly,

that the property of a person declared insane, should in no case be made over

to heirs while the proprietor is alive, but should be managed by a public

officer until his death or recovery.

        270
               A parallel case may be found in the distaste for politics, and

absence of public spirit, by which women, as a class, are characterized in the

present state of society, and which is often felt and complained of by political

reformers, without, in general, making them willing to recognise, or desirous

to remove, its cause. It obviously arises from their being taught, both by

institutions and by the whole of their education, to regard themselves as

entirely apart from politics. Wherever they have been politicians, they have

shown as great interest in the subject, and as great aptitude for it, according to

the spirit of their time, as the men with whom they were contemporaries: inthat period of history (for example) in which Isabella of Castile and Elizabeth

of England were, not rare exceptions, but merely brilliant examples of a spirit

and capacity very largely diffused among women of high station and

cultivation in Europe.

        271
               The objections which have been made, with so much virulence, in

some of these colonies, to the Wakefield system, apply, in so far as they have

any validity, not to the principle, but to some provisions which are no part of

the system, and have been most unnecessarily and improperly engrafted on it;

such as the offering only a limited quantity of land for sale, and that by

auction, and in lots of not less than 640 acres, instead of selling all land

which is asked for, and allowing to the buyer unlimited freedom of choice,

both as to quantity and situation, at a fixed price.

 

 

 

                                   On Liberty

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTORY
CHAPTER 2
OF THE LIBERTY OF THOUGHT AND DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 3
ON INDIVIDUALITY, AS ONE OF THE ELEMENTS OF WELLBEING
CHAPTER 4
OF THE LIMITS TO THE AUTHORITY OF SOCIETY OVER THE INDIVIDUAL
CHAPTER 5
APPLICATIONS                                      Chapter 1

 

 

                                      Introductory

 

 

              THE subject of this Essay is not the so-called Liberty of the Will, so

unfortunately opposed to the misnamed doctrine of Philosophical Necessity;

but Civil, or Social Liberty: the nature and limits of the power which can be

legitimately exercised by society over the individual. A question seldom

stated, and hardly ever discussed, in general terms, but which profoundly

influences the practical controversies of the age by its latent presence, and is

likely soon to make itself recognized as the vital question of the future. It is

so far from being new, that, in a certain sense, it has divided mankind, almost

from the remotest ages, but in the stage of progress into which the more

civilized portions of the species have now entered, it presents itself under

new conditions, and requires a different and more fundamental treatment.

              The struggle between Liberty and Authority is the most conspicuous

feature in the portions of history with which we are earliest familiar,

particularly in that of Greece, Rome, and England. But in old times this

contest was between subjects, or some classes of subjects, and the

government. By liberty, was meant protection against the tyranny of the

political rulers. The rulers were conceived (except in some of the popular

governments of Greece) as in a necessarily antagonistic position to the people

whom they ruled. They consisted of a governing One, or a governing tribe or

caste, who derived their authority from inheritance or conquest; who, at all

events, did not hold it at the pleasure of the governed, and whose supremacy

men did not venture, perhaps did not desire, to contest, whatever precautions

might be taken against its oppressive exercise. Their power was regarded as

necessary, but also as highly dangerous; as a weapon which they would

attempt to use against their subjects, no less than against external enemies. To

prevent the weaker members of the community from being preyed upon by

innumerable vultures, it was needful that there should be an animal of prey

stronger than the rest, commissioned to keep them down. But as the king of

the vultures would be no less bent upon preying upon the flock than any ofthe minor harpies, it was indispensable to be in a perpetual attitude of defence

against his beak and claws. The aim, therefore, of patriots, was to set limits to

the power which the ruler should be suffered to exercise over the community;

and this limitation was what they meant by liberty. It was attempted in two

ways. First, by obtaining a recognition of certain immunities, called political

liberties or rights, which it was to be regarded as a breach of duty in the ruler

to infringe, and which, if he did infringe, specific resistance, or general

rebellion, was held to be justifiable. A second, and generally a later

expedient, was the establishment of constitutional checks; by which the

consent of the community, or of a body of some sort supposed to represent its

interests, was made a necessary condition to some of the more important acts

of the governing power. To the first of these modes of limitation, the ruling

power, in most European countries, was compelled, more or less, to submit. It

was not so with the second; and to attain this, or when already in some degree

possessed, to attain it more completely, became everywhere the principal

object of the lovers of liberty. And so long as mankind were content to

combat one enemy by another, and to be ruled by a master, on condition of

being guaranteed more or less efficaciously against his tyranny, they did not

carry their aspirations beyond this point.

              A time, however, came in the progress of human affairs, when men

ceased to think it a necessity of nature that their governors should be an

independent power, opposed in interest to themselves. It appeared to them

much better that the various magistrates of the State should be their tenants or

delegates, revocable at their pleasure. In that way alone, it seemed, could they

have complete security that the powers of government would never be abused

to their disadvantage. By degrees, this new demand for elective and

temporary rulers became the prominent object of the exertions of the popular

party, wherever any such party existed; and superseded, to a considerable

extent, the previous efforts to limit the power of rulers. As the struggle

proceeded for making the ruling power emanate from the periodical choice of

the ruled, some persons began to think that too much importance had been

attached to the limitation of the power itself. That (it might seem) was a

resource against rulers whose interests were habitually opposed to those of

the people. What was now wanted was, that the rulers should be identified

with the people; that their interest and will should be the interest and will of

the nation. The nation did not need to be protected against its own will. There

was no fear of its tyrannizing over itself. Let the rulers be effectuallyresponsible to it, promptly removable by it, and it could afford to trust them

with power of which it could itself dictate the use to be made. Their power

was but the nation's own power, concentrated, and in a form convenient for

exercise. This mode of thought, or rather perhaps of feeling, was common

among the last generation of European liberalism, in the Continental section

of which, it still apparently predominates. Those who admit any limit to what

a government may do, except in the case of such governments as they think

ought not to exist, stand out as brilliant exceptions among the political

thinkers of the Continent. A similar tone of sentiment might by this time have

been prevalent in our own country, if the circumstances which for a time

encouraged it had continued unaltered.

              But, in political and philosophical theories, as well as in persons,

success discloses faults and infirmities which failure might have concealed

from observation. The notion, that the people have no need to limit their

power over themselves, might seem axiomatic, when popular government

was a thing only dreamed about, or read of as having existed at some distant

period of the past. Neither was that notion necessarily disturbed by such

temporary aberrations as those of the French Revolution, the worst of which

were the work of an usurping few, and which, in any case, belonged, not to

the permanent working of popular institutions, but to a sudden and

convulsive outbreak against monarchical and aristocratic despotism. In time,

however, a democratic republic came to occupy a large portion of the earth's

surface, and made itself felt as one of the most powerful members of the

community of nations; and elective and responsible government became

subject to the observations and criticisms which wait upon a great existing

fact. It was now perceived that such phrases as "self-government," and "the

power of the people over themselves," do not express the true state of the

case. The "people" who exercise the power, are not always the same people

with those over whom it is exercised, and the "self-government" spoken of, is

not the government of each by himself, but of each by all the rest. The will of

the people, moreover, practically means, the will of the most numerous or the

most active part of the people; the majority, or those who succeed in making

themselves accepted as the majority; the people, consequently, may desire to

oppress a part of their number; and precautions are as much needed against

this, as against any other abuse of power. The limitation, therefore, of the

power of government over individuals, loses none of its importance when the

holders of power are regularly accountable to the community, that is, to thestrongest party therein. This view of things, recommending itself equally to

the intelligence of thinkers and to the inclination of those important classes in

European society to whose real or supposed interests democracy is adverse,

has had no difficulty in establishing itself; and in political speculations "the

tyranny of the majority" is now generally included among the evils against

which society requires to be on its guard.

              Like other tyrannies, the tyranny of the majority was at first, and is

still vulgarly, held in dread, chiefly as operating through the acts of the public

authorities. But reflecting persons perceived that when society is itself the

tyrant — society collectively, over the separate individuals who compose it

— its means of tyrannizing are not restricted to the acts which it may do by

the hands of its political functionaries. Society can and does execute its own

mandates: and if it issues wrong mandates instead of right, or any mandates

at all in things with which it ought not to meddle, it practises a social tyranny

more formidable than many kinds of political oppression, since, though not

usually upheld by such extreme penalties, it leaves fewer means of escape,

penetrating much more deeply into the details of life, and enslaving the soul

itself. Protection, therefore, against the tyranny of the magistrate is not

enough; there needs protection also against the tyranny of the prevailing

opinion and feeling; against the tendency of society to impose, by other

means than civil penalties, its own ideas and practices as rules of conduct on

those who dissent from them; to fetter the development, and, if possible,

prevent the formation, of any individuality not in harmony with its ways, and

compel all characters to fashion themselves upon the model of its own. There

is a limit to the legitimate interference of collective opinion with individual

independence; and to find that limit, and maintain it against encroachment, is

as indispensable to a good condition of human affairs, as protection against

political despotism.

              But though this proposition is not likely to be contested in general

terms, the practical question, where to place the limit — how to make the

fitting adjustment between individual independence and social control — is a

subject on which nearly everything remains to be done. All that makes

existence valuable to any one, depends on the enforcement of restraints upon

the actions of other people. Some rules of conduct, therefore, must be

imposed, by law in the first place, and by opinion on many things which are

not fit subjects for the operation of law. What these rules should be, is theprincipal question in human affairs; but if we except a few of the most

obvious cases, it is one of those which least progress has been made in

resolving. No two ages, and scarcely any two countries, have decided it alike;

and the decision of one age or country is a wonder to another. Yet the people

of any given age and country no more suspect any difficulty in it, than if it

were a subject on which mankind had always been agreed. The rules which

obtain among themselves appear to them self-evident and selfjustifying. This

all but universal illusion is one of the examples of the magical influence of

custom, which is not only, as the proverb says a second nature, but is

continually mistaken for the first. The effect of custom, in preventing any

misgiving respecting the rules of conduct which mankind impose on one

another, is all the more complete because the subJect is one on which it is not

generally considered necessary that reasons should be given, either by one

person to others, or by each to himself. People are accustomed to believe and

have been encouraged in the belief by some who aspire to the character of

philosophers, that their feelings, on subjects of this nature, are better than

reasons, and render reasons unnecessary. The practical principle which

guides them to their opinions on the regulation of human conduct, is the

feeling in each person's mind that everybody should be required to act as he,

and those with whom he sympathizes, would like them to act. No one,

indeed, acknowledges to himself that his standard of judgment is his own

liking; but an opinion on a point of conduct, not supported by reasons, can

only count as one person's preference; and if the reasons, when given, are a

mere appeal to a similar preference felt by other people, it is still only many

people's liking instead of one. To an ordinary man, however, his own

preference, thus supported, is not only a perfectly satisfactory reason, but the

only one he generally has for any of his notions of morality, taste, or

propriety, which are not expressly written in his religious creed; and his chief

guide in the interpretation even of that. Men's opinions, accordingly, on what

is laudable or blamable, are affected by all the multifarious causes which

influence their wishes in regard to the conduct of others, and which are as

numerous as those which determine their wishes on any other subject.

Sometimes their reason — at other times their prejudices or superstitions:

often their social affections, not seldom their antisocial ones, their envy or

jealousy, their arrogance or contemptuousness: but most commonly, their

desires or fears for themselves — their legitimate or illegitimate self-interest.

Wherever there is an ascendant class, a large portion of the morality of thecountry emanates from its class interests, and its feelings of class superiority.

The morality between Spartans and Helots, between planters and negroes,

between princes and subjects, between nobles and roturiers, between men and

women, has been for the most part the creation of these class interests and

feelings: and the sentiments thus generated, react in turn upon the moral

feelings of the members of the ascendant class, in their relations among

themselves. Where, on the other hand, a class, formerly ascendant, has lost its

ascendency, or where its ascendency is unpopular, the prevailing moral

sentiments frequently bear the impress of an impatient dislike of superiority.

Another grand determining principle of the rules of conduct, both in act and

forbearance which have been enforced by law or opinion, has been the

servility of mankind towards the supposed preferences or aversions of their

temporal masters, or of their gods. This servility though essentially selfish, is

not hypocrisy; it gives rise to perfectly genuine sentiments of abhorrence; it

made men burn magicians and heretics. Among so many baser influences, the

general and obvious interests of society have of course had a share, and a

large one, in the direction of the moral sentiments: less, however, as a matter

of reason, and on their own account, than as a consequence of the sympathies

and antipathies which grew out of them: and sympathies and antipathies

which had little or nothing to do with the interests of society, have made

themselves felt in the establishment of moralities with quite as great force.

              The likings and dislikings of society, or of some powerful portion of

it, are thus the main thing which has practically determined the rules laid

down for general observance, under the penalties of law or opinion. And in

general, those who have been in advance of society in thought and feeling,

have left this condition of things unassailed in principle, however they may

have come into conflict with it in some of its details. They have occupied

themselves rather in inquiring what things society ought to like or dislike,

than in questioning whether its likings or dislikings should be a law to

individuals. They preferred endeavouring to alter the feelings of mankind on

the particular points on which they were themselves heretical, rather than

make common cause in defence of freedom, with heretics generally. The only

case in which the higher ground has been taken on principle and maintained

with consistency, by any but an individual here and there, is that of religious

belief: a case instructive in many ways, and not least so as forming a most

striking instance of the fallibility of what is called the moral sense: for the

odium theologicum, in a sincere bigot, is one of the most unequivocal casesof moral feeling. Those who first broke the yoke of what called itself the

Universal Church, were in general as little willing to permit difference of

religious opinion as that church itself. But when the heat of the conflict was

over, without giving a complete victory to any party, and each church or sect

was reduced to limit its hopes to retaining possession of the ground it already

occupied; minorities, seeing that they had no chance of becoming majorities,

were under the necessity of pleading to those whom they could not convert,

for permission to differ. It is accordingly on this battle-field, almost solely,

that the rights of the individual against society have been asserted on broad

grounds of principle, and the claim of society to exercise authority over

dissentients openly controverted. The great writers to whom the world owes

what religious liberty it possesses, have mostly asserted freedom of

conscience as an indefeasible right, and denied absolutely that a human being

is accountable to others for his religious belief. Yet so natural to mankind is

intolerance in whatever they really care about, that religious freedom has

hardly anywhere been practically realized, except where religious

indifference, which dislikes to have its peace disturbed by theological

quarrels, has added its weight to the scale. In the minds of almost all religious

persons, even in the most tolerant countries, the duty of toleration is admitted

with tacit reserves. One person will bear with dissent in matters of church

government, but not of dogma; another can tolerate everybody, short of a

Papist or an Unitarian; another, every one who believes in revealed religion; a

few extend their charity a little further, but stop at the belief in a God and in a

future state. Wherever the sentiment of the majority is still genuine and

intense, it is found to have abated little of its claim to be obeyed.

              In England, from the peculiar circumstances of our political history,

though the yoke of opinion is perhaps heavier, that of law is lighter, than in

most other countries of Europe; and there is considerable jealousy of direct

interference, by the legislative or the executive power with private conduct;

not so much from any just regard for the independence of the individual, as

from the still subsisting habit of looking on the government as representing

an opposite interest to the public. The majority have not yet learnt to feel the

power of the government their power, or its opinions their opinions. When

they do so, individual liberty will probably be as much exposed to invasion

from the government, as it already is from public opinion. But, as yet, there is

a considerable amount of feeling ready to be called forth against any attempt

of the law to control individuals in things in which they have not hithertobeen accustomed to be controlled by it; and this with very little

discrimination as to whether the matter is, or is not, within the legitimate

sphere of legal control; insomuch that the feeling, highly salutary on the

whole, is perhaps quite as often misplaced as well grounded in the particular

instances of its application.

              There is, in fact, no recognized principle by which the propriety or

impropriety of government interference is customarily tested. People decide

according to their personal preferences. Some, whenever they see any good to

be done, or evil to be remedied, would willingly instigate the government to

undertake the business; while others prefer to bear almost any amount of

social evil, rather than add one to the departments of human interests

amenable to governmental control. And men range themselves on one or the

other side in any particular case, according to this general direction of their

sentiments; or according to the degree of interest which they feel in the

particular thing which it is proposed that the government should do; or

according to the belief they entertain that the government would, or would

not, do it in the manner they prefer; but very rarely on account of any opinion

to which they consistently adhere, as to what things are fit to be done by a

government. And it seems to me that, in consequence of this absence of rule

or principle, one side is at present as often wrong as the other; the

interference of government is, with about equal frequency, improperly

invoked and improperly condemned.

              The object of this Essay is to assert one very simple principle, as

entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the individual in the

way of compulsion and control, whether the means used be physical force in

the form of legal penalties, or the moral coercion of public opinion. That

principle is, that the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually

or collectively in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number,

is self-protection. That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully

exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to

prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a

sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because

it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because,

in the opinions of others, to do so would be wise, or even right. These are

good reasons for remonstrating with him, or reasoning with him, or

persuading him, or entreating him, but not for compelling him, or visitinghim with any evil, in case he do otherwise. To justify that, the conduct from

which it is desired to deter him must be calculated to produce evil to some

one else. The only part of the conduct of any one, for which he is amenable to

society, is that which concerns others. In the part which merely concerns

himself, his independence is, of right, absolute. Over himself, over his own

body and mind, the individual is sovereign.

              It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that this doctrine is meant to

apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties. We are not

speaking of children, or of young persons below the age which the law may

fix as that of manhood or womanhood. Those who are still in a state to

require being taken care of by others, must be protected against their own

actions as well as against external injury. For the same reason, we may leave

out of consideration those backward states of society in which the race itself

may be considered as in its nonage. The early difficulties in the way of

spontaneous progress are so great, that there is seldom any choice of means

for overcoming them; and a ruler full of the spirit of improvement is

warranted in the use of any expedients that will attain an end, perhaps

otherwise unattainable. Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in

dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the

means justified by actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a principle, has no

application to any state of things anterior to the time when mankind have

become capable of being improved by free and equal discussion. Until then,

there is nothing for them but implicit obedience to an Akbar or a

Charlemagne, if they are so fortunate as to find one. But as soon as mankind

have attained the capacity of being guided to their own improvement by

conviction or persuasion (a period long since reached in all nations with

whom we need here concern ourselves), compulsion, either in the direct form

or in that of pains and penalties for non-compliance, is no longer admissible

as a means to their own good, and justifiable only for the security of others.

              It is proper to state that I forego any advantage which could be

derived to my argument from the idea of abstract right as a thing independent

of utility. I regard utility as the ultimate appeal on all ethical questions; but it

must be utility in the largest sense, grounded on the permanent interests of

man as a progressive being. Those interests, I contend, authorize the

subjection of individual spontaneity to external control, only in respect to

those actions of each, which concern the interest of other people. If any onedoes an act hurtful to others, there is a prima facie case for punishing him, by

law, or, where legal penalties are not safely applicable, by general

disapprobation. There are also many positive acts for the benefit of others,

which he may rightfully be compelled to perform; such as, to give evidence

in a court of justice; to bear his fair share in the common defence, or in any

other joint work necessary to the interest of the society of which he enjoys

the protection; and to perform certain acts of individual beneficence, such as

saving a fellow-creature's life, or interposing to protect the defenceless

against ill-usage, things which whenever it is obviously a man's duty to do, he

may rightfully be made responsible to society for not doing. A person may

cause evil to others not only by his actions but by his inaction, and in neither

case he is justly accountable to them for the injury. The latter case, it is true,

requires a much more cautious exercise of compulsion than the former. To

make any one answerable for doing evil to others, is the rule; to make him

answerable for not preventing evil, is, comparatively speaking, the exception.

Yet there are many cases clear enough and grave enough to justify that

exception. In all things which regard the external relations of the individual,

he is de jure amenable to those whose interests are concerned, and if need be,

to society as their protector. There are often good reasons for not holding him

to the responsibility; but these reasons must arise from the special

expediencies of the case: either because it is a kind of case in which he is on

the whole likely to act better, when left to his own discretion, than when

controlled in any way in which society have it in their power to control him;

or because the attempt to exercise control would produce other evils, greater

than those which it would prevent. When such reasons as these preclude the

enforcement of responsibility, the conscience of the agent himself should step

into the vacant judgment-seat, and protect those interests of others which

have no external protection; judging himself all the more rigidly, because the

case does not admit of his being made accountable to the judgment of his

fellowcreatures.

              But there is a sphere of action in which society, as distinguished

from the individual, has, if any, only an indirect interest; comprehending all

that portion of a person's life and conduct which affects only himself, or, if it

also affects others, only with their free, voluntary, and undeceived consent

and participation. When I say only himself, I mean directly, and in the first

instance: for whatever affects himself, may affect others through himself; and

the objection which may be grounded on this contingency, will receiveconsideration in the sequel. This, then, is the appropriate region of human

liberty. It comprises, first, the inward domain of consciousness; demanding

liberty of conscience, in the most comprehensive sense; liberty of thought

and feeling; absolute freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects,

practical or speculative, scientific, moral, or theological. The liberty of

expressing and publishing opinions may seem to fall under a different

principle, since it belongs to that part of the conduct of an individual which

concerns other people; but, being almost of as much importance as the liberty

of thought itself, and resting in great part on the same reasons, is practically

inseparable from it. Secondly, the principle requires liberty of tastes and

pursuits; of framing the plan of our life to suit our own character; of doing as

we like, subject to such consequences as may follow; without impediment

from our fellow-creatures, so long as what we do does not harm them even

though they should think our conduct foolish, perverse, or wrong. Thirdly,

from this liberty of each individual, follows the liberty, within the same

limits, of combination among individuals; freedom to unite, for any purpose

not involving harm to others: the persons combining being supposed to be of

full age, and not forced or deceived.

              No society in which these liberties are not, on the whole, respected,

is free, whatever may be its form of government; and none is completely free

in which they do not exist absolute and unqualified. The only freedom which

deserves the name, is that of pursuing our own good in our own way, so long

as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs, or impede their efforts to

obtain it. Each is the proper guardian of his own health, whether bodily, or

mental or spiritual. Mankind are greater gainers by suffering each other to

live as seems good to themselves, than by compelling each to live as seems

good to the rest.

              Though this doctrine is anything but new, and, to some persons, may

have the air of a truism, there is no doctrine which stands more directly

opposed to the general tendency of existing opinion and practice. Society has

expended fully as much effort in the attempt (according to its lights) to

compel people to conform to its notions of personal, as of social excellence.

The ancient commonwealths thought themselves entitled to practise, and the

ancient philosophers countenanced, the regulation of every part of private

conduct by public authority, on the ground that the State had a deep interest

in the whole bodily and mental discipline of every one of its citizens, a modeof thinking which may have been admissible in small republics surrounded

by powerful enemies, in constant peril of being subverted by foreign attack or

internal commotion, and to which even a short interval of relaxed energy and

self-command might so easily be fatal, that they could not afford to wait for

the salutary permanent effects of freedom. In the modern world, the greater

size of political communities, and above all, the separation between the

spiritual and temporal authority (which placed the direction of men's

consciences in other hands than those which controlled their worldly affairs),

prevented so great an interference by law in the details of private life; but the

engines of moral repression have been wielded more strenuously against

divergence from the reigning opinion in self-regarding, than even in social

matters; religion, the most powerful of the elements which have entered into

the formation of moral feeling, having almost always been governed either by

the ambition of a hierarchy, seeking control over every department of human

conduct, or by the spirit of Puritanism. And some of those modern reformers

who have placed themselves in strongest opposition to the religions of the

past, have been noway behind either churches or sects in their assertion of the

right of spiritual domination: M. Comte, in particular, whose social system,

as unfolded in his Traite de Politique Positive, aims at establishing (though

by moral more than by legal appliances) a despotism of society over the

individual, surpassing anything contemplated in the political ideal of the most

rigid disciplinarian among the ancient philosophers.

              Apart from the peculiar tenets of individual thinkers, there is also in

the world at large an increasing inclination to stretch unduly the powers of

society over the individual, both by the force of opinion and even by that of

legislation: and as the tendency of all the changes taking place in the world is

to strengthen society, and diminish the power of the individual, this

encroachment is not one of the evils which tend spontaneously to disappear,

but, on the contrary, to grow more and more formidable. The disposition of

mankind, whether as rulers or as fellow-citizens, to impose their own

opinions and inclinations as a rule of conduct on others, is so energetically

supported by some of the best and by some of the worst feelings incident to

human nature, that it is hardly ever kept under restraint by anything but want

of power; and as the power is not declining, but growing, unless a strong

barrier of moral conviction can be raised against the mischief, we must

expect, in the present circumstances of the world, to see it increase.              It will be convenient for the argument, if, instead of at once entering

upon the general thesis, we confine ourselves in the first instance to a single

branch of it, on which the principle here stated is, if not fully, yet to a certain

point, recognized by the current opinions. This one branch is the Liberty of

Thought: from which it is impossible to separate the cognate liberty of

speaking and of writing. Although these liberties, to some considerable

amount, form part of the political morality of all countries which profess

religious toleration and free institutions, the grounds, both philosophical and

practical, on which they rest, are perhaps not so familiar to the general mind,

nor so thoroughly appreciated by many even of the leaders of opinion, as

might have been expected. Those grounds, when rightly understood, are of

much wider application than to only one division of the subject, and a

thorough consideration of this part of the question will be found the best

introduction to the remainder. Those to whom nothing which I am about to

say will be new, may therefore, I hope, excuse me, if on a subject which for

now three centuries has been so often discussed, I venture on one discussion

more.

 

 

                                       Chapter 2

 

 

                  Of the Liberty of Thought and Discussion

 

 

              THE time, it is to be hoped, is gone by when any defence would be

necessary of the "liberty of the press" as one of the securities against corrupt

or tyrannical government. No argument, we may suppose, can now be

needed, against permitting a legislature or an executive, not identified in

interest with the people, to prescribe opinions to them, and determine what

doctrines or what arguments they shall be allowed to hear. This aspect of the

question, besides, has been so often and so triumphantly enforced by

preceding writers, that it needs not be specially insisted on in this place.

Though the law of England, on the subject of the press, is as servile to this

day as it was in the time of the Tudors, there is little danger of its being

actually put in force against political discussion, except during some

temporary panic, when fear of insurrection drives ministers and judges from
                1
their propriety; and, speaking generally, it is not, in constitutional countries,

to be apprehended that the government, whether completely responsible to

the people or not, will often attempt to control the expression of opinion,

except when in doing so it makes itself the organ of the general intolerance of

the public. Let us suppose, therefore, that the government is entirely at one

with the people, and never thinks of exerting any power of coercion unless in

agreement with what it conceives to be their voice. But I deny the right of the

people to exercise such coercion, either by themselves or by their

government. The power itself is illegitimate. The best government has no

more title to it than the worst. It is as noxious, or more noxious, when exerted

in accordance with public opinion, than when in opposition to it. If all

mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and only one person were of the

contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one

person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind.

Were an opinion a personal possession of no value except to the owner; if to

be obstructed in the enjoyment of it were simply a private injury, it wouldmake some difference whether the injury was inflicted only on a few persons

or on many. But the peculiar evil of silencing the expression of an opinion is,

that it is robbing the human race; posterity as well as the existing generation;

those who dissent from the opinion, still more than those who hold it. If the

opinion is right, they are deprived of the opportunity of exchanging error for

truth: if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great a benefit, the clearer

perception and livelier impression of truth, produced by its collision with

error.

              It is necessary to consider separately these two hypotheses, each of

which has a distinct branch of the argument corresponding to it. We can

never be sure that the opinion we are endeavouring to stifle is a false opinion;

and if we were sure, stifling it would be an evil still.

              First: the opinion which it is attempted to suppress by authority may

possibly be true. Those who desire to suppress it, of course deny its truth; but

they are not infallible. They have no authority to decide the question for all

mankind, and exclude every other person from the means of judging. To

refuse a hearing to an opinion, because they are sure that it is false, is to

assume that their certainty is the same thing as absolute certainty. All

silencing of discussion is an assumption of infallibility. Its condemnation

may be allowed to rest on this common argument, not the worse for being

common.

              Unfortunately for the good sense of mankind, the fact of their

fallibility is far from carrying the weight in their practical judgment, which is

always allowed to it in theory; for while every one well knows himself to be

fallible, few think it necessary to take any precautions against their own

fallibility, or admit the supposition that any opinion of which they feel very

certain, may be one of the examples of the error to which they acknowledge

themselves to be liable. Absolute princes, or others who are accustomed to

unlimited deference, usually feel this complete confidence in their own

opinions on nearly all subjects. People more happily situated, who sometimes

hear their opinions disputed, and are not wholly unused to be set right when

they are wrong, place the same unbounded reliance only on such of their

opinions as are shared by all who surround them, or to whom they habitually

defer: for in proportion to a man's want of confidence in his own solitary

judgment, does he usually repose, with implicit trust, on the infallibility of

"the world" in general. And the world, to each individual, means the part of itwith which he comes in contact; his party, his sect, his church, his class of

society: the man may be called, by comparison, almost liberal and

largeminded to whom it means anything so comprehensive as his own

country or his own age. Nor is his faith in this collective authority at all

shaken by his being aware that other ages, countries, sects, churches, classes,

and parties have thought, and even now think, the exact reverse. He devolves

upon his own world the responsibility of being in the right against the

dissentient worlds of other people; and it never troubles him that mere

accident has decided which of these numerous worlds is the object of his

reliance, and that the same causes which make him a Churchman in London,

would have made him a Buddhist or a Confucian in Pekin. Yet it is as evident

in itself as any amount of argument can make it, that ages are no more

infallible than individuals; every age having held many opinions which

subsequent ages have deemed not only false but absurd; and it is as certain

that many opinions, now general, will be rejected by future ages, as it is that

many, once general, are rejected by the present.

              The objection likely to be made to this argument, would probably

take some such form as the following. There is no greater assumption of

infallibility in forbidding the propagation of error, than in any other thing

which is done by public authority on its own judgment and responsibility.

Judgment is given to men that they may use it. Because it may be used

erroneously, are men to be told that they ought not to use it at all? To prohibit

what they think pernicious, is not claiming exemption from error, but

fulfilling the duty incumbent on them, although fallible, of acting on their

conscientious conviction. If we were never to act on our opinions, because

those opinions may be wrong, we should leave all our interests uncared for,

and all our duties unperformed. An objection which applies to all conduct can

be no valid objection to any conduct in particular.

              It is the duty of governments, and of individuals, to form the truest

opinions they can; to form them carefully, and never impose them upon

others unless they are quite sure of being right. But when they are sure (such

reasoners may say), it is not conscientiousness but cowardice to shrink from

acting on their opinions, and allow doctrines which they honestly think

dangerous to the welfare of mankind, either in this life or in another, to be

scattered abroad without restraint, because other people, in less enlightened

times, have persecuted opinions now believed to be true. Let us take care, itmay be said, not to make the same mistake: but governments and nations

have made mistakes in other things, which are not denied to be fit subjects for

the exercise of authority: they have laid on bad taxes, made unjust wars.

Ought we therefore to lay on no taxes, and, under whatever provocation,

make no wars? Men, and governments, must act to the best of their ability.

There is no such thing as absolute certainty, but there is assurance sufficient

for the purposes of human life. We may, and must, assume our opinion to be

true for the guidance of our own conduct: and it is assuming no more when

we forbid bad men to pervert society by the propagation of opinions which

we regard as false and pernicious.

              I answer, that it is assuming very much more. There is the greatest

difference between presuming an opinion to be true, because, with every

opportunity for contesting it, it has not been refuted, and assuming its truth

for the purpose of not permitting its refutation. Complete liberty of

contradicting and disproving our opinion, is the very condition which justifies

us in assuming its truth for purposes of action; and on no other terms can a

being with human faculties have any rational assurance of being right.

              When we consider either the history of opinion, or the ordinary

conduct of human life, to what is it to be ascribed that the one and the other

are no worse than they are? Not certainly to the inherent force of the human

understanding; for, on any matter not self-evident, there are ninety-nine

persons totally incapable of judging of it, for one who is capable; and the

capacity of the hundredth person is only comparative; for the majority of the

eminent men of every past generation held many opinions now known to be

erroneous, and did or approved numerous things which no one will now

justify. Why is it, then, that there is on the whole a preponderance among

mankind of rational opinions and rational conduct? If there really is this

preponderance — which there must be, unless human affairs are, and have

always been, in an almost desperate state — it is owing to a quality of the

human mind, the source of everything respectable in man, either as an

intellectual or as a moral being, namely, that his errors are corrigible. He is

capable of rectifying his mistakes by discussion and experience. Not by

experience alone. There must be discussion, to show how experience is to be

interpreted. Wrong opinions and practices gradually yield to fact and

argument: but facts and arguments, to produce any effect on the mind, must

be brought before it. Very few facts are able to tell their own story, withoutcomments to bring out their meaning. The whole strength and value, then, of

human judgment, depending on the one property, that it can be set right when

it is wrong, reliance can be placed on it only when the means of setting it

right are kept constantly at hand. In the case of any person whose judgment is

really deserving of confidence, how has it become so? Because he has kept

his mind open to criticism of his opinions and conduct. Because it has been

his practice to listen to all that could be said against him; to profit by as much

of it as was just, and expound to himself, and upon occasion to others, the

fallacy of what was fallacious. Because he has felt, that the only way in

which a human being can make some approach to knowing the whole of a

subject, is by hearing what can be said about it by persons of every variety of

opinion, and studying all modes in which it can be looked at by every

character of mind. No wise man ever acquired his wisdom in any mode but

this; nor is it in the nature of human intellect to become wise in any other

manner. The steady habit of correcting and completing his own opinion by

collating it with those of others, so far from causing doubt and hesitation in

carrying it into practice, is the only stable foundation for a just reliance on it:

for, being cognizant of all that can, at least obviously, be said against him,

and having taken up his position against all gainsayers knowing that he has

sought for objections and difficulties, instead of avoiding them, and has shut

out no light which can be thrown upon the subject from any quarter — he has

a right to think his judgment better than that of any person, or any multitude,

who have not gone through a similar process.

              It is not too much to require that what the wisest of mankind, those

who are best entitled to trust their own judgment, find necessary to warrant

their relying on it, should be submitted to by that miscellaneous collection of

a few wise and many foolish individuals, called the public. The most

intolerant of churches, the Roman Catholic Church, even at the canonization

of a saint, admits, and listens patiently to, a "devil's advocate." The holiest of

men, it appears, cannot be admitted to posthumous honors, until all that the

devil could say against him is known and weighed. If even the Newtonian

philosophy were not permitted to be questioned, mankind could not feel as

complete assurance of its truth as they now do. The beliefs which we have

most warrant for, have no safeguard to rest on, but a standing invitation to the

whole world to prove them unfounded. If the challenge is not accepted, or is

accepted and the attempt fails, we are far enough from certainty still; but we

have done the best that the existing state of human reason admits of; we haveneglected nothing that could give the truth a chance of reaching us: if the lists

are kept open, we may hope that if there be a better truth, it will be found

when the human mind is capable of receiving it; and in the meantime we may

rely on having attained such approach to truth, as is possible in our own day.

This is the amount of certainty attainable by a fallible being, and this the sole

way of attaining it.

              Strange it is, that men should admit the validity of the arguments for

free discussion, but object to their being "pushed to an extreme;" not seeing

that unless the reasons are good for an extreme case, they are not good for

any case. Strange that they should imagine that they are not assuming

infallibility when they acknowledge that there should be free discussion on

all subjects which can possibly be doubtful, but think that some particular

principle or doctrine should be forbidden to be questioned because it is so

certain, that is, because they are certain that it is certain. To call any

proposition certain, while there is any one who would deny its certainty if

permitted, but who is not permitted, is to assume that we ourselves, and those

who agree with us, are the judges of certainty, and judges without hearing the

other side.

              In the present age — which has been described as "destitute of faith,

but terrified at scepticism,"— in which people feel sure, not so much that

their opinions are true, as that they should not know what to do without them

— the claims of an opinion to be protected from public attack are rested not

so much on its truth, as on its importance to society. There are, it is alleged,

certain beliefs, so useful, not to say indispensable to well-being, that it is as

much the duty of governments to uphold those beliefs, as to protect any other

of the interests of society. In a case of such necessity, and so directly in the

line of their duty, something less than infallibility may, it is maintained,

warrant, and even bind, governments, to act on their own opinion, confirmed

by the general opinion of mankind. It is also often argued, and still oftener

thought, that none but bad men would desire to weaken these salutary beliefs;

and there can be nothing wrong, it is thought, in restraining bad men, and

prohibiting what only such men would wish to practise. This mode of

thinking makes the justification of restraints on discussion not a question of

the truth of doctrines, but of their usefulness; and flatters itself by that means

to escape the responsibility of claiming to be an infallible judge of opinions.

But those who thus satisfy themselves, do not perceive that the assumption ofinfallibility is merely shifted from one point to another. The usefulness of an

opinion is itself matter of opinion: as disputable, as open to discussion and

requiring discussion as much, as the opinion itself. There is the same need of

an infallible judge of opinions to decide an opinion to be noxious, as to

decide it to be false, unless the opinion condemned has full opportunity of

defending itself. And it will not do to say that the heretic may be allowed to

maintain the utility or harmlessness of his opinion, though forbidden to

maintain its truth. The truth of an opinion is part of its utility. If we would

know whether or not it is desirable that a proposition should be believed, is it

possible to exclude the consideration of whether or not it is true? In the

opinion, not of bad men, but of the best men, no belief which is contrary to

truth can be really useful: and can you prevent such men from urging that

plea, when they are charged with culpability for denying some doctrine

which they are told is useful, but which they believe to be false? Those who

are on the side of received opinions, never fail to take all possible advantage

of this plea; you do not find them handling the question of utility as if it could

be completely abstracted from that of truth: on the contrary, it is, above all,

because their doctrine is "the truth," that the knowledge or the belief of it is

held to be so indispensable. There can be no fair discussion of the question of

usefulness, when an argument so vital may be employed on one side, but not

on the other. And in point of fact, when law or public feeling do not permit

the truth of an opinion to be disputed, they are just as little tolerant of a denial

of its usefulness. The utmost they allow is an extenuation of its absolute

necessity or of the positive guilt of rejecting it.

              In order more fully to illustrate the mischief of denying a hearing to

opinions because we, in our own judgment, have condemned them, it will be

desirable to fix down the discussion to a concrete case; and I choose, by

preference, the cases which are least favourable to me — in which the

argument against freedom of opinion, both on the score of truth and on that of

utility, is considered the strongest. Let the opinions impugned be the belief in

a God and in a future state, or any of the commonly received doctrines of

morality. To fight the battle on such ground, gives a great advantage to an

unfair antagonist; since he will be sure to say (and many who have no desire

to be unfair will say it internally), Are these the doctrines which you do not

deem sufficiently certain to be taken under the protection of law? Is the belief

in a God one of the opinions, to feel sure of which, you hold to be assuming

infallibility? But I must be permitted to observe, that it is not the feeling sureof a doctrine (be it what it may) which I call an assumption of infallibility. It

is the undertaking to decide that question for others, without allowing them to

hear what can be said on the contrary side. And I denounce and reprobate this

pretension not the less, if put forth on the side of my most solemn

convictions. However positive any one's persuasion may be, not only of the

falsity, but of the pernicious consequences — not only of the pernicious

consequences, but (to adopt expressions which I altogether condemn) the

immorality and impiety of an opinion; yet if, in pursuance of that private

judgment, though backed by the public judgment of his country or his

cotemporaries, he prevents the opinion from being heard in its defence, he

assumes infallibility. And so far from the assumption being less objectionable

or less dangerous because the opinion is called immoral or impious, this is

the case of all others in which it is most fatal. These are exactly the occasions

on which the men of one generation commit those dreadful mistakes which

excite the astonishment and horror of posterity. It is among such that we find

the instances memorable in history, when the arm of the law has been

employed to root out the best men and the noblest doctrines; with deplorable

success as to the men, though some of the doctrines have survived to be (as if

in mockery) invoked, in defence of similar conduct towards those who

dissent from them, or from their received interpretation.

              Mankind can hardly be too often reminded, that there was once a

man named Socrates, between whom and the legal authorities and public

opinion of his time, there took place a memorable collision. Born in an age

and country abounding in individual greatness, this man has been handed

down to us by those who best knew both him and the age, as the most

virtuous man in it; while we know him as the head and prototype of all

subsequent teachers of virtue, the source equally of the lofty inspiration of

Plato and the judicious utilitarianism of Aristotle, "i maestri di color che

sanno," the two headsprings of ethical as of all other philosophy. This

acknowledged master of all the eminent thinkers who have since lived —

whose fame, still growing after more than two thousand years, all but

outweighs the whole remainder of the names which make his native city

illustrious — was put to death by his countrymen, after a judicial conviction,

for impiety and immorality. Impiety, in denying the gods recognized by the

State; indeed his accuser asserted (see the "Apologia") that he believed in no

gods at all. Immorality, in being, by his doctrines and instructions, a

"corrupter of youth." Of these charges the tribunal, there is every ground forbelieving, honestly found him guilty, and condemned the man who probably

of all then born had deserved best of mankind, to be put to death as a

criminal.

              To pass from this to the only other instance of judicial iniquity, the

mention of which, after the condemnation of Socrates, would not be an anti-

climax: the event which took place on Calvary rather more than eighteen

hundred years ago. The man who left on the memory of those who witnessed

his life and conversation, such an impression of his moral grandeur, that

eighteen subsequent centuries have done homage to him as the Almighty in

person, was ignominiously put to death, as what? As a blasphemer. Men did

not merely mistake their benefactor; they mistook him for the exact contrary

of what he was, and treated him as that prodigy of impiety, which they

themselves are now held to be, for their treatment of him. The feelings with

which mankind now regard these lamentable transactions, especially the latter

of the two, render them extremely unjust in their judgment of the unhappy

actors. These were, to all appearance, not bad men — not worse than men

most commonly are, but rather the contrary; men who possessed in a full, or

somewhat more than a full measure, the religious, moral, and patriotic

feelings of their time and people: the very kind of men who, in all times, our

own included, have every chance of passing through life blameless and

respected. The high-priest who rent his garments when the words were

pronounced, which, according to all the ideas of his country, constituted the

blackest guilt, was in all probability quite as sincere in his horror and

indignation, as the generality of respectable and pious men now are in the

religious and moral sentiments they profess; and most of those who now

shudder at his conduct, if they had lived in his time and been born Jews,

would have acted precisely as he did. Orthodox Christians who are tempted

to think that those who stoned to death the first martyrs must have been

worse men than they themselves are, ought to remember that one of those

persecutors was Saint Paul.

              Let us add one more example, the most striking of all, if the

impressiveness of an error is measured by the wisdom and virtue of him who

falls into it. If ever any one, possessed of power, had grounds for thinking

himself the best and most enlightened among his cotemporaries, it was the

Emperor Marcus Aurelius. Absolute monarch of the whole civilized world,

he preserved through life not only the most unblemished justice, but whatwas less to be expected from his Stoical breeding, the tenderest heart. The

few failings which are attributed to him, were all on the side of indulgence:

while his writings, the highest ethical product of the ancient mind, differ

scarcely perceptibly, if they differ at all, from the most characteristic

teachings of Christ. This man, a better Christian in all but the dogmatic sense

of the word, than almost any of the ostensibly Christian sovereigns who have

since reigned, persecuted Christianity. Placed at the summit of all the

previous attainments of humanity, with an open, unfettered intellect, and a

character which led him of himself to embody in his moral writings the

Christian ideal, he yet failed to see that Christianity was to be a good and not

an evil to the world, with his duties to which he was so deeply penetrated.

Existing society he knew to be in a deplorable state. But such as it was, he

saw or thought he saw, that it was held together and prevented from being

worse, by belief and reverence of the received divinities. As a ruler of

mankind, he deemed it his duty not to suffer society to fall in pieces; and saw

not how, if its existing ties were removed, any others could be formed which

could again knit it together. The new religion openly aimed at dissolving

these ties: unless, therefore, it was his duty to adopt that religion, it seemed to

be his duty to put it down. Inasmuch then as the theology of Christianity did

not appear to him true or of divine origin; inasmuch as this strange history of

a crucified God was not credible to him, and a system which purported to rest

entirely upon a foundation to him so wholly unbelievable, could not be

foreseen by him to be that renovating agency which, after all abatements, it

has in fact proved to be; the gentlest and most amiable of philosophers and

rulers, under a solemn sense of duty, authorized the persecution of

Christianity. To my mind this is one of the most tragical facts in all history. It

is a bitter thought, how different a thing the Christianity of the world might

have been, if the Christian faith had been adopted as the religion of the

empire under the auspices of Marcus Aurelius instead of those of

Constantine. But it would be equally unjust to him and false to truth, to deny,

that no one plea which can be urged for punishing anti-Christian teaching,

was wanting to Marcus Aurelius for punishing, as he did, the propagation of

Christianity. No Christian more firmly believes that Atheism is false, and

tends to the dissolution of society, than Marcus Aurelius believed the same

things of Christianity; he who, of all men then living, might have been

thought the most capable of appreciating it. Unless any one who approves of

punishment for the promulgation of opinions, flatters himself that he is awiser and better man than Marcus Aurelius — more deeply versed in the

wisdom of his time, more elevated in his intellect above it — more earnest in

his search for truth, or more single-minded in his devotion to it when found

— let him abstain from that assumption of the joint infallibility of himself

and the multitude, which the great Antoninus made with so unfortunate a

result.

              Aware of the impossibility of defending the use of punishment for

restraining irreligious opinions, by any argument which will not justify

Marcus Antoninus, the enemies of religious freedom, when hard pressed,

occasionally accept this consequence, and say, with Dr. Johnson, that the

persecutors of Christianity were in the right; that persecution is an ordeal

through which truth ought to pass, and always passes successfully, legal

penalties being, in the end, powerless against truth, though sometimes

beneficially effective against mischievous errors. This is a form of the

argument for religious intolerance, sufficiently remarkable not to be passed

without notice.

              A theory which maintains that truth may justifiably be persecuted

because persecution cannot possibly do it any harm, cannot be charged with

being intentionally hostile to the reception of new truths; but we cannot

commend the generosity of its dealing with the persons to whom mankind are

indebted for them. To discover to the world something which deeply

concerns it, and of which it was previously ignorant; to prove to it that it had

been mistaken on some vital point of temporal or spiritual interest, is as

important a service as a human being can render to his fellow-creatures, and

in certain cases, as in those of the early Christians and of the Reformers,

those who think with Dr. Johnson believe it to have been the most precious

gift which could be bestowed on mankind. That the authors of such splendid

benefits should be requited by martyrdom; that their reward should be to be

dealt with as the vilest of criminals, is not, upon this theory, a deplorable

error and misfortune, for which humanity should mourn in sackcloth and

ashes, but the normal and justifiable state of things. The propounder of a new

truth, according to this doctrine, should stand, as stood, in the legislation of

the Locrians, the proposer of a new law, with a halter round his neck, to be

instantly tightened if the public assembly did not, on hearing his reasons, then

and there adopt his proposition. People who defend this mode of treating

benefactors, can not be supposed to set much value on the benefit; and Ibelieve this view of the subject is mostly confined to the sort of persons who

think that new truths may have been desirable once, but that we have had

enough of them now.

              But, indeed, the dictum that truth always triumphs over persecution,

is one of those pleasant falsehoods which men repeat after one another till

they pass into commonplaces, but which all experience refutes. History teems

with instances of truth put down by persecution. If not suppressed forever, it

may be thrown back for centuries. To speak only of religious opinions: the

Reformation broke out at least twenty times before Luther, and was put

down. Arnold of Brescia was put down. Fra Dolcino was put down.

Savonarola was put down. The Albigeois were put down. The Vaudois were

put down. The Lollards were put down. The Hussites were put down. Even

after the era of Luther, wherever persecution was persisted in, it was

successful. In Spain, Italy, Flanders, the Austrian empire, Protestantism was

rooted out; and, most likely, would have been so in England, had Queen

Mary lived, or Queen Elizabeth died. Persecution has always succeeded, save

where the heretics were too strong a party to be effectually persecuted. No

reasonable person can doubt that Christianity might have been extirpated in

the Roman empire. It spread, and became predominant, because the

persecutions were only occasional, lasting but a short time, and separated by

long intervals of almost undisturbed propagandism. It is a piece of idle

sentimentality that truth, merely as truth, has any inherent power denied to

error, of prevailing against the dungeon and the stake. Men are not more

zealous for truth than they often are for error, and a sufficient application of

legal or even of social penalties will generally succeed in stopping the

propagation of either. The real advantage which truth has, consists in this,

that when an opinion is true, it may be extinguished once, twice, or many

times, but in the course of ages there will generally be found persons to

rediscover it, until some one of its reappearances falls on a time when from

favourable circumstances it escapes persecution until it has made such head

as to withstand all subsequent attempts to suppress it.

              It will be said, that we do not now put to death the introducers of

new opinions: we are not like our fathers who slew the prophets, we even

build sepulchres to them. It is true we no longer put heretics to death; and the

amount of penal infliction which modern feeling would probably tolerate,

even against the most obnoxious opinions, is not sufficient to extirpate them.But let us not flatter ourselves that we are yet free from the stain even of legal

persecution. Penalties for opinion, or at least for its expression, still exist by

law; and their enforcement is not, even in these times, so unexampled as to

make it at all incredible that they may some day be revived in full force. In

the year 1857, at the summer assizes of the county of Cornwall, an
                  2
unfortunate man, said to be of unexceptionable conduct in all relations of

life, was sentenced to twenty-one months imprisonment, for uttering, and

writing on a gate, some offensive words concerning Christianity. Within a

month of the same time, at the Old Bailey, two persons, on two separate
          3
occasions, were rejected as jurymen, and one of them grossly insulted by the

judge and one of the counsel, because they honestly declared that they had no
                                                4
theological belief; and a third, a foreigner, for the same reason, was denied

justice against a thief. This refusal of redress took place in virtue of the legal

doctrine, that no person can be allowed to give evidence in a court of justice,

who does not profess belief in a God (any god is sufficient) and in a future

state; which is equivalent to declaring such persons to be outlaws, excluded

from the protection of the tribunals; who may not only be robbed or assaulted

with impunity, if no one but themselves, or persons of similar opinions, be

present, but any one else may be robbed or assaulted with impunity, if the

proof of the fact depends on their evidence. The assumption on which this is

grounded, is that the oath is worthless, of a person who does not believe in a

future state; a proposition which betokens much ignorance of history in those

who assent to it (since it is historically true that a large proportion of infidels

in all ages have been persons of distinguished integrity and honor); and

would be maintained by no one who had the smallest conception how many

of the persons in greatest repute with the world, both for virtues and for

attainments, are well known, at least to their intimates, to be unbelievers. The

rule, besides, is suicidal, and cuts away its own foundation. Under pretence

that atheists must be liars, it admits the testimony of all atheists who are

willing to lie, and rejects only those who brave the obloquy of publicly

confessing a detested creed rather than affirm a falsehood. A rule thus self-

convicted of absurdity so far as regards its professed purpose, can be kept in

force only as a badge of hatred, a relic of persecution; a persecution, too,

having the peculiarity that the qualification for undergoing it is the being

clearly proved not to deserve it. The rule, and the theory it implies, are hardly

less insulting to believers than to infidels. For if he who does not believe in a

future state necessarily lies, it follows that they who do believe are onlyprevented from lying, if prevented they are, by the fear of hell. We will not

do the authors and abettors of the rule the injury of supposing, that the

conception which they have formed of Christian virtue is drawn from their

own consciousness.

              These, indeed, are but rags and remnants of persecution, and may be

thought to be not so much an indication of the wish to persecute, as an

example of that very frequent infirmity of English minds, which makes them

take a preposterous pleasure in the assertion of a bad principle, when they are

no longer bad enough to desire to carry it really into practice. But unhappily

there is no security in the state of the public mind, that the suspension of

worse forms of legal persecution, which has lasted for about the space of a

generation, will continue. In this age the quiet surface of routine is as often

ruffled by attempts to resuscitate past evils, as to introduce new benefits.

What is boasted of at the present time as the revival of religion, is always, in

narrow and uncultivated minds, at least as much the revival of bigotry; and

where there is the strongest permanent leaven of intolerance in the feelings of

a people, which at all times abides in the middle classes of this country, it

needs but little to provoke them into actively persecuting those whom they
                                                                  5
have never ceased to think proper objects of persecution. For it is this — it is

the opinions men entertain, and the feelings they cherish, respecting those

who disown the beliefs they deem important, which makes this country not a

place of mental freedom. For a long time past, the chief mischief of the legal

penalties is that they strengthen the social stigma. It is that stigma which is

really effective, and so effective is it, that the profession of opinions which

are under the ban of society is much less common in England, than is, in

many other countries, the avowal of those which incur risk of judicial

punishment. In respect to all persons but those whose pecuniary

circumstances make them independent of the good will of other people,

opinion, on this subject, is as efficacious as law; men might as well be

imprisoned, as excluded from the means of earning their bread. Those whose

bread is already secured, and who desire no favors from men in power, or

from bodies of men, or from the public, have nothing to fear from the open

avowal of any opinions, but to be ill-thought of and illspoken of, and this it

ought not to require a very heroic mould to enable them to bear. There is no

room for any appeal ad misericordiam in behalf of such persons. But though

we do not now inflict so much evil on those who think differently from us, as

it was formerly our custom to do, it may be that we do ourselves as much evilas ever by our treatment of them. Socrates was put to death, but the Socratic

philosophy rose like the sun in heaven, and spread its illumination over the

whole intellectual firmament. Christians were cast to the lions, but the

Christian Church grew up a stately and spreading tree, overtopping the older

and less vigorous growths, and stifling them by its shade. Our merely social

intolerance, kills no one, roots out no opinions, but induces men to disguise

them, or to abstain from any active effort for their diffusion. With us,

heretical opinions do not perceptibly gain or even lose, ground in each decade

or generation; they never blaze out far and wide, but continue to smoulder in

the narrow circles of thinking and studious persons among whom they

originate, without ever lighting up the general affairs of mankind with either

a true or a deceptive light. And thus is kept up a state of things very

satisfactory to some minds, because, without the unpleasant process of fining

or imprisoning anybody, it maintains all prevailing opinions outwardly

undisturbed, while it does not absolutely interdict the exercise of reason by

dissentients afflicted with the malady of thought. A convenient plan for

having peace in the intellectual world, and keeping all things going on therein

very much as they do already. But the price paid for this sort of intellectual

pacification, is the sacrifice of the entire moral courage of the human mind. A

state of things in which a large portion of the most active and inquiring

intellects find it advisable to keep the genuine principles and grounds of their

convictions within their own breasts, and attempt, in what they address to the

public, to fit as much as they can of their own conclusions to premises which

they have internally renounced, cannot send forth the open, fearless

characters, and logical, consistent intellects who once adorned the thinking

world. The sort of men who can be looked for under it, are either mere

conformers to commonplace, or time-servers for truth whose arguments on

all great subjects are meant for their hearers, and are not those which have

convinced themselves. Those who avoid this alternative, do so by narrowing

their thoughts and interests to things which can be spoken of without

venturing within the region of principles, that is, to small practical matters,

which would come right of themselves, if but the minds of mankind were

strengthened and enlarged, and which will never be made effectually right

until then; while that which would strengthen and enlarge men's minds, free

and daring speculation on the highest subjects, is abandoned.

              Those in whose eyes this reticence on the part of heretics is no evil,

should consider in the first place, that in consequence of it there is never anyfair and thorough discussion of heretical opinions; and that such of them as

could not stand such a discussion, though they may be prevented from

spreading, do not disappear. But it is not the minds of heretics that are

deteriorated most, by the ban placed on all inquiry which does not end in the

orthodox conclusions. The greatest harm done is to those who are not

heretics, and whose whole mental development is cramped, and their reason

cowed, by the fear of heresy. Who can compute what the world loses in the

multitude of promising intellects combined with timid characters, who dare

not follow out any bold, vigorous, independent train of thought, lest it should

land them in something which would admit of being considered irreligious or

immoral? Among them we may occasionally see some man of deep

conscientiousness, and subtile and refined understanding, who spends a life

in sophisticating with an intellect which he cannot silence, and exhausts the

resources of ingenuity in attempting to reconcile the promptings of his

conscience and reason with orthodoxy, which yet he does not, perhaps, to the

end succeed in doing. No one can be a great thinker who does not recognize,

that as a thinker it is his first duty to follow his intellect to whatever

conclusions it may lead. Truth gains more even by the errors of one who,

with due study and preparation, thinks for himself, than by the true opinions

of those who only hold them because they do not suffer themselves to think.

Not that it is solely, or chiefly, to form great thinkers, that freedom of

thinking is required. On the contrary, it is as much, and even more

indispensable, to enable average human beings to attain the mental stature

which they are capable of. There have been, and may again be, great

individual thinkers, in a general atmosphere of mental slavery. But there

never has been, nor ever will be, in that atmosphere, an intellectually active

people. Where any people has made a temporary approach to such a

character, it has been because the dread of heterodox speculation was for a

time suspended. Where there is a tacit convention that principles are not to be

disputed; where the discussion of the greatest questions which can occupy

humanity is considered to be closed, we cannot hope to find that generally

high scale of mental activity which has made some periods of history so

remarkable. Never when controversy avoided the subjects which are large

and important enough to kindle enthusiasm, was the mind of a people stirred

up from its foundations, and the impulse given which raised even persons of

the most ordinary intellect to something of the dignity of thinking beings. Of

such we have had an example in the condition of Europe during the timesimmediately following the Reformation; another, though limited to the

Continent and to a more cultivated class, in the speculative movement of the

latter half of the eighteenth century; and a third, of still briefer duration, in the

intellectual fermentation of Germany during the Goethian and Fichtean

period. These periods differed widely in the particular opinions which they

developed; but were alike in this, that during all three the yoke of authority

was broken. In each, an old mental despotism had been thrown off, and no

new one had yet taken its place. The impulse given at these three periods has

made Europe what it now is. Every single improvement which has taken

place either in the human mind or in institutions, may be traced distinctly to

one or other of them. Appearances have for some time indicated that all three

impulses are well-nigh spent; and we can expect no fresh start, until we again

assert our mental freedom.

              Let us now pass to the second division of the argument, and

dismissing the Supposition that any of the received opinions may be false, let

us assume them to be true, and examine into the worth of the manner in

which they are likely to be held, when their truth is not freely and openly

canvassed. However unwillingly a person who has a strong opinion may

admit the possibility that his opinion may be false, he ought to be moved by

the consideration that however true it may be, if it is not fully, frequently, and

fearlessly discussed, it will be held as a dead dogma, not a living truth.

              There is a class of persons (happily not quite so numerous as

formerly) who think it enough if a person assents undoubtingly to what they

think true, though he has no knowledge whatever of the grounds of the

opinion, and could not make a tenable defence of it against the most

superficial objections. Such persons, if they can once get their creed taught

from authority, naturally think that no good, and some harm, comes of its

being allowed to be questioned. Where their influence prevails, they make it

nearly impossible for the received opinion to be rejected wisely and

considerately, though it may still be rejected rashly and ignorantly; for to shut

out discussion entirely is seldom possible, and when it once gets in, beliefs

not grounded on conviction are apt to give way before the slightest

semblance of an argument. Waiving, however, this possibility — assuming

that the true opinion abides in the mind, but abides as a prejudice, a belief

independent of, and proof against, argument — this is not the way in which

truth ought to be held by a rational being. This is not knowing the truth.Truth, thus held, is but one superstition the more, accidentally clinging to the

words which enunciate a truth.

              If the intellect and judgment of mankind ought to be cultivated, a

thing which Protestants at least do not deny, on what can these faculties be

more appropriately exercised by any one, than on the things which concern

him so much that it is considered necessary for him to hold opinions on

them? If the cultivation of the understanding consists in one thing more than

in another, it is surely in learning the grounds of one's own opinions.

Whatever people believe, on subjects on which it is of the first importance to

believe rightly, they ought to be able to defend against at least the common

objections. But, some one may say, "Let them be taught the grounds of their

opinions. It does not follow that opinions must be merely parroted because

they are never heard controverted. Persons who learn geometry do not simply

commit the theorems to memory, but understand and learn likewise the

demonstrations; and it would be absurd to say that they remain ignorant of

the grounds of geometrical truths, because they never hear any one deny, and

attempt to disprove them." Undoubtedly: and such teaching suffices on a

subject like mathematics, where there is nothing at all to be said on the wrong

side of the question. The peculiarity of the evidence of mathematical truths is,

that all the argument is on one side. There are no objections, and no answers

to objections. But on every subject on which difference of opinion is

possible, the truth depends on a balance to be struck between two sets of

conflicting reasons. Even in natural philosophy, there is always some other

explanation possible of the same facts; some geocentric theory instead of

heliocentric, some phlogiston instead of oxygen; and it has to be shown why

that other theory cannot be the true one: and until this is shown and until we

know how it is shown, we do not understand the grounds of our opinion. But

when we turn to subjects infinitely more complicated, to morals, religion,

politics, social relations, and the business of life, three-fourths of the

arguments for every disputed opinion consist in dispelling the appearances

which favor some opinion different from it. The greatest orator, save one, of

antiquity, has left it on record that he always studied his adversary's case with

as great, if not with still greater, intensity than even his own. What Cicero

practised as the means of forensic success, requires to be imitated by all who

study any subject in order to arrive at the truth. He who knows only his own

side of the case, knows little of that. His reasons may be good, and no one

may have been able to refute them. But if he is equally unable to refute thereasons on the opposite side; if he does not so much as know what they are,

he has no ground for preferring either opinion. The rational position for him

would be suspension of judgment, and unless he contents himself with that,

he is either led by authority, or adopts, like the generality of the world, the

side to which he feels most inclination. Nor is it enough that he should hear

the arguments of adversaries from his own teachers, presented as they state

them, and accompanied by what they offer as refutations. This is not the way

to do justice to the arguments, or bring them into real contact with his own

mind. He must be able to hear them from persons who actually believe them;

who defend them in earnest, and do their very utmost for them. He must

know them in their most plausible and persuasive form; he must feel the

whole force of the difficulty which the true view of the subject has to

encounter and dispose of, else he will never really possess himself of the

portion of truth which meets and removes that difficulty. Ninety-nine in a

hundred of what are called educated men are in this condition, even of those

who can argue fluently for their opinions. Their conclusion may be true, but it

might be false for anything they know: they have never thrown themselves

into the mental position of those who think differently from them, and

considered what such persons may have to say; and consequently they do not,

in any proper sense of the word, know the doctrine which they themselves

profess. They do not know those parts of it which explain and justify the

remainder; the considerations which show that a fact which seemingly

conflicts with another is reconcilable with it, or that, of two apparently strong

reasons, one and not the other ought to be preferred. All that part of the truth

which turns the scale, and decides the judgment of a completely informed

mind, they are strangers to; nor is it ever really known, but to those who have

attended equally and impartially to both sides, and endeavored to see the

reasons of both in the strongest light. So essential is this discipline to a real

understanding of moral and human subjects, that if opponents of all important

truths do not exist, it is indispensable to imagine them and supply them with

the strongest arguments which the most skilful devil's advocate can conjure

up.

              To abate the force of these considerations, an enemy of free

discussion may be supposed to say, that there is no necessity for mankind in

general to know and understand all that can be said against or for their

opinions by philosophers and theologians. That it is not needful for common

men to be able to expose all the misstatements or fallacies of an ingeniousopponent. That it is enough if there is always somebody capable of answering

them, so that nothing likely to mislead uninstructed persons remains

unrefuted. That simple minds, having been taught the obvious grounds of the

truths inculcated on them, may trust to authority for the rest, and being aware

that they have neither knowledge nor talent to resolve every difficulty which

can be raised, may repose in the assurance that all those which have been

raised have been or can be answered, by those who are specially trained to

the task.

              Conceding to this view of the subject the utmost that can be claimed

for it by those most easily satisfied with the amount of understanding of truth

which ought to accompany the belief of it; even so, the argument for free

discussion is no way weakened. For even this doctrine acknowledges that

mankind ought to have a rational assurance that all objections have been

satisfactorily answered; and how are they to be answered if that which

requires to be answered is not spoken? or how can the answer be known to be

satisfactory, if the objectors have no opportunity of showing that it is

unsatisfactory? If not the public, at least the philosophers and theologians

who are to resolve the difficulties, must make themselves familiar with those

difficulties in their most puzzling form; and this cannot be accomplished

unless they are freely stated, and placed in the most advantageous light which

they admit of. The Catholic Church has its own way of dealing with this

embarrassing problem. It makes a broad separation between those who can be

permitted to receive its doctrines on conviction, and those who must accept

them on trust. Neither, indeed, are allowed any choice as to what they will

accept; but the clergy, such at least as can be fully confided in, may

admissibly and meritoriously make themselves acquainted with the

arguments of opponents, in order to answer them, and may, therefore, read

heretical books; the laity, not unless by special permission, hard to be

obtained. This discipline recognizes a knowledge of the enemy's case as

beneficial to the teachers, but finds means, consistent with this, of denying it

to the rest of the world: thus giving to the elite more mental culture, though

not more mental freedom, than it allows to the mass. By this device it

succeeds in obtaining the kind of mental superiority which its purposes

require; for though culture without freedom never made a large and liberal

mind, it can make a clever nisi prius advocate of a cause. But in countries

professing Protestantism, this resource is denied; since Protestants hold, at

least in theory, that the responsibility for the choice of a religion must beborne by each for himself, and cannot be thrown off upon teachers. Besides,

in the present state of the world, it is practically impossible that writings

which are read by the instructed can be kept from the uninstructed. If the

teachers of mankind are to be cognizant of all that they ought to know,

everything must be free to be written and published without restraint.

              If, however, the mischievous operation of the absence of free

discussion, when the received opinions are true, were confined to leaving

men ignorant of the grounds of those opinions, it might be thought that this, if

an intellectual, is no moral evil, and does not affect the worth of the opinions,

regarded in their influence on the character. The fact, however, is, that not

only the grounds of the opinion are forgotten in the absence of discussion, but

too often the meaning of the opinion itself. The words which convey it, cease

to suggest ideas, or suggest only a small portion of those they were originally

employed to communicate. Instead of a vivid conception and a living belief,

there remain only a few phrases retained by rote; or, if any part, the shell and

husk only of the meaning is retained, the finer essence being lost. The great

chapter in human history which this fact occupies and fills, cannot be too

earnestly studied and meditated on.

              It is illustrated in the experience of almost all ethical doctrines and

religious creeds. They are all full of meaning and vitality to those who

originate them, and to the direct disciples of the originators. Their meaning

continues to be felt in undiminished strength, and is perhaps brought out into

even fuller consciousness, so long as the struggle lasts to give the doctrine or

creed an ascendency over other creeds. At last it either prevails, and becomes

the general opinion, or its progress stops; it keeps possession of the ground it

has gained, but ceases to spread further. When either of these results has

become apparent, controversy on the subject flags, and gradually dies away.

The doctrine has taken its place, if not as a received opinion, as one of the

admitted sects or divisions of opinion: those who hold it have generally

inherited, not adopted it; and conversion from one of these doctrines to

another, being now an exceptional fact, occupies little place in the thoughts

of their professors. Instead of being, as at first, constantly on the alert either

to defend themselves against the world, or to bring the world over to them,

they have subsided into acquiescence, and neither listen, when they can help

it, to arguments against their creed, nor trouble dissentients (if there be such)

with arguments in its favor. From this time may usually be dated the declinein the living power of the doctrine. We often hear the teachers of all creeds

lamenting the difficulty of keeping up in the minds of believers a lively

apprehension of the truth which they nominally recognize, so that it may

penetrate the feelings, and acquire a real mastery over the conduct. No such

difficulty is complained of while the creed is still fighting for its existence:

even the weaker combatants then know and feel what they are fighting for,

and the difference between it and other doctrines; and in that period of every

creed's existence, not a few persons may be found, who have realized its

fundamental principles in all the forms of thought, have weighed and

considered them in all their important bearings, and have experienced the full

effect on the character, which belief in that creed ought to produce in a mind

thoroughly imbued with it. But when it has come to be an hereditary creed,

and to be received passively, not actively — when the mind is no longer

compelled, in the same degree as at first, to exercise its vital powers on the

questions which its belief presents to it, there is a progressive tendency to

forget all of the belief except the formularies, or to give it a dull and torpid

assent, as if accepting it on trust dispensed with the necessity of realizing it in

consciousness, or testing it by personal experience; until it almost ceases to

connect itself at all with the inner life of the human being. Then are seen the

cases, so frequent in this age of the world as almost to form the majority, in

which the creed remains as it were outside the mind, encrusting and

petrifying it against all other influences addressed to the higher parts of our

nature; manifesting its power by not suffering any fresh and living conviction

to get in, but itself doing nothing for the mind or heart, except standing

sentinel over them to keep them vacant.

              To what an extent doctrines intrinsically fitted to make the deepest

impression upon the mind may remain in it as dead beliefs, without being

ever realized in the imagination, the feelings, or the understanding, is

exemplified by the manner in which the majority of believers hold the

doctrines of Christianity. By Christianity I here mean what is accounted such

by all churches and sects — the maxims and precepts contained in the New

Testament. These are considered sacred, and accepted as laws, by all

professing Christians. Yet it is scarcely too much to say that not one Christian

in a thousand guides or tests his individual conduct by reference to those

laws. The standard to which he does refer it, is the custom of his nation, his

class, or his religious profession. He has thus, on the one hand, a collection of

ethical maxims, which he believes to have been vouchsafed to him byinfallible wisdom as rules for his government; and on the other, a set of

every-day judgments and practices, which go a certain length with some of

those maxims, not so great a length with others, stand in direct opposition to

some, and are, on the whole, a compromise between the Christian creed and

the interests and suggestions of worldly life. To the first of these standards he

gives his homage; to the other his real allegiance. All Christians believe that

the blessed are the poor and humble, and those who are illused by the world;

that it is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than for a rich

man to enter the kingdom of heaven; that they should judge not, lest they be

judged; that they should swear not at all; that they should love their neighbor

as themselves; that if one take their cloak, they should give him their coat

also; that they should take no thought for the morrow; that if they would be

perfect, they should sell all that they have and give it to the poor. They are

not insincere when they say that they believe these things. They do believe

them, as people believe what they have always heard lauded and never

discussed. But in the sense of that living belief which regulates conduct, they

believe these doctrines just up to the point to which it is usual to act upon

them. The doctrines in their integrity are serviceable to pelt adversaries with;

and it is understood that they are to be put forward (when possible) as the

reasons for whatever people do that they think laudable. But any one who

reminded them that the maxims require an infinity of things which they never

even think of doing would gain nothing but to be classed among those very

unpopular characters who affect to be better than other people. The doctrines

have no hold on ordinary believers — are not a power in their minds. They

have an habitual respect for the sound of them, but no feeling which spreads

from the words to the things signified, and forces the mind to take them in,

and make them conform to the formula. Whenever conduct is concerned, they

look round for Mr. A and B to direct them how far to go in obeying Christ.

              Now we may be well assured that the case was not thus, but far

otherwise, with the early Christians. Had it been thus, Christianity never

would have expanded from an obscure sect of the despised Hebrews into the

religion of the Roman empire. When their enemies said, "See how these

Christians love one another" (a remark not likely to be made by anybody

now), they assuredly had a much livelier feeling of the meaning of their creed

than they have ever had since. And to this cause, probably, it is chiefly owing

that Christianity now makes so little progress in extending its domain, and

after eighteen centuries, is still nearly confined to Europeans and thedescendants of Europeans. Even with the strictly religious, who are much in

earnest about their doctrines, and attach a greater amount of meaning to many

of them than people in general, it commonly happens that the part which is

thus comparatively active in their minds is that which was made by Calvin, or

Knox, or some such person much nearer in character to themselves. The

sayings of Christ coexist passively in their minds, producing hardly any

effect beyond what is caused by mere listening to words so amiable and

bland. There are many reasons, doubtless, why doctrines which are the badge

of a sect retain more of their vitality than those common to all recognized

sects, and why more pains are taken by teachers to keep their meaning alive;

but one reason certainly is, that the peculiar doctrines are more questioned,

and have to be oftener defended against open gainsayers. Both teachers and

learners go to sleep at their post, as soon as there is no enemy in the field.

              The same thing holds true, generally speaking, of all traditional

doctrines — those of prudence and knowledge of life, as well as of morals or

religion. All languages and literatures are full of general observations on life,

both as to what it is, and how to conduct oneself in it; observations which

everybody knows, which everybody repeats, or hears with acquiescence,

which are received as truisms, yet of which most people first truly learn the

meaning, when experience, generally of a painful kind, has made it a reality

to them. How often, when smarting under some unforeseen misfortune or

disappointment, does a person call to mind some proverb or common saying

familiar to him all his life, the meaning of which, if he had ever before felt it

as he does now, would have saved him from the calamity. There are indeed

reasons for this, other than the absence of discussion: there are many truths of

which the full meaning cannot be realized, until personal experience has

brought it home. But much more of the meaning even of these would have

been understood, and what was understood would have been far more deeply

impressed on the mind, if the man had been accustomed to hear it argued pro

and con by people who did understand it. The fatal tendency of mankind to

leave off thinking about a thing when it is no longer doubtful, is the cause of

half their errors. A contemporary author has well spoken of "the deep

slumber of a decided opinion."

              But what! (it may be asked) Is the absence of unanimity an

indispensable condition of true knowledge? Is it necessary that some part of

mankind should persist in error, to enable any to realize the truth? Does abelief cease to be real and vital as soon as it is generally received — and is a

proposition never thoroughly understood and felt unless some doubt of it

remains? As soon as mankind have unanimously accepted a truth, does the

truth perish within them? The highest aim and best result of improved

intelligence, it has hitherto been thought, is to unite mankind more and more

in the acknowledgment of all important truths: and does the intelligence only

last as long as it has not achieved its object? Do the fruits of conquest perish

by the very completeness of the victory?

              I affirm no such thing. As mankind improve, the number of doctrines

which are no longer disputed or doubted will be constantly on the increase:

and the well-being of mankind may almost be measured by the number and

gravity of the truths which have reached the point of being uncontested. The

cessation, on one question after another, of serious controversy, is one of the

necessary incidents of the consolidation of opinion; a consolidation as

salutary in the case of true opinions, as it is dangerous and noxious when the

opinions are erroneous. But though this gradual narrowing of the bounds of

diversity of opinion is necessary in both senses of the term, being at once

inevitable and indispensable, we are not therefore obliged to conclude that all

its consequences must be beneficial. The loss of so important an aid to the

intelligent and living apprehension of a truth, as is afforded by the necessity

of explaining it to, or defending it against, opponents, though not sufficient to

outweigh, is no trifling drawback from, the benefit of its universal

recognition. Where this advantage can no longer be had, I confess I should

like to see the teachers of mankind endeavoring to provide a substitute for it;

some contrivance for making the difficulties of the question as present to the

learner's consciousness, as if they were pressed upon him by a dissentient

champion, eager for his conversion.

              But instead of seeking contrivances for this purpose, they have lost

those they formerly had. The Socratic dialectics, so magnificently

exemplified in the dialogues of Plato, were a contrivance of this description.

They were essentially a negative discussion of the great questions of

philosophy and life, directed with consummate skill to the purpose of

convincing any one who had merely adopted the commonplaces of received

opinion, that he did not understand the subject — that he as yet attached no

definite meaning to the doctrines he professed; in order that, becoming aware

of his ignorance, he might be put in the way to attain a stable belief, restingon a clear apprehension both of the meaning of doctrines and of their

evidence. The school disputations of the Middle Ages had a somewhat

similar object. They were intended to make sure that the pupil understood his

own opinion, and (by necessary correlation) the opinion opposed to it, and

could enforce the grounds of the one and confute those of the other. These

last-mentioned contests had indeed the incurable defect, that the premises

appealed to were taken from authority, not from reason; and, as a discipline

to the mind, they were in every respect inferior to the powerful dialectics

which formed the intellects of the "Socratici viri:" but the modern mind owes

far more to both than it is generally willing to admit, and the present modes

of education contain nothing which in the smallest degree supplies the place

either of the one or of the other. A person who derives all his instruction from

teachers or books, even if he escape the besetting temptation of contenting

himself with cram, is under no compulsion to hear both sides; accordingly it

is far from a frequent accomplishment, even among thinkers, to know both

sides; and the weakest part of what everybody says in defence of his opinion,

is what he intends as a reply to antagonists. It is the fashion of the present

time to disparage negative logic — that which points out weaknesses in

theory or errors in practice, without establishing positive truths. Such

negative criticism would indeed be poor enough as an ultimate result; but as a

means to attaining any positive knowledge or conviction worthy the name, it

cannot be valued too highly; and until people are again systematically trained

to it, there will be few great thinkers, and a low general average of intellect,

in any but the mathematical and physical departments of speculation. On any

other subject no one's opinions deserve the name of knowledge, except so far

as he has either had forced upon him by others, or gone through of himself,

the same mental process which would have been required of him in carrying

on an active controversy with opponents. That, therefore, which when absent,

it is so indispensable, but so difficult, to create, how worse than absurd is it to

forego, when spontaneously offering itself! If there are any persons who

contest a received opinion, or who will do so if law or opinion will let them,

let us thank them for it, open our minds to listen to them, and rejoice that

there is some one to do for us what we otherwise ought, if we have any

regard for either the certainty or the vitality of our convictions, to do with

much greater labor for ourselves.

              It still remains to speak of one of the principal causes which make

diversity of opinion advantageous, and will continue to do so until mankindshall have entered a stage of intellectual advancement which at present seems

at an incalculable distance. We have hitherto considered only two

possibilities: that the received opinion may be false, and some other opinion,

consequently, true; or that, the received opinion being true, a conflict with the

opposite error is essential to a clear apprehension and deep feeling of its

truth. But there is a commoner case than either of these; when the conflicting

doctrines, instead of being one true and the other false, share the truth

between them; and the nonconforming opinion is needed to supply the

remainder of the truth, of which the received doctrine embodies only a part.

Popular opinions, on subjects not palpable to sense, are often true, but seldom

or never the whole truth. They are a part of the truth; sometimes a greater,

sometimes a smaller part, but exaggerated, distorted, and disjoined from the

truths by which they ought to be accompanied and limited. Heretical

opinions, on the other hand, are generally some of these suppressed and

neglected truths, bursting the bonds which kept them down, and either

seeking reconciliation with the truth contained in the common opinion, or

fronting it as enemies, and setting themselves up, with similar exclusiveness,

as the whole truth. The latter case is hitherto the most frequent, as, in the

human mind, one-sidedness has always been the rule, and many-sidedness

the exception. Hence, even in revolutions of opinion, one part of the truth

usually sets while another rises. Even progress, which ought to superadd, for

the most part only substitutes one partial and incomplete truth for another;

improvement consisting chiefly in this, that the new fragment of truth is more

wanted, more adapted to the needs of the time, than that which it displaces.

Such being the partial character of prevailing opinions, even when resting on

a true foundation; every opinion which embodies somewhat of the portion of

truth which the common opinion omits, ought to be considered precious, with

whatever amount of error and confusion that truth may be blended. No sober

judge of human affairs will feel bound to be indignant because those who

force on our notice truths which we should otherwise have overlooked,

overlook some of those which we see. Rather, he will think that so long as

popular truth is one-sided, it is more desirable than otherwise that unpopular

truth should have one-sided asserters too; such being usually the most

energetic, and the most likely to compel reluctant attention to the fragment of

wisdom which they proclaim as if it were the whole.

              Thus, in the eighteenth century, when nearly all the instructed, and

all those of the uninstructed who were led by them, were lost in admiration ofwhat is called civilization, and of the marvels of modern science, literature,

and philosophy, and while greatly overrating the amount of unlikeness

between the men of modern and those of ancient times, indulged the belief

that the whole of the difference was in their own favor; with what a salutary

shock did the paradoxes of Rousseau explode like bombshells in the midst,

dislocating the compact mass of one-sided opinion, and forcing its elements

to recombine in a better form and with additional ingredients. Not that the

current opinions were on the whole farther from the truth than Rousseau's

were; on the contrary, they were nearer to it; they contained more of positive

truth, and very much less of error. Nevertheless there lay in Rousseau's

doctrine, and has floated down the stream of opinion along with it, a

considerable amount of exactly those truths which the popular opinion

wanted; and these are the deposit which was left behind when the flood

subsided. The superior worth of simplicity of life, the enervating and

demoralizing effect of the trammels and hypocrisies of artificial society, are

ideas which have never been entirely absent from cultivated minds since

Rousseau wrote; and they will in time produce their due effect, though at

present needing to be asserted as much as ever, and to be asserted by deeds,

for words, on this subject, have nearly exhausted their power.

              In politics, again, it is almost a commonplace, that a party of order or

stability, and a party of progress or reform, are both necessary elements of a

healthy state of political life; until the one or the other shall have so enlarged

its mental grasp as to be a party equally of order and of progress, knowing

and distinguishing what is fit to be preserved from what ought to be swept

away. Each of these modes of thinking derives its utility from the deficiencies

of the other; but it is in a great measure the opposition of the other that keeps

each within the limits of reason and sanity. Unless opinions favorable to

democracy and to aristocracy, to property and to equality, to co-operation and

to competition, to luxury and to abstinence, to sociality and individuality, to

liberty and discipline, and all the other standing antagonisms of practical life,

are expressed with equal freedom, and enforced and defended with equal

talent and energy, there is no chance of both elements obtaining their due;

one scale is sure to go up, and the other down. Truth, in the great practical

concerns of life, is so much a question of the reconciling and combining of

opposites, that very few have minds sufficiently capacious and impartial to

make the adjustment with an approach to correctness, and it has to be made

by the rough process of a struggle between combatants fighting under hostilebanners. On any of the great open questions just enumerated, if either of the

two opinions has a better claim than the other, not merely to be tolerated, but

to be encouraged and countenanced, it is the one which happens at the

particular time and place to be in a minority. That is the opinion which, for

the time being, represents the neglected interests, the side of human well-

being which is in danger of obtaining less than its share. I am aware that there

is not, in this country, any intolerance of differences of opinion on most of

these topics. They are adduced to show, by admitted and multiplied

examples, the universality of the fact, that only through diversity of opinion

is there, in the existing state of human intellect, a chance of fair play to all

sides of the truth. When there are persons to be found, who form an exception

to the apparent unanimity of the world on any subject, even if the world is in

the right, it is always probable that dissentients have something worth hearing

to say for themselves, and that truth would lose something by their silence.

              It may be objected, "But some received principles, especially on the

highest and most vital subjects, are more than half-truths. The Christian

morality, for instance, is the whole truth on that subject and if any one

teaches a morality which varies from it, he is wholly in error." As this is of all

cases the most important in practice, none can be fitter to test the general

maxim. But before pronouncing what Christian morality is or is not, it would

be desirable to decide what is meant by Christian morality. If it means the

morality of the New Testament, I wonder that any one who derives his

knowledge of this from the book itself, can suppose that it was announced, or

intended, as a complete doctrine of morals. The Gospel always refers to a

preexisting morality, and confines its precepts to the particulars in which that

morality was to be corrected, or superseded by a wider and higher; expressing

itself, moreover, in terms most general, often impossible to be interpreted

literally, and possessing rather the impressiveness of poetry or eloquence than

the precision of legislation. To extract from it a body of ethical doctrine, has

never been possible without eking it out from the Old Testament, that is, from

a system elaborate indeed, but in many respects barbarous, and intended only

for a barbarous people. St. Paul, a declared enemy to this Judaical mode of

interpreting the doctrine and filling up the scheme of his Master, equally

assumes a preexisting morality, namely, that of the Greeks and Romans; and

his advice to Christians is in a great measure a system of accommodation to

that; even to the extent of giving an apparent sanction to slavery. What is

called Christian, but should rather be termed theological, morality, was notthe work of Christ or the Apostles, but is of much later origin, having been

gradually built up by the Catholic Church of the first five centuries, and

though not implicitly adopted by moderns and Protestants, has been much

less modified by them than might have been expected. For the most part,

indeed, they have contented themselves with cutting off the additions which

had been made to it in the Middle Ages, each sect supplying the place by

fresh additions, adapted to its own character and tendencies. That mankind

owe a great debt to this morality, and to its early teachers, I should be the last

person to deny; but I do not scruple to say of it, that it is, in many important

points, incomplete and one-sided, and that unless ideas and feelings, not

sanctioned by it, had contributed to the formation of European life and

character, human affairs would have been in a worse condition than they now

are. Christian morality (so called) has all the characters of a reaction; it is, in

great part, a protest against Paganism. Its ideal is negative rather than

positive; passive rather than active; Innocence rather than Nobleness;

Abstinence from Evil, rather than energetic Pursuit of Good: in its precepts

(as has been well said) "thou shalt not" predominates unduly over "thou

shalt." In its horror of sensuality, it made an idol of asceticism, which has

been gradually compromised away into one of legality. It holds out the hope

of heaven and the threat of hell, as the appointed and appropriate motives to a

virtuous life: in this falling far below the best of the ancients, and doing what

lies in it to give to human morality an essentially selfish character, by

disconnecting each man's feelings of duty from the interests of his fellow-

creatures, except so far as a self-interested inducement is offered to him for

consulting them. It is essentially a doctrine of passive obedience; it inculcates

submission to all authorities found established; who indeed are not to be

actively obeyed when they command what religion forbids, but who are not

to be resisted, far less rebelled against, for any amount of wrong to ourselves.

And while, in the morality of the best Pagan nations, duty to the State holds

even a disproportionate place, infringing on the just liberty of the individual;

in purely Christian ethics that grand department of duty is scarcely noticed or

acknowledged. It is in the Koran, not the New Testament, that we read the

maxim —"A ruler who appoints any man to an office, when there is in his

dominions another man better qualified for it, sins against God and against

the State." What little recognition the idea of obligation to the public obtains

in modern morality, is derived from Greek and Roman sources, not from

Christian; as, even in the morality of private life, whatever exists ofmagnanimity, high- mindedness, personal dignity, even the sense of honor, is

derived from the purely human, not the religious part of our education, and

never could have grown out of a standard of ethics in which the only worth,

professedly recognized, is that of obedience.

              I am as far as any one from pretending that these defects are

necessarily inherent in the Christian ethics, in every manner in which it can

be conceived, or that the many requisites of a complete moral doctrine which

it does not contain, do not admit of being reconciled with it. Far less would I

insinuate this of the doctrines and precepts of Christ himself. I believe that

the sayings of Christ are all, that I can see any evidence of their having been

intended to be; that they are irreconcilable with nothing which a

comprehensive morality requires; that everything which is excellent in ethics

may be brought within them, with no greater violence to their language than

has been done to it by all who have attempted to deduce from them any

practical system of conduct whatever. But it is quite consistent with this, to

believe that they contain and were meant to contain, only a part of the truth;

that many essential elements of the highest morality are among the things

which are not provided for, nor intended to be provided for, in the recorded

deliverances of the Founder of Christianity, and which have been entirely

thrown aside in the system of ethics erected on the basis of those deliverances

by the Christian Church. And this being so, I think it a great error to persist in

attempting to find in the Christian doctrine that complete rule for our

guidance, which its author intended it to sanction and enforce, but only

partially to provide. I believe, too, that this narrow theory is becoming a

grave practical evil, detracting greatly from the value of the moral training

and instruction, which so many wellmeaning persons are now at length

exerting themselves to promote. I much fear that by attempting to form the

mind and feelings on an exclusively religious type, and discarding those

secular standards (as for want of a better name they may be called) which

heretofore coexisted with and supplemented the Christian ethics, receiving

some of its spirit, and infusing into it some of theirs, there will result, and is

even now resulting, a low, abject, servile type of character, which, submit

itself as it may to what it deems the Supreme Will, is incapable of rising to or

sympathizing in the conception of Supreme Goodness. I believe that other

ethics than any one which can be evolved from exclusively Christian sources,

must exist side by side with Christian ethics to produce the moral

regeneration of mankind; and that the Christian system is no exception to therule that in an imperfect state of the human mind, the interests of truth require

a diversity of opinions. It is not necessary that in ceasing to ignore the moral

truths not contained in Christianity, men should ignore any of those which it

does contain. Such prejudice, or oversight, when it occurs, is altogether an

evil; but it is one from which we cannot hope to be always exempt, and must

be regarded as the price paid for an inestimable good. The exclusive

pretension made by a part of the truth to be the whole, must and ought to be

protested against, and if a reactionary impulse should make the protestors

unjust in their turn, this one-sidedness, like the other, may be lamented, but

must be tolerated. If Christians would teach infidels to be just to Christianity,

they should themselves be just to infidelity. It can do truth no service to blink

the fact, known to all who have the most ordinary acquaintance with literary

history, that a large portion of the noblest and most valuable moral teaching

has been the work, not only of men who did not know, but of men who knew

and rejected, the Christian faith.

              I do not pretend that the most unlimited use of the freedom of

enunciating all possible opinions would put an end to the evils of religious or

philosophical sectarianism. Every truth which men of narrow capacity are in

earnest about, is sure to be asserted, inculcated, and in many ways even acted

on, as if no other truth existed in the world, or at all events none that could

limit or qualify the first. I acknowledge that the tendency of all opinions to

become sectarian is not cured by the freest discussion, but is often heightened

and exacerbated thereby; the truth which ought to have been, but was not,

seen, being rejected all the more violently because proclaimed by persons

regarded as opponents. But it is not on the impassioned partisan, it is on the

calmer and more disinterested bystander, that this collision of opinions works

its salutary effect. Not the violent conflict between parts of the truth, but the

quiet suppression of half of it, is the formidable evil: there is always hope

when people are forced to listen to both sides; it is when they attend only to

one that errors harden into prejudices, and truth itself ceases to have the effect

of truth, by being exaggerated into falsehood. And since there are few mental

attributes more rare than that judicial faculty which can sit in intelligent

judgment between two sides of a question, of which only one is represented

by an advocate before it, truth has no chance but in proportion as every side

of it, every opinion which embodies any fraction of the truth, not only finds

advocates, but is so advocated as to be listened to.              We have now recognized the necessity to the mental wellbeing of

mankind (on which all their other well-being depends) of freedom of opinion,

and freedom of the expression of opinion, on four distinct grounds; which we

will now briefly recapitulate.

              First, if any opinion is compelled to silence, that opinion may, for

aught we can certainly know, be true. To deny this is to assume our own

infallibility.

              Secondly, though the silenced opinion be an error, it may, and very

commonly does, contain a portion of truth; and since the general or prevailing

opinion on any object is rarely or never the whole truth, it is only by the

collision of adverse opinions that the remainder of the truth has any chance of

being supplied.

              Thirdly, even if the received opinion be not only true, but the whole

truth; unless it is suffered to be, and actually is, vigorously and earnestly

contested, it will, by most of those who receive it, be held in the manner of a

prejudice, with little comprehension or feeling of its rational grounds. And

not only this, but, fourthly, the meaning of the doctrine itself will be in

danger of being lost, or enfeebled, and deprived of its vital effect on the

character and conduct: the dogma becoming a mere formal profession,

inefficacious for good, but cumbering the ground, and preventing the growth

of any real and heartfelt conviction, from reason or personal experience.

              Before quitting the subject of freedom of opinion, it is fit to take

notice of those who say, that the free expression of all opinions should be

permitted, on condition that the manner be temperate, and do not pass the

bounds of fair discussion. Much might be said on the impossibility of fixing

where these supposed bounds are to be placed; for if the test be offence to

those whose opinion is attacked, I think experience testifies that this offence

is given whenever the attack is telling and powerful, and that every opponent

who pushes them hard, and whom they find it difficult to answer, appears to

them, if he shows any strong feeling on the subject, an intemperate opponent.

But this, though an important consideration in a practical point of view,

merges in a more fundamental objection. Undoubtedly the manner of

asserting an opinion, even though it be a true one, may be very objectionable,

and may justly incur severe censure. But the principal offences of the kind

are such as it is mostly impossible, unless by accidental self-betrayal, to bringhome to conviction. The gravest of them is, to argue sophistically, to suppress

facts or arguments, to misstate the elements of the case, or misrepresent the

opposite opinion. But all this, even to the most aggravated degree, is so

continually done in perfect good faith, by persons who are not considered,

and in many other respects may not deserve to be considered, ignorant or

incompetent, that it is rarely possible on adequate grounds conscientiously to

stamp the misrepresentation as morally culpable; and still less could law

presume to interfere with this kind of controversial misconduct. With regard

to what is commonly meant by intemperate discussion, namely, invective,

sarcasm, personality, and the like, the denunciation of these weapons would

deserve more sympathy if it were ever proposed to interdict them equally to

both sides; but it is only desired to restrain the employment of them against

the prevailing opinion: against the unprevailing they may not only be used

without general disapproval, but will be likely to obtain for him who uses

them the praise of honest zeal and righteous indignation. Yet whatever

mischief arises from their use, is greatest when they are employed against the

comparatively defenceless; and whatever unfair advantage can be derived by

any opinion from this mode of asserting it, accrues almost exclusively to

received opinions. The worst offence of this kind which can be committed by

a polemic, is to stigmatize those who hold the contrary opinion as bad and

immoral men. To calumny of this sort, those who hold any unpopular opinion

are peculiarly exposed, because they are in general few and uninfluential, and

nobody but themselves feels much interest in seeing justice done them; but

this weapon is, from the nature of the case, denied to those who attack a

prevailing opinion: they can neither use it with safety to themselves, nor if

they could, would it do anything but recoil on their own cause. In general,

opinions contrary to those commonly received can only obtain a hearing by

studied moderation of language, and the most cautious avoidance of

unnecessary offence, from which they hardly ever deviate even in a slight

degree without losing ground: while unmeasured vituperation employed on

the side of the prevailing opinion, really does deter people from professing

contrary opinions, and from listening to those who profess them. For the

interest, therefore, of truth and justice, it is far more important to restrain this

employment of vituperative language than the other; and, for example, if it

were necessary to choose, there would be much more need to discourage

offensive attacks on infidelity, than on religion. It is, however, obvious that

law and authority have no business with restraining either, while opinionought, in every instance, to determine its verdict by the circumstances of the

individual case; condemning every one, on whichever side of the argument

he places himself, in whose mode of advocacy either want of candor, or

malignity, bigotry or intolerance of feeling manifest themselves, but not

inferring these vices from the side which a person takes, though it be the

contrary side of the question to our own; and giving merited honor to every

one, whatever opinion he may hold, who has calmness to see and honesty to

state what his opponents and their opinions really are, exaggerating nothing

to their discredit, keeping nothing back which tells, or can be supposed to

tell, in their favor. This is the real morality of public discussion; and if often

violated, I am happy to think that there are many controversialists who to a

great extent observe it, and a still greater number who conscientiously strive

towards it.

        1
               These words had scarcely been written, when, as if to give them an

emphatic contradiction, occurred the Government Press Prosecutions of

1858. That illjudged interference with the liberty of public discussion has not,

however, induced me to alter a single word in the text, nor has it at all

weakened my conviction that, moments of panic excepted, the era of pains

and penalties far political discussion has, in our own country, passed away.

For, in the first place, the prosecutions were not persisted in; and in the

second, they were never, properly speaking, political prosecutions. The

offence charged was not that of criticizing institutions, or the acts or persons

of rulers, but of circulating what was deemed an immoral doctrine, the

lawfulness of Tyrannicide.

              If the arguments of the present chapter are of any validity, there

ought to exist the fullest liberty of professing and discussing, as a matter of

ethical conviction, any doctrine, however immoral it may be considered. It

would, therefore, be irrelevant and out of place to examine here, whether the

doctrine of Tyrannicide deserves that title. I shall content myself with saying,

that the subject has been at all times one of the open questions of morals, that

the act of a private citizen in striking down a criminal, who, by raising

himself above the law, has placed himself beyond the reach of legal

punishment or control, has been accounted by whole nations, and by some of

the best and wisest of men, not a crime, but an act of exalted virtue and that,

right or wrong, it is not of the nature of assassination but of civil war. As

such, I hold that the instigation to it, in a specific case, may be a propersubject of punishment, but only if an overt act has followed, and at least a

probable connection can be established between the act and the instigation.

Even then it is not a foreign government, but the very government assailed,

which alone, in the exercise of self-defence, can legitimately punish attacks

directed against its own existence.

        2
               Thomas Pooley, Bodmin Assizes, July 31, 1857. In December

following, he received a free pardon from the Crown.

        3
               George Jacob Holyoake, August 17, 1857; Edward Truelove, July,

1857.

        4
               Baron de Gleichen, Marlborough Street Police Court, August 4,

1857.

        5
               Ample warning may be drawn from the large infusion of the

passions of a persecutor, which mingled with the general display of the worst

parts of our national character on the occasion of the Sepoy insurrection. The

ravings of fanatics or charlatans from the pulpit may be unworthy of notice;

but the heads of the Evangelical party have announced as their principle, for

the government of Hindoos and Mahomedans, that no schools be supported

by public money in which the Bible is not taught, and by necessary

consequence that no public employment be given to any but real or pretended

Christians. An Under-Secretary of State, in a speech delivered to his

constituents on the 12th of November, 1857, is reported to have said:

"Toleration of their faith" (the faith of a hundred millions of British subjects),

"the superstition which they called religion, by the British Government, had

had the effect of retarding the ascendency of the British name, and preventing

the salutary growth of Christianity.... Toleration was the great corner-stone of

the religious liberties of this country; but do not let them abuse that precious

word toleration. As he understood it, it meant the complete liberty to all,

freedom of worship, among Christians, who worshipped upon the same

foundation. It meant toleration of all sects and denominations of Christians

who believed in the one mediation." I desire to call attention to the fact, that a

man who has been deemed fit to fill a high office in the government of this

country, under a liberal Ministry, maintains the doctrine that all who do not

believe in the divinity of Christ are beyond the pale of toleration. Who, after

this imbecile display, can indulge the illusion that religious persecution has

passed away, never to return? 

 

                                       Chapter 3

 

 

          On Individuality, As One of the Elements of Wellbeing

 

 

              SUCH being the reasons which make it imperative that human

beings should be free to form opinions, and to express their opinions without

reserve; and such the baneful consequences to the intellectual, and through

that to the moral nature of man, unless this liberty is either conceded, or

asserted in spite of prohibition; let us next examine whether the same reasons

do not require that men should be free to act upon their opinions — to carry

these out in their lives, without hindrance, either physical or moral, from their

fellow-men, so long as it is at their own risk and peril. This last proviso is of

course indispensable. No one pretends that actions should be as free as

opinions. On the contrary, even opinions lose their immunity, when the

circumstances in which they are expressed are such as to constitute their

expression a positive instigation to some mischievous act. An opinion that

corndealers are starvers of the poor, or that private property is robbery, ought

to be unmolested when simply circulated through the press, but may justly

incur punishment when delivered orally to an excited mob assembled before

the house of a corn-dealer, or when handed about among the same mob in the

form of a placard. Acts of whatever kind, which, without justifiable cause, do

harm to others, may be, and in the more important cases absolutely require to

be, controlled by the unfavorable sentiments, and, when needful, by the

active interference of mankind. The liberty of the individual must be thus far

limited; he must not make himself a nuisance to other people. But if he

refrains from molesting others in what concerns them, and merely acts

according to his own inclination and judgment in things which concern

himself, the same reasons which show that opinion should be free, prove also

that he should be allowed, without molestation, to carry his opinions into

practice at his own cost. That mankind are not infallible; that their truths, for

the most part, are only half-truths; that unity of opinion, unless resulting from

the fullest and freest comparison of opposite opinions, is not desirable, anddiversity not an evil, but a good, until mankind are much more capable than

at present of recognizing all sides of the truth, are principles applicable to

men's modes of action, not less than to their opinions. As it is useful that

while mankind are imperfect there should be different opinions, so is it that

there should be different experiments of living; that free scope should be

given to varieties of character, short of injury to others; and that the worth of

different modes of life should be proved practically, when any one thinks fit

to try them. It is desirable, in short, that in things which do not primarily

concern others, individuality should assert itself. Where, not the person's own

character, but the traditions of customs of other people are the rule of

conduct, there is wanting one of the principal ingredients of human

happiness, and quite the chief ingredient of individual and social progress.

              In maintaining this principle, the greatest difficulty to be

encountered does not lie in the appreciation of means towards an

acknowledged end, but in the indifference of persons in general to the end

itself. If it were felt that the free development of individuality is one of the

leading essentials of well-being; that it is not only a coordinate element with

all that is designated by the terms civilization, instruction, education, culture,

but is itself a necessary part and condition of all those things; there would be

no danger that liberty should be undervalued, and the adjustment of the

boundaries between it and social control would present no extraordinary

difficulty. But the evil is, that individual spontaneity is hardly recognized by

the common modes of thinking as having any intrinsic worth, or deserving

any regard on its own account. The majority, being satisfied with the ways of

mankind as they now are (for it is they who make them what they are),

cannot comprehend why those ways should not be good enough for

everybody; and what is more, spontaneity forms no part of the ideal of the

majority of moral and social reformers, but is rather looked on with jealousy,

as a troublesome and perhaps rebellious obstruction to the general acceptance

of what these reformers, in their own judgment, think would be best for

mankind. Few persons, out of Germany, even comprehend the meaning of the

doctrine which Wilhelm von Humboldt, so eminent both as a savant and as a

politician, made the text of a treatise — that "the end of man, or that which is

prescribed by the eternal or immutable dictates of reason, and not suggested

by vague and transient desires, is the highest and most harmonious

development of his powers to a complete and consistent whole;" that,

therefore, the object "towards which every human being must ceaselesslydirect his efforts, and on which especially those who design to influence their

fellow-men must ever keep their eyes, is the individuality of power and

development;" that for this there are two requisites, "freedom, and a variety

of situations;" and that from the union of these arise "individual vigor and
                                                                            1
manifold diversity," which combine themselves in " originality."

              Little, however, as people are accustomed to a doctrine like that of

Von Humboldt, and surprising as it may be to them to find so high a value

attached to individuality, the question, one must nevertheless think, can only

be one of degree. No one's idea of excellence in conduct is that people should

do absolutely nothing but copy one another. No one would assert that people

ought not to put into their mode of life, and into the conduct of their

concerns, any impress whatever of their own judgment, or of their own

individual character. On the other hand, it would be absurd to pretend that

people ought to live as if nothing whatever had been known in the world

before they came into it; as if experience had as yet done nothing towards

showing that one mode of existence, or of conduct, is preferable to another.

Nobody denies that people should be so taught and trained in youth, as to

know and benefit by the ascertained results of human experience. But it is the

privilege and proper condition of a human being, arrived at the maturity of

his faculties, to use and interpret experience in his own way. It is for him to

find out what part of recorded experience is properly applicable to his own

circumstances and character. The traditions and customs of other people are,

to a certain extent, evidence of what their experience has taught them;

presumptive evidence, and as such, have a claim to this deference: but, in the

first place, their experience may be too narrow; or they may not have

interpreted it rightly. Secondly, their interpretation of experience may be

correct but unsuitable to him. Customs are made for customary

circumstances, and customary characters: and his circumstances or his

character may be uncustomary. Thirdly, though the customs be both good as

customs, and suitable to him, yet to conform to custom, merely as custom,

does not educate or develop in him any of the qualities which are the

distinctive endowment of a human being. The human faculties of perception,

judgment, discriminative feeling, mental activity, and even moral preference,

are exercised only in making a choice. He who does anything because it is the

custom, makes no choice. He gains no practice either in discerning or in

desiring what is best. The mental and moral, like the muscular powers, are

improved only by being used. The faculties are called into no exercise bydoing a thing merely because others do it, no more than by believing a thing

only because others believe it. If the grounds of an opinion are not conclusive

to the person's own reason, his reason cannot be strengthened, but is likely to

be weakened by his adopting it: and if the inducements to an act are not such

as are consentaneous to his own feelings and character (where affection, or

the rights of others are not concerned), it is so much done towards rendering

his feelings and character inert and torpid, instead of active and energetic.

              He who lets the world, or his own portion of it, choose his plan of

life for him, has no need of any other faculty than the ape-like one of

imitation. He who chooses his plan for himself, employs all his faculties. He

must use observation to see, reasoning and judgment to foresee, activity to

gather materials for decision, discrimination to decide, and when he has

decided, firmness and self-control to hold to his deliberate decision. And

these qualities he requires and exercises exactly in proportion as the part of

his conduct which he determines according to his own judgment and feelings

is a large one. It is possible that he might be guided in some good path, and

kept out of harm's way, without any of these things. But what will be his

comparative worth as a human being? It really is of importance, not only

what men do, but also what manner of men they are that do it. Among the

works of man, which human life is rightly employed in perfecting and

beautifying, the first in importance surely is man himself. Supposing it were

possible to get houses built, corn grown, battles fought, causes tried, and even

churches erected and prayers said, by machinery — by automatons in human

form — it would be a considerable loss to exchange for these automatons

even the men and women who at present inhabit the more civilized parts of

the world, and who assuredly are but starved specimens of what nature can

and will produce. Human nature is not a machine to be built after a model,

and set to do exactly the work prescribed for it, but a tree, which requires to

grow and develop itself on all sides, according to the tendency of the inward

forces which make it a living thing.

              It will probably be conceded that it is desirable people should

exercise their understandings, and that an intelligent following of custom, or

even occasionally an intelligent deviation from custom, is better than a blind

and simply mechanical adhesion to it. To a certain extent it is admitted, that

our understanding should be our own: but there is not the same willingness to

admit that our desires and impulses should be our own likewise; or that topossess impulses of our own, and of any strength, is anything but a peril and

a snare. Yet desires and impulses are as much a part of a perfect human

being, as beliefs and restraints: and strong impulses are only perilous when

not properly balanced; when one set of aims and inclinations is developed

into strength, while others, which ought to coexist with them, remain weak

and inactive. It is not because men's desires are strong that they act ill; it is

because their consciences are weak. There is no natural connection between

strong impulses and a weak conscience. The natural connection is the other

way. To say that one person's desires and feelings are stronger and more

various than those of another, is merely to say that he has more of the raw

material of human nature, and is therefore capable, perhaps of more evil, but

certainly of more good. Strong impulses are but another name for energy.

Energy may be turned to bad uses; but more good may always be made of an

energetic nature, than of an indolent and impassive one. Those who have

most natural feeling, are always those whose cultivated feelings may be made

the strongest. The same strong susceptibilities which make the personal

impulses vivid and powerful, are also the source from whence are generated

the most passionate love of virtue, and the sternest selfcontrol. It is through

the cultivation of these, that society both does its duty and protects its

interests: not by rejecting the stuff of which heroes are made, because it

knows not how to make them. A person whose desires and impulses are his

own — are the expression of his own nature, as it has been developed and

modified by his own culture — is said to have a character. One whose desires

and impulses are not his owN, has no character, no more than a steam-engine

has a character. If, in addition to being his own, his impulses are strong, and

are under the government of a strong will, he has an energetic character.

Whoever thinks that individuality of desires and impulses should not be

encouraged to unfold itself, must maintain that society has no need of strong

natures — is not the better for containing many persons who have much

character — and that a high general average of energy is not desirable.

              In some early states of society, these forces might be, and were, too

much ahead of the power which society then possessed of disciplining and

controlling them. There has been a time when the element of spontaneity and

individuality was in excess, and the social principle had a hard struggle with

it. The difficulty then was, to induce men of strong bodies or minds to pay

obedience to any rules which required them to control their impulses. To

overcome this difficulty, law and discipline, like the Popes struggling againstthe Emperors, asserted a power over the whole man, claiming to control all

his life in order to control his character — which society had not found any

other sufficient means of binding. But society has now fairly got the better of

individuality; and the danger which threatens human nature is not the excess,

but the deficiency, of personal impulses and preferences. Things are vastly

changed, since the passions of those who were strong by station or by

personal endowment were in a state of habitual rebellion against laws and

ordinances, and required to be rigorously chained up to enable the persons

within their reach to enjoy any particle of security. In our times, from the

highest class of society down to the lowest every one lives as under the eye of

a hostile and dreaded censorship. Not only in what concerns others, but in

what concerns only themselves, the individual, or the family, do not ask

themselves — what do I prefer? or, what would suit my character and

disposition? or, what would allow the best and highest in me to have fair

play, and enable it to grow and thrive? They ask themselves, what is suitable

to my position? what is usually done by persons of my station and pecuniary

circumstances? or (worse still) what is usually done by persons of a station

and circumstances superior to mine? I do not mean that they choose what is

customary, in preference to what suits their own inclination. It does not occur

to them to have any inclination, except for what is customary. Thus the mind

itself is bowed to the yoke: even in what people do for pleasure, conformity is

the first thing thought of; they like in crowds; they exercise choice only

among things commonly done: peculiarity of taste, eccentricity of conduct,

are shunned equally with crimes: until by dint of not following their own

nature, they have no nature to follow: their human capacities are withered and

starved: they become incapable of any strong wishes or native pleasures, and

are generally without either opinions or feelings of home growth, or properly

their own. Now is this, or is it not, the desirable condition of human nature?

              It is so, on the Calvinistic theory. According to that, the one great

offence of man is Self-will. All the good of which humanity is capable, is

comprised in Obedience. You have no choice; thus you must do, and no

otherwise; "whatever is not a duty is a sin." Human nature being radically

corrupt, there is no redemption for any one until human nature is killed

within him. To one holding this theory of life, crushing out any of the human

faculties, capacities, and susceptibilities, is no evil: man needs no capacity,

but that of surrendering himself to the will of God: and if he uses any of his

faculties for any other purpose but to do that supposed will more effectually,he is better without them. That is the theory of Calvinism; and it is held, in a

mitigated form, by many who do not consider themselves Calvinists; the

mitigation consisting in giving a less ascetic interpretation to the alleged will

of God; asserting it to be his will that mankind should gratify some of their

inclinations; of course not in the manner they themselves prefer, but in the

way of obedience, that is, in a way prescribed to them by authority; and,

therefore, by the necessary conditions of the case, the same for all.

              In some such insidious form there is at present a strong tendency to

this narrow theory of life, and to the pinched and hidebound type of human

character which it patronizes. Many persons, no doubt, sincerely think that

human beings thus cramped and dwarfed, are as their Maker designed them

to be; just as many have thought that trees are a much finer thing when

clipped into pollards, or cut out into figures of animals, than as nature made

them. But if it be any part of religion to believe that man was made by a good

Being, it is more consistent with that faith to believe, that this Being gave all

human faculties that they might be cultivated and unfolded, not rooted out

and consumed, and that he takes delight in every nearer approach made by

his creatures to the ideal conception embodied in them, every increase in any

of their capabilities of comprehension, of action, or of enjoyment. There is a

different type of human excellence from the Calvinistic; a conception of

humanity as having its nature bestowed on it for other purposes than merely

to be abnegated. "Pagan selfassertion" is one of the elements of human worth,
                                      2
as well as "Christian self-denial." There is a Greek ideal of self-

development, which the Platonic and Christian ideal of self-government

blends with, but does not supersede. It may be better to be a John Knox than

an Alcibiades, but it is better to be a Pericles than either; nor would a

Pericles, if we had one in these days, be without anything good which

belonged to John Knox.

              It is not by wearing down into uniformity all that is individual in

themselves, but by cultivating it and calling it forth, within the limits imposed

by the rights and interests of others, that human beings become a noble and

beautiful object of contemplation; and as the works partake the character of

those who do them, by the same process human life also becomes rich,

diversified, and animating, furnishing more abundant aliment to high

thoughts and elevating feelings, and strengthening the tie which binds every

individual to the race, by making the race infinitely better worth belonging to.In proportion to the development of his individuality, each person becomes

more valuable to himself, and is therefore capable of being more valuable to

others. There is a greater fulness of life about his own existence, and when

there is more life in the units there is more in the mass which is composed of

them. As much compression as is necessary to prevent the stronger

specimens of human nature from encroaching on the rights of others, cannot

be dispensed with; but for this there is ample compensation even in the point

of view of human development. The means of development which the

individual loses by being prevented from gratifying his inclinations to the

injury of others, are chiefly obtained at the expense of the development of

other people. And even to himself there is a full equivalent in the better

development of the social part of his nature, rendered possible by the restraint

put upon the selfish part. To be held to rigid rules of justice for the sake of

others, develops the feelings and capacities which have the good of others for

their object. But to be restrained in things not affecting their good, by their

mere displeasure, develops nothing valuable, except such force of character

as may unfold itself in resisting the restraint. If acquiesced in, it dulls and

blunts the whole nature. To give any fair play to the nature of each, it is

essential that different persons should be allowed to lead different lives. In

proportion as this latitude has been exercised in any age, has that age been

noteworthy to posterity. Even despotism does not produce its worst effects,

so long as Individuality exists under it; and whatever crushes individuality is

despotism, by whatever name it may be called, and whether it professes to be

enforcing the will of God or the injunctions of men.

              Having said that Individuality is the same thing with development,

and that it is only the cultivation of individuality which produces, or can

produce, well-developed human beings, I might here close the argument: for

what more or better can be said of any condition of human affairs, than that it

brings human beings themselves nearer to the best thing they can be? or what

worse can be said of any obstruction to good, than that it prevents this?

Doubtless, however, these considerations will not suffice to convince those

who most need convincing; and it is necessary further to show, that these

developed human beings are of some use to the undeveloped — to point out

to those who do not desire liberty, and would not avail themselves of it, that

they may be in some intelligible manner rewarded for allowing other people

to make use of it without hindrance.              In the first place, then, I would suggest that they might possibly

learn something from them. It will not be denied by anybody, that originality

is a valuable element in human affairs. There is always need of persons not

only to discover new truths, and point out when what were once truths are

true no longer, but also to commence new practices, and set the example of

more enlightened conduct, and better taste and sense in human life. This

cannot well be gainsaid by anybody who does not believe that the world has

already attained perfection in all its ways and practices. It is true that this

benefit is not capable of being rendered by everybody alike: there are but few

persons, in comparison with the whole of mankind, whose experiments, if

adopted by others, would be likely to be any improvement on established

practice. But these few are the salt of the earth; without them, human life

would become a stagnant pool. Not only is it they who introduce good things

which did not before exist; it is they who keep the life in those which already

existed. If there were nothing new to be done, would human intellect cease to

be necessary? Would it be a reason why those who do the old things should

forget why they are done, and do them like cattle, not like human beings?

There is only too great a tendency in the best beliefs and practices to

degenerate into the mechanical; and unless there were a succession of persons

whose ever-recurring originality prevents the grounds of those beliefs and

practices from becoming merely traditional, such dead matter would not

resist the smallest shock from anything really alive, and there would be no

reason why civilization should not die out, as in the Byzantine Empire.

Persons of genius, it is true, are, and are always likely to be, a small minority;

but in order to have them, it is necessary to preserve the soil in which they

grow. Genius can only breathe freely in an atmosphere of freedom. Persons

of genius are, ex vi termini, more individual than any other people — less

capable, consequently, of fitting themselves, without hurtful compression,

into any of the small number of moulds which society provides in order to

save its members the trouble of forming their own character. If from timidity

they consent to be forced into one of these moulds, and to let all that part of

themselves which cannot expand under the pressure remain unexpanded,

society will be little the better for their genius. If they are of a strong

character, and break their fetters they become a mark for the society which

has not succeeded in reducing them to common-place, to point at with solemn

warning as "wild," "erratic," and the like; much as if one should complain of

the Niagara river for not flowing smoothly between its banks like a Dutchcanal.

              I insist thus emphatically on the importance of genius, and the

necessity of allowing it to unfold itself freely both in thought and in practice,

being well aware that no one will deny the position in theory, but knowing

also that almost every one, in reality, is totally indifferent to it. People think

genius a fine thing if it enables a man to write an exciting poem, or paint a

picture. But in its true sense, that of originality in thought and action, though

no one says that it is not a thing to be admired, nearly all, at heart, think they

can do very well without it. Unhappily this is too natural to be wondered at.

Originality is the one thing which unoriginal minds cannot feel the use of.

They cannot see what it is to do for them: how should they? If they could see

what it would do for them, it would not be originality. The first service which

originality has to render them, is that of opening their eyes: which being once

fully done, they would have a chance of being themselves original.

Meanwhile, recollecting that nothing was ever yet done which some one was

not the first to do, and that all good things which exist are the fruits of

originality, let them be modest enough to believe that there is something still

left for it to accomplish, and assure themselves that they are more in need of

originality, the less they are conscious of the want.

              In sober truth, whatever homage may be professed, or even paid, to

real or supposed mental superiority, the general tendency of things

throughout the world is to render mediocrity the ascendant power among

mankind. In ancient history, in the Middle Ages, and in a diminishing degree

through the long transition from feudality to the present time, the individual

was a power in himself; and If he had either great talents or a high social

position, he was a considerable power. At present individuals are lost in the

crowd. In politics it is almost a triviality to say that public opinion now rules

the world. The only power deserving the name is that of masses, and of

governments while they make themselves the organ of the tendencies and

instincts of masses. This is as true in the moral and social relations of private

life as in public transactions. Those whose opinions go by the name of public

opinion, are not always the same sort of public: in America, they are the

whole white population; in England, chiefly the middle class. But they are

always a mass, that is to say, collective mediocrity. And what is still greater

novelty, the mass do not now take their opinions from dignitaries in Church

or State, from ostensible leaders, or from books. Their thinking is done forthem by men much like themselves, addressing them or speaking in their

name, on the spur of the moment, through the newspapers. I am not

complaining of all this. I do not assert that anything better is compatible, as a

general rule, with the present low state of the human mind. But that does not

hinder the government of mediocrity from being mediocre government. No

government by a democracy or a numerous aristocracy, either in its political

acts or in the opinions, qualities, and tone of mind which it fosters, ever did

or could rise above mediocrity, except in so far as the sovereign Many have

let themselves be guided (which in their best times they always have done) by

the counsels and influence of a more highly gifted and instructed One or Few.

The initiation of all wise or noble things, comes and must come from

individuals; generally at first from some one individual. The honor and glory

of the average man is that he is capable of following that initiative; that he

can respond internally to wise and noble things, and be led to them with his

eyes open. I am not countenancing the sort of "hero-worship" which applauds

the strong man of genius for forcibly seizing on the government of the world

and making it do his bidding in spite of itself. All he can claim is, freedom to

point out the way. The power of compelling others into it, is not only

inconsistent with the freedom and development of all the rest, but corrupting

to the strong man himself. It does seem, however, that when the opinions of

masses of merely average men are everywhere become or becoming the

dominant power, the counterpoise and corrective to that tendency would be,

the more and more pronounced individuality of those who stand on the higher

eminences of thought. It Is in these circumstances most especially, that

exceptional individuals, instead of being deterred, should be encouraged in

acting differently from the mass. In other times there was no advantage in

their doing so, unless they acted not only differently, but better. In this age

the mere example of non-conformity, the mere refusal to bend the knee to

custom, is itself a service. Precisely because the tyranny of opinion is such as

to make eccentricity a reproach, it is desirable, in order to break through that

tyranny, that people should be eccentric. Eccentricity has always abounded

when and where strength of character has abounded; and the amount of

eccentricity in a society has generally been proportional to the amount of

genius, mental vigor, and moral courage which it contained. That so few now

dare to be eccentric, marks the chief danger of the time.

              I have said that it is important to give the freest scope possible to

uncustomary things, in order that it may in time appear which of these are fitto be converted into customs. But independence of action, and disregard of

custom are not solely deserving of encouragement for the chance they afford

that better modes of action, and customs more worthy of general adoption,

may be struck out; nor is it only persons of decided mental superiority who

have a just claim to carry on their lives in their own way. There is no reason

that all human existences should be constructed on some one, or some small

number of patterns. If a person possesses any tolerable amount of common

sense and experience, his own mode of laying out his existence is the best,

not because it is the best in itself, but because it is his own mode. Human

beings are not like sheep; and even sheep are not undistinguishably alike. A

man cannot get a coat or a pair of boots to fit him, unless they are either made

to his measure, or he has a whole warehouseful to choose from: and is it

easier to fit him with a life than with a coat, or are human beings more like

one another in their whole physical and spiritual conformation than in the

shape of their feet? If it were only that people have diversities of taste that is

reason enough for not attempting to shape them all after one model. But

different persons also require different conditions for their spiritual

development; and can no more exist healthily in the same moral, than all the

variety of plants can in the same physical atmosphere and climate. The same

things which are helps to one person towards the cultivation of his higher

nature, are hindrances to another. The same mode of life is a healthy

excitement to one, keeping all his faculties of action and enjoyment in their

best order, while to another it is a distracting burden, which suspends or

crushes all internal life. Such are the differences among human beings in their

sources of pleasure, their susceptibilities of pain, and the operation on them

of different physical and moral agencies, that unless there is a corresponding

diversity in their modes of life, they neither obtain their fair share of

happiness, nor grow up to the mental, moral, and aesthetic stature of which

their nature is capable. Why then should tolerance, as far as the public

sentiment is concerned, extend only to tastes and modes of life which extort

acquiescence by the multitude of their adherents? Nowhere (except in some

monastic institutions) is diversity of taste entirely unrecognized; a person

may without blame, either like or dislike rowing, or smoking, or music, or

athletic exercises, or chess, or cards, or study, because both those who like

each of these things, and those who dislike them, are too numerous to be put

down. But the man, and still more the woman, who can be accused either of

doing "what nobody does," or of not doing "what everybody does," is thesubject of as much depreciatory remark as if he or she had committed some

grave moral delinquency. Persons require to possess a title, or some other

badge of rank, or the consideration of people of rank, to be able to indulge

somewhat in the luxury of doing as they like without detriment to their

estimation. To indulge somewhat, I repeat: for whoever allow themselves

much of that in dulgence, incur the risk of something worse than disparaging

speeches — they are in peril of a commission de lunatico, and of having their
                                                              3
property taken from them and given to their relations.

              There is one characteristic of the present direction of public opinion,

peculiarly calculated to make it intolerant of any marked demonstration of

individuality. The general average of mankind are not only moderate in

intellect, but also moderate in inclinations: they have no tastes or wishes

strong enough to incline them to do anything unusual, and they consequently

do not understand those who have, and class all such with the wild and

intemperate whom they are accustomed to look down upon. Now, in addition

to this fact which is general, we have only to suppose that a strong movement

has set in towards the improvement of morals, and it is evident what we have

to expect. In these days such a movement has set in; much has actually been

effected in the way of increased regularity of conduct, and discouragement of

excesses; and there is a philanthropic spirit abroad, for the exercise of which

there is no more inviting field than the moral and prudential improvement of

our fellow-creatures. These tendencies of the times cause the public to be

more disposed than at most former periods to prescribe general rules of

conduct, and endeavor to make every one conform to the approved standard.

And that standard, express or tacit, is to desire nothing strongly. Its ideal of

character is to be without any marked character; to maim by compression,

like a Chinese lady's foot, every part of human nature which stands out

prominently, and tends to make the person markedly dissimilar in outline to

commonplace humanity.

              As is usually the case with ideals which exclude one half of what is

desirable, the present standard of approbation produces only an inferior

imitation of the other half. Instead of great energies guided by vigorous

reason, and strong feelings strongly controlled by a conscientious will, its

result is weak feelings and weak energies, which therefore can be kept in

outward conformity to rule without any strength either of will or of reason.

Already energetic characters on any large scale are becoming merelytraditional. There is now scarcely any outlet for energy in this country except

business. The energy expended in that may still be regarded as considerable.

What little is left from that employment, is expended on some hobby; which

may be a useful, even a philanthropic hobby, but is always some one thing,

and generally a thing of small dimensions. The greatness of England is now

all collective: individually small, we only appear capable of anything great by

our habit of combining; and with this our moral and religious philanthropists

are perfectly contented. But it was men of another stamp than this that made

England what it has been; and men of another stamp will be needed to

prevent its decline.

              The despotism of custom is everywhere the standing hindrance to

human advancement, being in unceasing antagonism to that disposition to

aim at something better than customary, which is called, according to

circumstances, the spirit of liberty, or that of progress or improvement. The

spirit of improvement is not always a spirit of liberty, for it may aim at

forcing improvements on an unwilling people; and the spirit of liberty, in so

far as it resists such attempts, may ally itself locally and temporarily with the

opponents of improvement; but the only unfailing and permanent source of

improvement is liberty, since by it there are as many possible independent

centres of improvement as there are individuals. The progressive principle,

however, in either shape, whether as the love of liberty or of improvement, is

antagonistic to the sway of Custom, involving at least emancipation from that

yoke; and the contest between the two constitutes the chief interest of the

history of mankind. The greater part of the world has, properly speaking, no

history, because the despotism of Custom is complete. This is the case over

the whole East. Custom is there, in all things, the final appeal; Justice and

right mean conformity to custom; the argument of custom no one, unless

some tyrant intoxicated with power, thinks of resisting. And we see the result.

Those nations must once have had originality; they did not start out of the

ground populous, lettered, and versed in many of the arts of life; they made

themselves all this, and were then the greatest and most powerful nations in

the world. What are they now? The subjects or dependents of tribes whose

forefathers wandered in the forests when theirs had magnificent palaces and

gorgeous temples, but over whom custom exercised only a divided rule with

liberty and progress. A people, it appears, may be progressive for a certain

length of time, and then stop: when does it stop? When it ceases to possess

individuality. If a similar change should befall the nations of Europe, it willnot be in exactly the same shape: the despotism of custom with which these

nations are threatened is not precisely stationariness. It proscribes singularity,

but it does not preclude change, provided all change together. We have

discarded the fixed costumes of our forefathers; every one must still dress

like other people, but the fashion may change once or twice a year. We thus

take care that when there is change, it shall be for change's sake, and not from

any idea of beauty or convenience; for the same idea of beauty or

convenience would not strike all the world at the same moment, and be

simultaneously thrown aside by all at another moment. But we are

progressive as well as changeable: we continually make new inventions in

mechanical things, and keep them until they are again superseded by better;

we are eager for improvement in politics, in education, even in morals,

though in this last our idea of improvement chiefly consists in persuading or

forcing other people to be as good as ourselves. It is not progress that we

object to; on the contrary, we flatter ourselves that we are the most

progressive people who ever lived. It is individuality that we war against: we

should think we had done wonders if we had made ourselves all alike;

forgetting that the unlikeness of one person to another is generally the first

thing which draws the attention of either to the imperfection of his own type,

and the superiority of another, or the possibility, by combining the

advantages of both, of producing something better than either. We have a

warning example in China — a nation of much talent, and, in some respects,

even wisdom, owing to the rare good fortune of having been provided at an

early period with a particularly good set of customs, the work, in some

measure, of men to whom even the most enlightened European must accord,

under certain limitations, the title of sages and philosophers. They are

remarkable, too, in the excellence of their apparatus for impressing, as far as

possible, the best wisdom they possess upon every mind in the community,

and securing that those who have appropriated most of it shall occupy the

posts of honor and power. Surely the people who did this have discovered the

secret of human progressiveness, and must have kept themselves steadily at

the head of the movement of the world. On the contrary, they have become

stationary — have remained so for thousands of years; and if they are ever to

be farther improved, it must be by foreigners. They have succeeded beyond

all hope in what English philanthropists are so industriously working at — in

making a people all alike, all governing their thoughts and conduct by the

same maxims and rules; and these are the fruits. The modern regime of publicopinion is, in an unorganized form, what the Chinese educational and

political systems are in an organized; and unless individuality shall be able

successfully to assert itself against this yoke, Europe, notwithstanding its

noble antecedents and its professed Christianity, will tend to become another

China.

              What is it that has hitherto preserved Europe from this lot? What has

made the European family of nations an improving, instead of a stationary

portion of mankind? Not any superior excellence in them, which when it

exists, exists as the effect, not as the cause; but their remarkable diversity of

character and culture. Individuals, classes, nations, have been extremely

unlike one another: they have struck out a great variety of paths, each leading

to something valuable; and although at every period those who travelled in

different paths have been intolerant of one another, and each would have

thought it an excellent thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel

his road, their attempts to thwart each other's development have rarely had

any permanent success, and each has in time endured to receive the good

which the others have offered. Europe is, in my judgment, wholly indebted to

this plurality of paths for its progressive and many-sided development. But it

already begins to possess this benefit in a considerably less degree. It is

decidedly advancing towards the Chinese ideal of making all people alike. M.

de Tocqueville, in his last important work, remarks how much more the

Frenchmen of the present day resemble one another, than did those even of

the last generation. The same remark might be made of Englishmen in a far

greater degree. In a passage already quoted from Wilhelm von Humboldt, he

points out two things as necessary conditions of human development, because

necessary to render people unlike one another; namely, freedom, and variety

of situations. The second of these two conditions is in this country every day

diminishing. The circumstances which surround different classes and

individuals, and shape their characters, are daily becoming more assimilated.

Formerly, different ranks, different neighborhoods, different trades and

professions lived in what might be called different worlds; at present, to a

great degree, in the same. Comparatively speaking, they now read the same

things, listen to the same things, see the same things, go to the same places,

have their hopes and fears directed to the same objects, have the same rights

and liberties, and the same means of asserting them. Great as are the

differences of position which remain, they are nothing to those which have

ceased. And the assimilation is still proceeding. All the political changes ofthe age promote it, since they all tend to raise the low and to lower the high.

Every extension of education promotes it, because education brings people

under common influences, and gives them access to the general stock of facts

and sentiments. Improvements in the means of communication promote it, by

bringing the inhabitants of distant places into personal contact, and keeping

up a rapid flow of changes of residence between one place and another. The

increase of commerce and manufactures promotes it, by diffusing more

widely the advantages of easy circumstances, and opening all objects of

ambition, even the highest, to general competition, whereby the desire of

rising becomes no longer the character of a particular class, but of all classes.

A more powerful agency than even all these, in bringing about a general

similarity among mankind, is the complete establishment, in this and other

free countries, of the ascendancy of public opinion in the State. As the

various social eminences which enabled persons entrenched on them to

disregard the opinion of the multitude, gradually became levelled; as the very

idea of resisting the will of the public, when it is positively known that they

have a will, disappears more and more from the minds of practical

politicians; there ceases to be any social support for non-conformity — any

substantive power in society, which, itself opposed to the ascendancy of

numbers, is interested in taking under its protection opinions and tendencies

at variance with those of the public.

              The combination of all these causes forms so great a mass of

influences hostile to Individuality, that it is not easy to see how it can stand

its ground. It will do so with increasing difficulty, unless the intelligent part

of the public can be made to feel its value — to see that it is good there

should be differences, even though not for the better, even though, as it may

appear to them, some should be for the worse. If the claims of Individuality

are ever to be asserted, the time is now, while much is still wanting to

complete the enforced assimilation. It is only in the earlier stages that any

stand can be successfully made against the encroachment. The demand that

all other people shall resemble ourselves, grows by what it feeds on. If

resistance waits till life is reduced nearly to one uniform type, all deviations

from that type will come to be considered impious, immoral, even monstrous

and contrary to nature. Mankind speedily become unable to conceive

diversity, when they have been for some time unaccustomed to see it.

        1
               The Sphere and Duties of Government, from the German of BaronWilhelm von Humboldt, pp. 11-13.

        2
               Sterling's Essays.

        3
               There is something both contemptible and frightful in the sort of

evidence on which, of late years, any person can be judicially declared unfit

for the management of his affairs; and after his death, his disposal of his

property can be set aside, if there is enough of it to pay the expenses of

litigation — which are charged on the property itself. All of the minute

details of his daily life are pried into, and whatever is found which, seen

through the medium of the perceiving and escribing faculties of the lowest of

the low, bears an appearance unlike absolute commonplace, is laid before the

jury as evidence of insanity, and often with success; the jurors being little, if

at all, less vulgar and ignorant than the witnesses; while the judges, with that

extraordinary want of knowledge of human nature and life which continually

astonishes us in English lawyers, often help to mislead them. These trials

speak volumes as to the state of feeling and opinion among the vulgar with

regard to human liberty. So far from setting any value on individuality — so

far from respecting the rights of each individual to act, in things indifferent,

as seems good to his own judgment and inclinations, judges and juries cannot

even conceive that a person in a state of sanity can desire such freedom. In

former days, when it was proposed to burn atheists, charitable people used to

suggest putting them in a madhouse instead: it would be nothing surprising

now-a-days were we to see this done, and the doers applauding themselves,

because, instead of persecuting for religion, they had adopted so humane and

Christian a mode of treating these unfortunates, not without a silent

satisfaction at their having thereby obtained their deserts.

 

 

                                       Chapter 4

 

 

      Of the Limits to the Authority of Society Over the Individual

 

 

              WHAT, then, is the rightful limit to the sovereignty of the individual

over himself? Where does the authority of society begin? How much of

human life should be assigned to individuality, and how much to society?

              Each will receive its proper share, if each has that which more

particularly concerns it. To individuality should belong the part of life in

which it is chiefly the individual that is interested; to society, the part which

chiefly interests society.

              Though society is not founded on a contract, and though no good

purpose is answered by inventing a contract in order to deduce social

obligations from it, every one who receives the protection of society owes a

return for the benefit, and the fact of living in society renders it indispensable

that each should be bound to observe a certain line of conduct towards the

rest. This conduct consists, first, in not injuring the interests of one another;

or rather certain interests, which, either by express legal provision or by tacit

understanding, ought to be considered as rights; and secondly, in each

person's bearing his share (to be fixed on some equitable principle) of the

labors and sacrifices incurred for defending the society or its members from

injury and molestation. These conditions society is justified in enforcing, at

all costs to those who endeavor to withhold fulfilment. Nor is this all that

society may do. The acts of an individual may be hurtful to others, or wanting

in due consideration for their welfare, without going the length of violating

any of their constituted rights. The offender may then be justly punished by

opinion, though not by law. As soon as any part of a person's conduct affects

prejudicially the interests of others, society has jurisdiction over it, and the

question whether the general welfare will or will not be promoted by

interfering with it, becomes open to discussion. But there is no room for

entertaining any such question when a person's conduct affects the interests

of no persons besides himself, or needs not affect them unless they like (allthe persons concerned being of full age, and the ordinary amount of

understanding). In all such cases there should be perfect freedom, legal and

social, to do the action and stand the consequences.

              It would be a great misunderstanding of this doctrine, to suppose that

it is one of selfish indifference, which pretends that human beings have no

business with each other's conduct in life, and that they should not concern

themselves about the well-doing or well-being of one another, unless their

own interest is involved. Instead of any diminution, there is need of a great

increase of disinterested exertion to promote the good of others. But

disinterested benevolence can find other instruments to persuade people to

their good, than whips and scourges, either of the literal or the metaphorical

sort. I am the last person to undervalue the self-regarding virtues; they are

only second in importance, if even second, to the social. It is equally the

business of education to cultivate both. But even education works by

conviction and persuasion as well as by compulsion, and it is by the former

only that, when the period of education is past, the self-regarding virtues

should be inculcated. Human beings owe to each other help to distinguish the

better from the worse, and encouragement to choose the former and avoid the

latter. They should be forever stimulating each other to increased exercise of

their higher faculties, and increased direction of their feelings and aims

towards wise instead of foolish, elevating instead of degrading, objects and

contemplations. But neither one person, nor any number of persons, is

warranted in saying to another human creature of ripe years, that he shall not

do with his life for his own benefit what he chooses to do with it. He is the

person most interested in his own well-being, the interest which any other

person, except in cases of strong personal attachment, can have in it, is

trifling, compared with that which he himself has; the interest which society

has in him individually (except as to his conduct to others) is fractional, and

altogether indirect: while, with respect to his own feelings and circumstances,

the most ordinary man or woman has means of knowledge immeasurably

surpassing those that can be possessed by any one else. The interference of

society to overrule his judgment and purposes in what only regards himself,

must be grounded on general presumptions; which may be altogether wrong,

and even if right, are as likely as not to be misapplied to individual cases, by

persons no better acquainted with the circumstances of such cases than those

are who look at them merely from without. In this department, therefore, of

human affairs, Individuality has its proper field of action. In the conduct ofhuman beings towards one another, it is necessary that general rules should

for the most part be observed, in order that people may know what they have

to expect; but in each person's own concerns, his individual spontaneity is

entitled to free exercise. Considerations to aid his judgment, exhortations to

strengthen his will, may be offered to him, even obtruded on him, by others;

but he, himself, is the final judge. All errors which he is likely to commit

against advice and warning, are far outweighed by the evil of allowing others

to constrain him to what they deem his good.

              I do not mean that the feelings with which a person is regarded by

others, ought not to be in any way affected by his self-regarding qualities or

deficiencies. This is neither possible nor desirable. If he is eminent in any of

the qualities which conduce to his own good, he is, so far, a proper object of

admiration. He is so much the nearer to the ideal perfection of human nature.

If he is grossly deficient in those qualities, a sentiment the opposite of

admiration will follow. There is a degree of folly, and a degree of what may

be called (though the phrase is not unobjectionable) lowness or depravation

of taste, which, though it cannot justify doing harm to the person who

manifests it, renders him necessarily and properly a subject of distaste, or, in

extreme cases, even of contempt: a person could not have the opposite

qualities in due strength without entertaining these feelings. Though doing no

wrong to any one, a person may so act as to compel us to judge him, and feel

to him, as a fool, or as a being of an inferior order: and since this judgment

and feeling are a fact which he would prefer to avoid, it is doing him a

service to warn him of it beforehand, as of any other disagreeable

consequence to which he exposes himself. It would be well, indeed, if this

good office were much more freely rendered than the common notions of

politeness at present permit, and if one person could honestly point out to

another that he thinks him in fault, without being considered unmannerly or

presuming. We have a right, also, in various ways, to act upon our

unfavorable opinion of any one, not to the oppression of his individuality, but

in the exercise of ours. We are not bound, for example, to seek his society;

we have a right to avoid it (though not to parade the avoidance), for we have

a right to choose the society most acceptable to us. We have a right, and it

may be our duty, to caution others against him, if we think his example or

conversation likely to have a pernicious effect on those with whom he

associates. We may give others a preference over him in optional good

offices, except those which tend to his improvement. In these various modesa person may suffer very severe penalties at the hands of others, for faults

which directly concern only himself; but he suffers these penalties only in so

far as they are the natural, and, as it were, the spontaneous consequences of

the faults themselves, not because they are purposely inflicted on him for the

sake of punishment. A person who shows rashness, obstinacy, self-conceit —

who cannot live within moderate means — who cannot restrain himself from

hurtful indulgences — who pursues animal pleasures at the expense of those

of feeling and intellect — must expect to be lowered in the opinion of others,

and to have a less share of their favorable sentiments, but of this he has no

right to complain, unless he has merited their favor by special excellence in

his social relations, and has thus established a title to their good offices,

which is not affected by his demerits towards himself.

              What I contend for is, that the inconveniences which are strictly

inseparable from the unfavorable judgment of others, are the only ones to

which a person should ever be subjected for that portion of his conduct and

character which concerns his own good, but which does not affect the

interests of others in their relations with him. Acts injurious to others require

a totally different treatment. Encroachment on their rights; infliction on them

of any loss or damage not justified by his own rights; falsehood or duplicity

in dealing with them; unfair or ungenerous use of advantages over them; even

selfish abstinence from defending them against injury — these are fit objects

of moral reprobation, and, in grave cases, of moral retribution and

punishment. And not only these acts, but the dispositions which lead to them,

are properly immoral, and fit subjects of disapprobation which may rise to

abhorrence. Cruelty of disposition; malice and ill-nature; that most anti-social

and odious of all passions, envy; dissimulation and insincerity, irascibility on

insufficient cause, and resentment disproportioned to the provocation; the

love of domineering over others; the desire to engross more than one's share

of advantages (the [greekword] of the Greeks); the pride which derives

gratification from the abasement of others; the egotism which thinks self and

its concerns more important than everything else, and decides all doubtful

questions in his own favor — these are moral vices, and constitute a bad and

odious moral character: unlike the self-regarding faults previously mentioned,

which are not properly immoralities, and to whatever pitch they may be

carried, do not constitute wickedness. They may be proofs of any amount of

folly, or want of personal dignity and self-respect; but they are only a subject

of moral reprobation when they involve a breach of duty to others, for whosesake the individual is bound to have care for himself. What are called duties

to ourselves are not socially obligatory, unless circumstances render them at

the same time duties to others. The term duty to oneself, when it means

anything more than prudence, means self-respect or self-development; and

for none of these is any one accountable to his fellow-creatures, because for

none of them is it for the good of mankind that he be held accountable to

them.

              The distinction between the loss of consideration which a person

may rightly incur by defect of prudence or of personal dignity, and the

reprobation which is due to him for an offence against the rights of others, is

not a merely nominal distinction. It makes a vast difference both in our

feelings and in our conduct towards him, whether he displeases us in things

in which we think we have a right to control him, or in things in which we

know that we have not. If he displeases us, we may express our distaste, and

we may stand aloof from a person as well as from a thing that displeases us;

but we shall not therefore feel called on to make his life uncomfortable. We

shall reflect that he already bears, or will bear, the whole penalty of his error;

if he spoils his life by mismanagement, we shall not, for that reason, desire to

spoil it still further: instead of wishing to punish him, we shall rather

endeavor to alleviate his punishment, by showing him how he may avoid or

cure the evils his conduct tends to bring upon him. He may be to us an object

of pity, perhaps of dislike, but not of anger or resentment; we shall not treat

him like an enemy of society: the worst we shall think ourselves justified in

doing is leaving him to himself, If we do not interfere benevolently by

showing interest or concern for him. It is far otherwise if he has infringed the

rules necessary for the protection of his fellow-creatures, individually or

collectively. The evil consequences of his acts do not then fall on himself, but

on others; and society, as the protector of all its members, must retaliate on

him; must inflict pain on him for the express purpose of punishment, and

must take care that it be sufficiently severe. In the one case, he is an offender

at our bar, and we are called on not only to sit in judgment on him, but, in one

shape or another, to execute our own sentence: in the other case, it is not our

part to inflict any suffering on him, except what may incidentally follow from

our using the same liberty in the regulation of our own affairs, which we

allow to him in his.

              The distinction here pointed out between the part of a person's life