 


                  JOHN STUART MILL



                  COMPLETE WORKS


                        –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––

                        M I N E R V A   C L A S S I C S                                        TITLES

 

A SYSTEM OF LOGIC

THE PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY WITH SOME OF THEIR APPLICATIONS
TO SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY

ON LIBERTY

REPRESENTATIVE GOVERNMENT

UTILITARIANISM

THE SUBJECTION OF WOMEN

AUTOBIOGRAPHY


                             A System of Logic

                            Ratiocinative and Inductive,

                          Being a connected view of the

                              Principles of Evidence,

                                        and the

                      Methods of Scientific Investigation.

                                     CONTENTS

 

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
PREFACE TO THE THIRD AND FOURTH EDITIONS.
INTRODUCTION.
BOOK I: OF NAMES AND PROPOSITIONS.
CHAPTER I. – OF THE NECESSITY OF COMMENCING WITH AN ANALYSIS OF LANGUAGE.
CHAPTER II. – OF NAMES.
CHAPTER III. – OF THE THINGS DENOTED BY NAMES.
CHAPTER IV. – OF PROPOSITIONS.
CHAPTER V. – OF THE IMPORT OF PROPOSITIONS.
CHAPTER VI. – OF PROPOSITIONS MERELY VERBAL.
CHAPTER VII. – OF THE NATURE OF CLASSIFICATION, AND THE FIVE PREDICABLES.
CHAPTER VIII. – OF DEFINITION.
BOOK II: OF REASONING.
CHAPTER I. – OF INFERENCE, OR REASONING, IN GENERAL.
CHAPTER II. – OF RATIOCINATION, OR SYLLOGISM.
CHAPTER III. – OF THE FUNCTIONS AND LOGICAL VALUE OF THE SYLLOGISM.
CHAPTER IV. – OF TRAINS OF REASONING, AND DEDUCTIVE SCIENCES.
CHAPTER V. – OF DEMONSTRATION, AND NECESSARY TRUTHS.
CHAPTER VI. – THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.
CHAPTER VII. – EXAMINATION OF SOME OPINIONS OPPOSED TO THE PRECEDING DOCTRINES.
BOOK III: OF INDUCTION.
CHAPTER I. – PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS ON INDUCTION IN GENERAL.
CHAPTER II. – OF INDUCTIONS IMPROPERLY SO CALLED.
CHAPTER III. – OF THE GROUND OF INDUCTION.
CHAPTER IV. – OF LAWS OF NATURE.
CHAPTER V. – OF THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL CAUSATION.
CHAPTER VII. – ON OBSERVATION AND EXPERIMENT.
CHAPTER VIII. – OF THE FOUR METHODS OF EXPERIMENTAL INQUIRY.
CHAPTER IX. – MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES OF THE FOUR METHODS.
CHAPTER X. – OF PLURALITY OF CAUSES, AND OF THE INTERMIXTURE OF EFFECTS.
CHAPTER XI. – OF THE DEDUCTIVE METHOD.
CHAPTER XII. – OF THE EXPLANATION OF LAWS OF NATURE.
CHAPTER XIII. – MISCELLANEOUS EXAMPLES OF THE EXPLANATION OF LAWS OF NATURE.
CHAPTER XIV. – OF THE LIMITS TO THE EXPLANATION OF LAWS OF NATURE; AND OF HYPOTHESES.
CHAPTER XV. – OF PROGRESSIVE EFFECTS; AND OF THE CONTINUED ACTION OF CAUSES.
CHAPTER XVI. – OF EMPIRICAL LAWS.
CHAPTER XVII. – OF CHANCE AND ITS ELIMINATION.
CHAPTER XVIII. – OF THE CALCULATION OF CHANCES.
CHAPTER XIX. – OF THE EXTENSION OF DERIVATIVE LAWS TO ADJACENT CASES.
CHAPTER XX. – OF ANALOGY.
CHAPTER XXI. – OF THE EVIDENCE OF THE LAW OF UNIVERSAL CAUSATION.
CHAPTER XXII. – OF UNIFORMITIES OF CO–EXISTENCE NOT DEPENDENT ON CAUSATION.
CHAPTER XXIII. – OF APPROXIMATE GENERALIZATIONS, AND PROBABLE EVIDENCE.
CHAPTER XXIV. – OF THE REMAINING LAWS OF NATURE.CHAPTER XXV. – OF THE GROUNDS OF DISBELIEF.
BOOK IV: OF OPERATIONS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.
CHAPTER I. – OF OBSERVATION AND DESCRIPTION.
CHAPTER II. – OF ABSTRACTION, OR THE FORMATION OF CONCEPTIONS.
CHAPTER III. – OF NAMING, AS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.
CHAPTER IV. – OF THE REQUISITES OF A PHILOSOPHICAL LANGUAGE, AND THE PRINCIPLES OF DEFINITION.
CHAPTER V. – ON THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE VARIATIONS IN THE MEANING OF TERMS.
CHAPTER VI. – THE PRINCIPLES OF A PHILOSOPHICAL LANGUAGE FURTHER CONSIDERED.
CHAPTER VII. – OF CLASSIFICATION, AS SUBSIDIARY TO INDUCTION.
CHAPTER VIII – OF CLASSIFICATION BY SERIES.
BOOK V: ON FALLACIES.
CHAPTER I. – OF FALLACIES IN GENERAL.
CHAPTER II. – CLASSIFICATION OF FALLACIES.
CHAPTER III. – FALLACIES OF SIMPLE INSPECTION; OR A PRIORI FALLACIES.
CHAPTER IV. – FALLACIES OF OBSERVATION.
CHAPTER V. – FALLACIES OF GENERALIZATION.
CHAPTER VI. – FALLACIES OF RATIOCINATION.
CHAPTER VII. – FALLACIES OF CONFUSION.
BOOK VI: ON THE LOGIC OF THE MORAL SCIENCES.
CHAPTER I. – INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
CHAPTER II. – OF LIBERTY AND NECESSITY.
CHAPTER III. – THAT THERE IS, OR MAY BE, A SCIENCE OF HUMAN NATURE.
CHAPTER IV. – OF THE LAWS OF MIND.
CHAPTER V. – OF ETHOLOGY, OR THE SCIENCE OF THE FORMATION OF CHARACTER.
CHAPTER VI. – GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE SOCIAL SCIENCE.
CHAPTER VII. – OF THE CHEMICAL, OR EXPERIMENTAL, METHOD IN THE SOCIAL SCIENCE.
CHAPTER VIII. – OF THE GEOMETRICAL, OR ABSTRACT, METHOD.
CHAPTER IX. – OF THE PHYSICAL, OR CONCRETE DEDUCTIVE, METHOD.
CHAPTER X. – OF THE INVERSE DEDUCTIVE, OR HISTORICAL, METHOD.
CHAPTER XI. – ADDITIONAL ELUCIDATIONS OF THE SCIENCE OF HISTORY.
CHAPTER XII. – OF THE LOGIC OF PRACTICE, OR ART; INCLUDING MORALITY AND POLICY.                        Preface to the First Edition.

 

 

              This book makes no pretense of giving to the world a new theory of

the intellectual operations. Its claim to attention, if it possess any, is grounded

on the fact that it is an attempt, not to supersede, but to embody and

systematize, the best ideas which have been either promulgated on its subject

by speculative writers, or conformed to by accurate thinkers in their scientific

inquiries.

              To cement together the detached fragments of a subject, never yet

treated as a whole; to harmonize the true portions of discordant theories, by

supplying the links of thought necessary to connect them, and by

disentangling them from the errors with which they are always more or less

interwoven, must necessarily require a considerable amount of original

speculation. To other originality than this, the present work lays no claim. In

the existing state of the cultivation of the sciences, there would be a very

strong presumption against any one who should imagine that he had effected

a revolution in the theory of the investigation of truth, or added any

fundamentally new process to the practice of it. The improvement which

remains to be effected in the methods of philosophizing (and the author

believes that they have much need of improvement) can only consist in

performing more systematically and accurately operations with which, at

least in their elementary form, the human intellect, in some one or other of its

employments, is already familiar.

              In the portion of the work which treats of Ratiocination, the author

has not deemed it necessary to enter into technical details which may be

obtained in so perfect a shape from the existing treatises on what is termed

the Logic of the Schools. In the contempt entertained by many modern

philosophers for the syllogistic art, it will be seen that he by no means

participates; though the scientific theory on which its defense is usually

rested appears to him erroneous: and the view which he has suggested of the

nature and functions of the Syllogism may, perhaps, afford the means of

conciliating the principles of the art with as much as is well grounded in the

doctrines and objections of its assailants.

              The same abstinence from details could not be observed in the FirstBook, on Names and Propositions; because many useful principles and

distinctions which were contained in the old Logic have been gradually

omitted from the writings of its later teachers; and it appeared desirable both

to revive these, and to reform and rationalize the philosophical foundation on

which they stood. The earlier chapters of this preliminary Book will

consequently appear, to some readers, needlessly elementary and scholastic.

But those who know in what darkness the nature of our knowledge, and of

the processes by which it is obtained, is often involved by a confused

apprehension of the import of the different classes of Words and Assertions,

will not regard these discussions as either frivolous, or irrelevant to the topics

considered in the later Books.

              On the subject of Induction, the task to be performed was that of

generalizing the modes of investigating truth and estimating evidence, by

which so many important and recondite laws of nature have, in the various

sciences, been aggregated to the stock of human knowledge. That this is not a

task free from difficulty may be presumed from the fact that even at a very

recent period, eminent writers (among whom it is sufficient to name

Archbishop Whately, and the author of a celebrated article on Bacon in the
                                                                            1
Edinburgh Review ) have not scrupled to pronounce it impossible. The

author has endeavored to combat their theory in the manner in which

Diogenes confuted the skeptical reasonings against the possibility of motion;

remembering that Diogenes’s argument would have been equally conclusive,

though his individual perambulations might not have extended beyond the

circuit of his own tub.

              Whatever may be the value of what the author has succeeded in

effecting on this branch of his subject, it is a duty to acknowledge that for

much of it he has been indebted to several important treatises, partly

historical and partly philosophical, on the generalities and processes of

physical science, which have been published within the last few years. To

these treatises, and to their authors, he has endeavored to do justice in the

body of the work. But as with one of these writers, Dr. Whewell, he has

occasion frequently to express differences of opinion, it is more particularly

incumbent on him in this place to declare, that without the aid derived from

the facts and ideas contained in that gentleman’s “History of the Inductive

Sciences,” the corresponding portion of this work would probably not have

been written.              The concluding Book is an attempt to contribute toward the solution

of a question which the decay of old opinions, and the agitation that disturbs

European society to its inmost depths, render as important in the present day

to the practical interests of human life, as it must at all times be to the

completeness of our speculative knowledge — viz.: Whether moral and

social phenomena are really exceptions to the general certainty and

uniformity of the course of nature; and how far the methods by which so

many of the laws of the physical world have been numbered among truths

irrevocably acquired and universally assented to, can be made instrumental to

the formation of a similar body of received doctrine in moral and political

science.

 

 

               Preface to the Third and Fourth Editions.

 

 

              Several criticisms, of a more or less controversial character, on this

work, have appeared since the publication of the second edition; and Dr.

Whewell has lately published a reply to those parts of it in which some of his
                                2
opinions were controverted.

              I have carefully reconsidered all the points on which my conclusions

have been assailed. But I have not to announce a change of opinion on any

matter of importance. Such minor oversights as have been detected, either by

myself or by my critics, I have, in general silently, corrected: but it is not to

be inferred that I agree with the objections which have been made to a

passage, in every instance in which I have altered or canceled it. I have often

done so, merely that it might not remain a stumbling-block, when the amount

of discussion necessary to place the matter in its true light would have

exceeded what was suitable to the occasion.

              To several of the arguments which have been urged against me, I

have thought it useful to reply with some degree of minuteness; not from any

taste for controversy, but because the opportunity was favorable for placing

my own conclusions, and the grounds of them, more clearly and completely

before the reader. Truth on these subjects is militant, and can only establish

itself by means of conflict. The most opposite opinions can make a plausible

show of evidence while each has the statement of its own case; and it is only

possible to ascertain which of them is in the right, after hearing and

comparing what each can say against the other, and what the other can urge

in its defense.

              Even the criticisms from which I most dissent have been of great

service to me, by showing in what places the exposition most needed to be

improved, or the argument strengthened. And I should have been well

pleased if the book had undergone a much greater amount of attack; as in that

case I should probably have been enabled to improve it still more than I

believe I have now done.

              

              In the subsequent editions, the attempt to improve the work by

additions and corrections, suggested by criticism or by thought, has been

continued. The additions and corrections in the present (eighth) edition,

which are not very considerable, are chiefly such as have been suggested by

Professor Bain’s “Logic,” a book of great merit and value. Mr. Bain’s view

of the science is essentially the same with that taken in the present treatise,

the differences of opinion being few and unimportant compared with the

agreements; and he has not only enriched the exposition by many

applications and illustrative details, but has appended to it a minute and very

valuable discussion of the logical principles specially applicable to each of

the sciences — a task for which the encyclopedical character of his

knowledge peculiarly qualified him. I have in several instances made use of

his exposition to improve my own, by adopting, and occasionally by

controverting, matter contained in his treatise.

              The longest of the additions belongs to the chapter on Causation, and

is a discussion of the question how far, if at all, the ordinary mode of stating

the law of Cause and Effect requires modification to adapt it to the new

doctrine of the Conservation of Force — a point still more fully and

elaborately treated in Mr. Bain’s work.

 

 

                                     Introduction.

 

 

              § 1. There is as great diversity among authors in the modes which

they have adopted of defining logic, as in their treatment of the details of it.

This is what might naturally be expected on any subject on which writers

have availed themselves of the same language as a means of delivering

different ideas. Ethics and jurisprudence are liable to the remark in common

with logic. Almost every writer having taken a different view of some of the

particulars which these branches of knowledge are usually understood to

include; each has so framed his definition as to indicate beforehand his own

peculiar tenets, and sometimes to beg the question in their favor.

              This diversity is not so much an evil to be complained of, as an

inevitable and in some degree a proper result of the imperfect state of those

sciences. It is not to be expected that there should be agreement about the

definition of any thing, until there is agreement about the thing itself. To

define, is to select from among all the properties of a thing, those which shall

be understood to be designated and declared by its name; and the properties

must be well known to us before we can be competent to determine which of

them are fittest to be chosen for this purpose. Accordingly, in the case of so

complex an aggregation of particulars as are comprehended in any thing

which can be called a science, the definition we set out with is seldom that

which a more extensive knowledge of the subject shows to be the most

appropriate. Until we know the particulars themselves, we can not fix upon

the most correct and compact mode of circumscribing them by a general

description. It was not until after an extensive and accurate acquaintance with

the details of chemical phenomena, that it was found possible to frame a

rational definition of chemistry; and the definition of the science of life and

organization is still a matter of dispute. So long as the sciences are imperfect,

the definitions must partake of their imperfection; and if the former are

progressive, the latter ought to be so too. As much, therefore, as is to be

expected from a definition placed at the commencement of a subject, is that it

should define the scope of our inquiries: and the definition which I am about

to offer of the science of logic, pretends to nothing more than to be astatement of the question which I have put to myself, and which this book is

an attempt to resolve. The reader is at liberty to object to it as a definition of

logic; but it is at all events a correct definition of the subject of this volume.

                                                                                    3
              § 2. Logic has often been called the Art of Reasoning. A writer who

has done more than any other person to restore this study to the rank from

which it had fallen in the estimation of the cultivated class in our own

country, has adopted the above definition with an amendment; he has defined

Logic to be the Science, as well as the Art, of reasoning; meaning by the

former term, the analysis of the mental process which takes place whenever

we reason, and by the latter, the rules, grounded on that analysis, for

conducting the process correctly. There can be no doubt as to the propriety of

the emendation. A right understanding of the mental process itself, of the

conditions it depends on, and the steps of which it consists, is the only basis

on which a system of rules, fitted for the direction of the process, can

possibly be founded. Art necessarily presupposes knowledge; art, in any but

its infant state, presupposes scientific knowledge: and if every art does not

bear the name of a science, it is only because several sciences are often

necessary to form the groundwork of a single art. So complicated are the

conditions which govern our practical agency, that to enable one thing to be

done , it is often requisite to know the nature and properties of many things.

              Logic, then, comprises the science of reasoning, as well as an art,

founded on that science. But the word Reasoning, again, like most other

scientific terms in popular use, abounds in ambiguities. In one of its

acceptations, it means syllogizing; or the mode of inference which may be

called (with sufficient accuracy for the present purpose) concluding from

generals to particulars. In another of its senses, to reason is simply to infer

any assertion, from assertions already admitted: and in this sense induction is

as much entitled to be called reasoning as the demonstrations of geometry.

              Writers on logic have generally preferred the former acceptation of

the term: the latter, and more extensive signification is that in which I mean

to use it. I do this by virtue of the right I claim for every author, to give

whatever provisional definition he pleases of his own subject. But sufficient

reasons will, I believe, unfold themselves as we advance, why this should be

not only the provisional but the final definition. It involves, at all events, no

arbitrary change in the meaning of the word; for, with the general usage of

the English language, the wider signification, I believe, accords better thanthe more restricted one.

              § 3. But reasoning, even in the widest sense of which the word is

susceptible, does not seem to comprehend all that is included, either in the

best, or even in the most current, conception of the scope and province of our

science. The employment of the word Logic to denote the theory of

Argumentation, is derived from the Aristotelian, or, as they are commonly

termed, the scholastic, logicians. Yet even with them, in their systematic

treatises, Argumentation was the subject only of the third part: the two former

treated of Terms, and of Propositions; under one or other of which heads

were also included Definition and Division. By some, indeed, these previous

topics were professedly introduced only on account of their connection with

reasoning, and as a preparation for the doctrine and rules of the syllogism.

Yet they were treated with greater minuteness, and dwelt on at greater length,

than was required for that purpose alone. More recent writers on logic have

generally understood the term as it was employed by the able author of the

Port Royal Logic; viz., as equivalent to the Art of Thinking. Nor is this

acceptation confined to books, and scientific inquiries. Even in ordinary

conversation, the ideas connected with the word Logic include at least

precision of language, and accuracy of classification: and we perhaps oftener

hear persons speak of a logical arrangement, or of expressions logically

defined, than of conclusions logically deduced from premises. Again, a man

is often called a great logician, or a man of powerful logic, not for the

accuracy of his deductions, but for the extent of his command over premises;

because the general propositions required for explaining a difficulty or

refuting a sophism, copiously and promptly occur to him: because, in short,

his knowledge, besides being ample, is well under his command for

argumentative use. Whether, therefore, we conform to the practice of those

who have made the subject their particular study, or to that of popular writers

and common discourse, the province of logic will include several operations

of the intellect not usually considered to fall within the meaning of the terms

Reasoning and Argumentation.

              These various operations might be brought within the compass of the

science, and the additional advantage be obtained of a very simple definition,

if, by an extension of the term, sanctioned by high authorities, we were to

define logic as the science which treats of the operations of the human

understanding in the pursuit of truth. For to this ultimate end, naming,classification, definition, and all other operations over which logic has ever

claimed jurisdiction, are essentially subsidiary. They may all be regarded as

contrivances for enabling a person to know the truths which are needful to

him, and to know them at the precise moment at which they are needful.

Other purposes, indeed, are also served by these operations; for instance, that

of imparting our knowledge to others. But, viewed with regard to this

purpose, they have never been considered as within the province of the

logician. The sole object of Logic is the guidance of one’s own thoughts: the

communication of those thoughts to others falls under the consideration of

Rhetoric, in the large sense in which that art was conceived by the ancients;

or of the still more extensive art of Education. Logic takes cognizance of our

intellectual operations only as they conduce to our own knowledge, and to

our command over that knowledge for our own uses. If there were but one

rational being in the universe, that being might be a perfect logician; and the

science and art of logic would be the same for that one person as for the

whole human race.

              § 4. But, if the definition which we formerly examined included too

little, that which is now suggested has the opposite fault of including too

much.

              Truths are known to us in two ways: some are known directly, and

of themselves; some through the medium of other truths. The former are the
                                            4
subject of Intuition, or Consciousness; the latter, of Inference. The truths

known by intuition are the original premises from which all others are

inferred. Our assent to the conclusion being grounded on the truth of the

premises, we never could arrive at any knowledge by reasoning, unless

something could be known antecedently to all reasoning.

              Examples of truths known to us by immediate consciousness, are our

own bodily sensations and mental feelings. I know directly, and of my own

knowledge, that I was vexed yesterday, or that I am hungry to-day. Examples

of truths which we know only by way of inference, are occurrences which

took place while we were absent, the events recorded in history, or the

theorems of mathematics. The two former we infer from the testimony

adduced, or from the traces of those past occurrences which still exist; the

latter, from the premises laid down in books of geometry, under the title of

definitions and axioms. Whatever we are capable of knowing must belong to

the one class or to the other; must be in the number of the primitive data, orof the conclusions which can be drawn from these.

              With the original data, or ultimate premises of our knowledge; with

their number or nature, the mode in which they are obtained, or the tests by

which they may be distinguished; logic, in a direct way at least, has, in the

sense in which I conceive the science, nothing to do. These questions are

partly not a subject of science at all, partly that of a very different science.

              Whatever is known to us by consciousness is known beyond

possibility of question. What one sees or feels, whether bodily or mentally,

one can not but be sure that one sees or feels. No science is required for the

purpose of establishing such truths; no rules of art can render our knowledge

of them more certain than it is in itself. There is no logic for this portion of

our knowledge.

              But we may fancy that we see or feel what we in reality infer. A

truth, or supposed truth, which is really the result of a very rapid inference,

may seem to be apprehended intuitively. It has long been agreed by thinkers

of the most opposite schools, that this mistake is actually made in so familiar

an instance as that of the eyesight. There is nothing of which we appear to

ourselves to be more directly conscious than the distance of an object from

us. Yet it has long been ascertained, that what is perceived by the eye, is at

most nothing more than a variously colored surface; that when we fancy we

see distance, all we really see is certain variations of apparent size, and

degrees of faintness of color; that our estimate of the object’s distance from

us is the result partly of a rapid inference from the muscular sensations

accompanying the adjustment of the focal distance of the eye to objects

unequally remote from us, and partly of a comparison (made with so much

rapidity that we are unconscious of making it) between the size and color of

the object as they appear at the time, and the size and color of the same or of

similar objects as they appeared when close at hand, or when their degree of

remoteness was known by other evidence. The perception of distance by the

eye, which seems so like intuition, is thus, in reality, an inference grounded

on experience; an inference, too, which we learn to make; and which we

make with more and more correctness as our experience increases; though in

familiar cases it takes place so rapidly as to appear exactly on a par with
                                                                                          5
those perceptions of sight which are really intuitive, our perceptions of color.

              Of the science, therefore, which expounds the operations of thehuman understanding in the pursuit of truth, one essential part is the inquiry:

What are the facts which are the objects of intuition or consciousness, and

what are those which we merely infer? But this inquiry has never been

considered a portion of logic. Its place is in another and a perfectly distinct

department of science, to which the name metaphysics more particularly

belongs: that portion of mental philosophy which attempts to determine what

part of the furniture of the mind belongs to it originally, and what part is

constructed out of materials furnished to it from without. To this science

appertain the great and much debated questions of the existence of matter; the

existence of spirit, and of a distinction between it and matter; the reality of

time and space, as things without the mind, and distinguishable from the

objects which are said to exist in them. For in the present state of the

discussion on these topics, it is almost universally allowed that the existence

of matter or of spirit, of space or of time, is in its nature unsusceptible of

being proved; and that if any thing is known of them, it must be by

immediate intuition. To the same science belong the inquiries into the nature

of Conception, Perception, Memory, and Belief; all of which are operations

of the understanding in the pursuit of truth; but with which, as phenomena of

the mind, or with the possibility which may or may not exist of analyzing any

of them into simpler phenomena, the logician as such has no concern. To this

science must also be referred the following, and all analogous questions: To

what extent our intellectual faculties and our emotions are innate — to what

extent the result of association: Whether God and duty are realities, the

existence of which is manifest to us a priori by the constitution of our

rational faculty; or whether our ideas of them are acquired notions, the origin

of which we are able to trace and explain; and the reality of the objects

themselves a question not of consciousness or intuition, but of evidence and

reasoning.

              The province of logic must be restricted to that portion of our

knowledge which consists of inferences from truths previously known;

whether those antecedent data be general propositions, or particular

observations and perceptions. Logic is not the science of Belief, but the

science of Proof, or Evidence. In so far as belief professes to be founded on

proof, the office of logic is to supply a test for ascertaining whether or not the

belief is well grounded. With the claims which any proposition has to belief

on the evidence of consciousness — that is, without evidence in the proper

sense of the word — logic has nothing to do.              § 5. By far the greatest portion of our knowledge, whether of general

truths or of particular facts, being avowedly matter of inference, nearly the

whole, not only of science, but of human conduct, is amenable to the

authority of logic. To draw inferences has been said to be the great business

of life. Every one has daily, hourly, and momentary need of ascertaining facts

which he has not directly observed; not from any general purpose of adding

to his stock of knowledge, but because the facts themselves are of importance

to his interests or to his occupations. The business of the magistrate, of the

military commander, of the navigator, of the physician, of the agriculturist, is

merely to judge of evidence, and to act accordingly. They all have to

ascertain certain facts, in order that they may afterward apply certain rules,

either devised by themselves or prescribed for their guidance by others; and

as they do this well or ill, so they discharge well or ill the duties of their

several callings. It is the only occupation in which the mind never ceases to

be engaged; and is the subject, not of logic, but of knowledge in general.

              Logic, however, is not the same thing with knowledge, though the

field of logic is co-extensive with the field of knowledge. Logic is the

common judge and arbiter of all particular investigations. It does not

undertake to find evidence, but to determine whether it has been found. Logic

neither observes, nor invents, nor discovers; but judges. It is no part of the

business of logic to inform the surgeon what appearances are found to

accompany a violent death. This he must learn from his own experience and

observation, or from that of others, his predecessors in his peculiar pursuit.

But logic sits in judgment on the sufficiency of that observation and

experience to justify his rules, and on the sufficiency of his rules to justify his

conduct. It does not give him proofs, but teaches him what makes them

proofs, and how he is to judge of them. It does not teach that any particular

fact proves any other, but points out to what conditions all facts must

conform, in order that they may prove other facts. To decide whether any

given fact fulfills these conditions, or whether facts can be found which fulfill

them in a given case, belongs exclusively to the particular art or science, or to

our knowledge of the particular subject.

              It is in this sense that logic is, what it was so expressively called by

the schoolmen and by Bacon, ars artium ; the science of science itself. All

science consists of data and conclusions from those data, of proofs and what

they prove: now logic points out what relations must subsist between dataand whatever can be concluded from them, between proof and every thing

which it can prove. If there be any such indispensable relations, and if these

can be precisely determined, every particular branch of science, as well as

every individual in the guidance of his conduct, is bound to conform to those

relations, under the penalty of making false inferences — of drawing

conclusions which are not grounded in the realities of things. Whatever has at

any time been concluded justly, whatever knowledge has been acquired

otherwise than by immediate intuition, depended on the observance of the

laws which it is the province of logic to investigate. If the conclusions are

just, and the knowledge real, those laws, whether known or not, have been

observed.

              § 6. We need not, therefore, seek any further for a solution of the

question, so often agitated, respecting the utility of logic. If a science of logic

exists, or is capable of existing, it must be useful. If there be rules to which

every mind consciously or unconsciously conforms in every instance in

which it infers rightly, there seems little necessity for discussing whether a

person is more likely to observe those rules, when he knows the rules, than

when he is unacquainted with them.

              A science may undoubtedly be brought to a certain, not

inconsiderable, stage of advancement, without the application of any other

logic to it than what all persons, who are said to have a sound understanding,

acquire empirically in the course of their studies. Mankind judged of

evidence, and often correctly, before logic was a science, or they never could

have made it one. And they executed great mechanical works before they

understood the laws of mechanics. But there are limits both to what

mechanicians can do without principles of mechanics, and to what thinkers

can do without principles of logic. A few individuals, by extraordinary

genius, or by the accidental acquisition of a good set of intellectual habits,

may work without principles in the same way, or nearly the same way, in

which they would have worked if they had been in possession of principles.

But the bulk of mankind require either to understand the theory of what they

are doing, or to have rules laid down for them by those who have understood

the theory. In the progress of science from its easiest to its more difficult

problems, each great step in advance has usually had either as its precursor,

or as its accompaniment and necessary condition, a corresponding

improvement in the notions and principles of logic received among the mostadvanced thinkers. And if several of the more difficult sciences are still in so

defective a state; if not only so little is proved, but disputation has not

terminated even about the little which seemed to be so; the reason perhaps is,

that men’s logical notions have not yet acquired the degree of extension, or of

accuracy, requisite for the estimation of the evidence proper to those

particular departments of knowledge.

              § 7. Logic, then, is the science of the operations of the understanding

which are subservient to the estimation of evidence: both the process itself of

advancing from known truths to unknown, and all other intellectual

operations in so far as auxiliary to this. It includes, therefore, the operation of

Naming; for language is an instrument of thought, as well as a means of

communicating our thoughts. It includes, also, Definition, and Classification.

For, the use of these operations (putting all other minds than one’s own out of

consideration) is to serve not only for keeping our evidences and the

conclusions from them permanent and readily accessible in the memory, but

for so marshaling the facts which we may at any time be engaged in

investigating, as to enable us to perceive more clearly what evidence there is,

and to judge with fewer chances of error whether it be sufficient. These,

therefore, are operations specially instrumental to the estimation of evidence,

and, as such, are within the province of Logic. There are other more

elementary processes, concerned in all thinking, such as Conception,

Memory, and the like; but of these it is not necessary that Logic should take

any peculiar cognizance, since they have no special connection with the

problem of Evidence, further than that, like all other problems addressed to

the understanding, it presupposes them.

              Our object, then, will be, to attempt a correct analysis of the

intellectual process called Reasoning or Inference, and of such other mental

operations as are intended to facilitate this: as well as, on the foundation of

this analysis, and pari passu with it, to bring together or frame a set of rules

or canons for testing the sufficiency of any given evidence to prove any given

proposition.

              With respect to the first part of this undertaking, I do not attempt to

decompose the mental operations in question into their ultimate elements. It

is enough if the analysis as far as it goes is correct, and if it goes far enough

for the practical purposes of logic considered as an art. The separation of a

complicated phenomenon into its component parts is not like a connected andinterdependent chain of proof. If one link of an argument breaks, the whole

drops to the ground; but one step toward an analysis holds good and has an

independent value, though we should never be able to make a second. The

results which have been obtained by analytical chemistry are not the less

valuable, though it should be discovered that all which we now call simple

substances are really compounds. All other things are at any rate

compounded of those elements: whether the elements themselves admit of

decomposition, is an important inquiry, but does not affect the certainty of

the science up to that point.

              I shall, accordingly, attempt to analyze the process of inference, and

the processes subordinate to inference, so far only as may be requisite for

ascertaining the difference between a correct and an incorrect performance of

those processes. The reason for thus limiting our design, is evident. It has

been said by objectors to logic, that we do not learn to use our muscles by

studying their anatomy. The fact is not quite fairly stated; for if the action of

any of our muscles were vitiated by local weakness, or other physical defect,

a knowledge of their anatomy might be very necessary for effecting a cure.

But we should be justly liable to the criticism involved in this objection, were

we, in a treatise on logic, to carry the analysis of the reasoning process

beyond the point at which any inaccuracy which may have crept into it must

become visible. In learning bodily exercises (to carry on the same illustration)

we do, and must, analyze the bodily motions so far as is necessary for

distinguishing those which ought to be performed from those which ought

not. To a similar extent, and no further, it is necessary that the logician should

analyze the mental processes with which Logic is concerned. Logic has no

interest in carrying the analysis beyond the point at which it becomes

apparent whether the operations have in any individual case been rightly or

wrongly performed: in the same manner as the science of music teaches us to

discriminate between musical notes, and to know the combinations of which

they are susceptible, but not what number of vibrations in a second

correspond to each; which, though useful to be known, is useful for totally

different purposes. The extension of Logic as a Science is determined by its

necessities as an Art: whatever it does not need for its practical ends, it leaves

to the larger science which may be said to correspond, not to any particular

art, but to art in general; the science which deals with the constitution of the

human faculties; and to which, in the part of our mental nature which

concerns Logic, as well as in all other parts, it belongs to decide what areultimate facts, and what are resolvable into other facts. And I believe it will

be found that most of the conclusions arrived at in this work have no

necessary connection with any particular views respecting the ulterior

analysis. Logic is common ground on which the partisans of Hartley and of

Reid, of Locke and of Kant, may meet and join hands. Particular and

detached opinions of all these thinkers will no doubt occasionally be

controverted, since all of them were logicians as well as metaphysicians; but

the field on which their principal battles have been fought, lies beyond the

boundaries of our science.

              It can not, indeed, be pretended that logical principles can be

altogether irrelevant to those more abstruse discussions; nor is it possible but

that the view we are led to take of the problem which logic proposes, must

have a tendency favorable to the adoption of some one opinion, on these

controverted subjects, rather than another. For metaphysics, in endeavoring to

solve its own peculiar problem, must employ means, the validity of which

falls under the cognizance of logic. It proceeds, no doubt, as far as possible,

merely by a closer and more attentive interrogation of our consciousness, or

more properly speaking, of our memory; and so far is not amenable to logic.

But wherever this method is insufficient to attain the end of its inquiries, it

must proceed, like other sciences, by means of evidence. Now, the moment

this science begins to draw inferences from evidence, logic becomes the

sovereign judge whether its inferences are well grounded, or what other

inferences would be so.

              This, however, constitutes no nearer or other relation between logic

and metaphysics, than that which exists between logic and every other

science. And I can conscientiously affirm that no one proposition laid down

in this work has been adopted for the sake of establishing, or with any

reference to its fitness for being employed in establishing, preconceived

opinions in any department of knowledge or of inquiry on which the
                                        6
speculative world is still undecided.

 

 

                   Book I: Of names and propositions.

 

 

              “La scolastique, qui produisit dans la logique, comme dans la

morale, et dans une partie de la métaphysique, une subtilité, une précision

d’idées, dont l’habitude inconnue aux anciens, a contribué plus qu’on ne croit

au progrès de la bonne philosophie.” — CONDORCET, Vie de Turgot .

              “To the schoolmen the vulgar languages are principally indebted for

what precision and analytic subtlety they possess.” — SIR W. HAMILTON,

Discussions in Philosophy .

 

 

   Chapter I. – Of The Necessity Of Commencing With An Analysis Of

                                      Language.

 

 

              § 1. It is so much the established practice of writers on logic to

commence their treatises by a few general observations (in most cases, it is

true, rather meagre) on Terms and their varieties, that it will, perhaps,

scarcely be required from me, in merely following the common usage, to be

as particular in assigning my reasons, as it is usually expected that those

should be who deviate from it.

              The practice, indeed, is recommended by considerations far too

obvious to require a formal justification. Logic is a portion of the Art of

Thinking: Language is evidently, and by the admission of all philosophers,

one of the principal instruments or helps of thought; and any imperfection in

the instrument, or in the mode of employing it, is confessedly liable, still

more than in almost any other art, to confuse and impede the process, and

destroy all ground of confidence in the result. For a mind not previously

versed in the meaning and right use of the various kinds of words, to attempt

the study of methods of philosophizing, would be as if some one should

attempt to become an astronomical observer, having never learned to adjust

the focal distance of his optical instruments so as to see distinctly.

              Since Reasoning, or Inference, the principal subject of logic, is an

operation which usually takes place by means of words, and in complicated

cases can take place in no other way; those who have not a thorough insight

into the signification and purposes of words, will be under chances,

amounting almost to certainty, of reasoning or inferring incorrectly. And

logicians have generally felt that unless, in the very first stage, they removed

this source of error; unless they taught their pupil to put away the glasses

which distort the object, and to use those which are adapted to his purpose in

such a manner as to assist, not perplex, his vision; he would not be in a

condition to practice the remaining part of their discipline with any prospect

of advantage. Therefore it is that an inquiry into language, so far as is needful

to guard against the errors to which it gives rise, has at all times been deemed

a necessary preliminary to the study of logic.              But there is another reason, of a still more fundamental nature, why

the import of words should be the earliest subject of the logician’s

consideration: because without it he can not examine into the import of

Propositions. Now this is a subject which stands on the very threshold of the

science of logic.

              The object of logic, as defined in the Introductory Chapter, is to

ascertain how we come by that portion of our knowledge (much the greatest

portion) which is not intuitive: and by what criterion we can, in matters not

self-evident, distinguish between things proved and things not proved,

between what is worthy and what is unworthy of belief. Of the various

questions which present themselves to our inquiring faculties, some receive

an answer from direct consciousness, others, if resolved at all, can only be

resolved by means of evidence. Logic is concerned with these last. But before

inquiring into the mode of resolving questions, it is necessary to inquire what

are those which offer themselves; what questions are conceivable; what

inquiries are there, to which mankind have either obtained, or been able to

imagine it possible that they should obtain, an answer. This point is best

ascertained by a survey and analysis of Propositions.

              § 2. The answer to every question which it is possible to frame, must

be contained in a Proposition, or Assertion. Whatever can be an object of

belief, or even of disbelief, must, when put into words, assume the form of a

proposition. All truth and all error lie in propositions. What, by a convenient

misapplication of an abstract term, we call a Truth, means simply a True

Proposition; and errors are false propositions. To know the import of all

possible propositions would be to know all questions which can be raised, all

matters which are susceptible of being either believed or disbelieved. How

many kinds of inquiries can be propounded; how many kinds of judgments

can be made; and how many kinds of propositions it is possible to frame with

a meaning, are but different forms of one and the same question. Since, then,

the objects of all Belief and of all Inquiry express themselves in propositions,

a sufficient scrutiny of Propositions and of their varieties will apprise us what

questions mankind have actually asked of themselves, and what, in the nature

of answers to those questions, they have actually thought they had grounds to

believe.

              Now the first glance at a proposition shows that it is formed by

putting together two names. A proposition, according to the common simpledefinition, which is sufficient for our purpose is, discourse, in which

something is affirmed or denied of something . Thus, in the proposition, Gold

is yellow, the quality yellow is affirmed of the substance gold . In the

proposition, Franklin was not born in England, the fact expressed by the

words born in England is denied of the man Franklin.

              Every proposition consists of three parts: the Subject, the Predicate,

and the Copula. The predicate is the name denoting that which is affirmed or

denied. The subject is the name denoting the person or thing which

something is affirmed or denied of. The copula is the sign denoting that there

is an affirmation or denial, and thereby enabling the hearer or reader to

distinguish a proposition from any other kind of discourse. Thus, in the

proposition, The earth is round, the Predicate is the word round , which

denotes the quality affirmed, or (as the phrase is) predicated: the earth ,

words denoting the object which that quality is affirmed of, compose the

Subject; the word is , which serves as the connecting mark between the

subject and predicate, to show that one of them is affirmed of the other, is

called the Copula.

              Dismissing, for the present, the copula, of which more will be said

hereafter, every proposition, then, consists of at least two names — brings

together two names, in a particular manner. This is already a first step toward

what we are in quest of. It appears from this, that for an act of belief, one

object is not sufficient; the simplest act of belief supposes, and has something

to do with, two objects — two names, to say the least; and (since the names

must be names of something) two namable things . A large class of thinkers

would cut the matter short by saying, two ideas . They would say, that the

subject and predicate are both of them names of ideas; the idea of gold, for

instance, and the idea of yellow; and that what takes place (or part of what

takes place) in the act of belief consists in bringing (as it is often expressed)

one of these ideas under the other. But this we are not yet in a condition to

say: whether such be the correct mode of describing the phenomenon, is an

after consideration. The result with which for the present we must be

contented, is, that in every act of belief two objects are in some manner taken

cognizance of; that there can be no belief claimed, or question propounded,

which does not embrace two distinct (either material or intellectual) subjects

of thought; each of them capable, or not, of being conceived by itself, but

incapable of being believed by itself.              I may say, for instance, “the sun.” The word has a meaning, and

suggests that meaning to the mind of any one who is listening to me. But

suppose I ask him, Whether it is true: whether he believes it? He can give no

answer. There is as yet nothing to believe, or to disbelieve. Now, however, let

me make, of all possible assertions respecting the sun, the one which involves

the least of reference to any object besides itself; let me say, “the sun exists.”

Here, at once, is something which a person can say he believes. But here,

instead of only one, we find two distinct objects of conception: the sun is one

object; existence is another. Let it not be said that this second conception,

existence, is involved in the first; for the sun may be conceived as no longer

existing. “The sun” does not convey all the meaning that is conveyed by “the

sun exists:” “my father” does not include all the meaning of “my father

exists,” for he may be dead; “a round square” does not include the meaning

of “a round square exists,” for it does not and can not exist. When I say “the

sun,” “my father,” or a “round square,” I do not call upon the hearer for any

belief or disbelief, nor can either the one or the other be afforded me; but if I

say, “the sun exists,” “my father exists,” or “a round square exists,” I call for

belief; and should, in the first of the three instances, meet with it; in the

second, with belief or disbelief, as the case might be; in the third, with

disbelief.

              § 3. This first step in the analysis of the object of belief, which,

though so obvious, will be found to be not unimportant, is the only one which

we shall find it practicable to make without a preliminary survey of language.

If we attempt to proceed further in the same path, that is, to analyze any

further the import of Propositions; we find forced upon us, as a subject of

previous consideration, the import of Names. For every proposition consists

of two names; and every proposition affirms or denies one of these names, of

the other. Now what we do, what passes in our mind, when we affirm or deny

two names of one another, must depend on what they are names of; since it is

with reference to that, and not to the mere names themselves, that we make

the affirmation or denial. Here, therefore, we find a new reason why the

signification of names, and the relation generally between names and the

things signified by them, must occupy the preliminary stage of the inquiry we

are engaged in.

              It may be objected that the meaning of names can guide us at most

only to the opinions, possibly the foolish and groundless opinions, whichmankind have formed concerning things, and that as the object of philosophy

is truth, not opinion, the philosopher should dismiss words and look into

things themselves, to ascertain what questions can be asked and answered in

regard to them. This advice (which no one has it in his power to follow) is in

reality an exhortation to discard the whole fruits of the labors of his

predecessors, and conduct himself as if he were the first person who had ever

turned an inquiring eye upon nature. What does any one’s personal

knowledge of Things amount to, after subtracting all which he has acquired

by means of the words of other people? Even after he has learned as much as

people usually do learn from others, will the notions of things contained in

his individual mind afford as sufficient a basis for a catalogue raisonné as the

notions which are in the minds of all mankind?

              In any enumeration and classification of Things, which does not set

out from their names, no varieties of things will of course be comprehended

but those recognized by the particular inquirer; and it will still remain to be

established, by a subsequent examination of names, that the enumeration has

omitted nothing which ought to have been included. But if we begin with

names, and use them as our clue to the things, we bring at once before us all

the distinctions which have been recognized, not by a single inquirer, but by

all inquirers taken together. It doubtless may, and I believe it will, be found,

that mankind have multiplied the varieties unnecessarily, and have imagined

distinctions among things, where there were only distinctions in the manner

of naming them. But we are not entitled to assume this in the commencement.

We must begin by recognizing the distinctions made by ordinary language. If

some of these appear, on a close examination, not to be fundamental, the

enumeration of the different kinds of realities may be abridged accordingly.

But to impose upon the facts in the first instance the yoke of a theory, while

the grounds of the theory are reserved for discussion in a subsequent stage, is

not a course which a logician can reasonably adopt.

 

 

                               Chapter II. – Of Names.

 

 
                                          7
              § 1. “A name,” says Hobbes, “is a word taken at pleasure to serve

for a mark which may raise in our mind a thought like to some thought we

had before, and which being pronounced to others, may be to them a sign of
                                8
what thought the speaker had before in his mind.” This simple definition of a

name, as a word (or set of words) serving the double purpose of a mark to

recall to ourselves the likeness of a former thought, and a sign to make it

known to others, appears unexceptionable. Names, indeed, do much more

than this; but whatever else they do, grows out of, and is the result of this: as

will appear in its proper place.

              Are names more properly said to be the names of things, or of our

ideas of things? The first is the expression in common use; the last is that of

some metaphysicians, who conceived that in adopting it they were

introducing a highly important distinction. The eminent thinker, just quoted,

seems to countenance the latter opinion. “But seeing,” he continues, “names

ordered in speech (as is defined) are signs of our conceptions, it is manifest

they are not signs of the things themselves; for that the sound of this word

stone should be the sign of a stone, can not be understood in any sense but

this, that he that hears it collects that he that pronounces it thinks of a stone.”

              If it be merely meant that the conception alone, and not the thing

itself, is recalled by the name, or imparted to the hearer, this of course can not

be denied. Nevertheless, there seems good reason for adhering to the

common usage, and calling (as indeed Hobbes himself does in other places)

the word sun the name of the sun, and not the name of our idea of the sun.

For names are not intended only to make the hearer conceive what we

conceive, but also to inform him what we believe. Now, when I use a name

for the purpose of expressing a belief, it is a belief concerning the thing itself,

not concerning my idea of it. When I say, “the sun is the cause of day,” I do

not mean that my idea of the sun causes or excites in me the idea of day; or in

other words, that thinking of the sun makes me think of day. I mean, that a

certain physical fact, which is called the sun’s presence (and which, in the

ultimate analysis, resolves itself into sensations, not ideas) causes another

physical fact, which is called day. It seems proper to consider a word as thename of that which we intend to be understood by it when we use it; of that

which any fact that we assert of it is to be understood of; that, in short,

concerning which, when we employ the word, we intend to give information.

Names, therefore, shall always be spoken of in this work as the names of

things themselves, and not merely of our ideas of things.

              But the question now arises, of what things? and to answer this it is

necessary to take into consideration the different kinds of names.

              § 2. It is usual, before examining the various classes into which

names are commonly divided, to begin by distinguishing from names of

every description, those words which are not names, but only parts of names.

Among such are reckoned particles, as of , to , truly , often ; the inflected

cases of nouns substantive, as me , him , John’s ; and even adjectives, as

large , heavy . These words do not express things of which any thing can be

affirmed or denied. We can not say, Heavy fell, or A heavy fell; Truly, or A

truly, was asserted; Of, or An of, was in the room. Unless, indeed, we are

speaking of the mere words themselves, as when we say, Truly is an English

word, or, Heavy is an adjective. In that case they are complete names — viz.,

names of those particular sounds, or of those particular collections of written

characters. This employment of a word to denote the mere letters and

syllables of which it is composed, was termed by the schoolmen the

suppositio materialis of the word. In any other sense we can not introduce

one of these words into the subject of a proposition, unless in combination

with other words; as, A heavy body fell, A truly important fact was asserted,

A member of parliament was in the room.

              An adjective, however, is capable of standing by itself as the

predicate of a proposition; as when we say, Snow is white; and occasionally

even as the subject, for we may say, White is an agreeable color. The

adjective is often said to be so used by a grammatical ellipsis: Snow is white,

instead of Snow is a white object; White is an agreeable color, instead of, A

white color, or, The color white, is agreeable. The Greeks and Romans were

allowed, by the rules of their language, to employ this ellipsis universally in

the subject as well as in the predicate of a proposition. In English this can not,

generally speaking, be done. We may say, The earth is round; but we can not

say, Round is easily moved; we must say, A round object. This distinction,

however, is rather grammatical than logical. Since there is no difference of

meaning between round , and a round object , it is only custom whichprescribes that on any given occasion one shall be used, and not the other.

We shall, therefore, without scruple, speak of adjectives as names, whether in

their own right, or as representative of the more circuitous forms of

expression above exemplified. The other classes of subsidiary words have no

title whatever to be considered as names. An adverb, or an accusative case,

can not under any circumstances (except when their mere letters and syllables

are spoken of) figure as one of the terms of a proposition.

              Words which are not capable of being used as names, but only as

parts of names, were called by some of the schoolmen Syncategorematic

terms: from σὺν, with, and κατηγορέω, to predicate, because it was only with

some other word that they could be predicated. A word which could be used

either as the subject or predicate of a proposition without being accompanied

by any other word, was termed by the same authorities a Categorematic term.

A combination of one or more Categorematic, and one or more

Syncategorematic words, as A heavy body, or A court of justice, they

sometimes called a mixed term; but this seems a needless multiplication of

technical expressions. A mixed term is, in the only useful sense of the word,

Categorematic. It belongs to the class of what have been called many-worded

names.

              For, as one word is frequently not a name, but only part of a name,

so a number of words often compose one single name, and no more. These

words, “The place which the wisdom or policy of antiquity had destined for

the residence of the Abyssinian princes,” form in the estimation of the

logician only one name; one Categorematic term. A mode of determining

whether any set of words makes only one name, or more than one, is by

predicating something of it, and observing whether, by this predication, we

make only one assertion or several. Thus, when we say, John Nokes, who

was the mayor of the town, died yesterday — by this predication we make

but one assertion; whence it appears that “John Nokes, who was the mayor of

the town,” is no more than one name. It is true that in this proposition,

besides the assertion that John Nokes died yesterday, there is included

another assertion, namely, that John Nokes was mayor of the town. But this

last assertion was already made: we did not make it by adding the predicate,

“died yesterday.” Suppose, however, that the words had been, John Nokes

and the mayor of the town, they would have formed two names instead of

one. For when we say, John Nokes and the mayor of the town died yesterday,we make two assertions: one, that John Nokes died yesterday; the other, that

the mayor of the town died yesterday.

              It being needless to illustrate at any greater length the subject of

many-worded names, we proceed to the distinctions which have been

established among names, not according to the words they are composed of,

but according to their signification.

              § 3. All names are names of something, real or imaginary; but all

things have not names appropriated to them individually. For some individual

objects we require, and consequently have, separate distinguishing names;

there is a name for every person, and for every remarkable place. Other

objects, of which we have not occasion to speak so frequently, we do not

designate by a name of their own; but when the necessity arises for naming

them, we do so by putting together several words, each of which, by itself,

might be and is used for an indefinite number of other objects; as when I say,

this stone : “this” and “stone” being, each of them, names that may be used of

many other objects besides the particular one meant, though the only object

of which they can both be used at the given moment, consistently with their

signification, may be the one of which I wish to speak.

              Were this the sole purpose for which names, that are common to

more things than one, could be employed; if they only served, by mutually

limiting each other, to afford a designation for such individual objects as have

no names of their own: they could only be ranked among contrivances for

economizing the use of language. But it is evident that this is not their sole

function. It is by their means that we are enabled to assert general

propositions; to affirm or deny any predicate of an indefinite number of

things at once. The distinction, therefore, between general names, and

individual or singular names, is fundamental; and may be considered as the

first grand division of names.

              A general name is familiarly defined, a name which is capable of

being truly affirmed, in the same sense, of each of an indefinite number of

things. An individual or singular name is a name which is only capable of

being truly affirmed, in the same sense, of one thing.

              Thus, man is capable of being truly affirmed of John, George, Mary,

and other persons without assignable limit; and it is affirmed of all of them in

the same sense; for the word man expresses certain qualities, and when wepredicate it of those persons, we assert that they all possess those qualities.

But John is only capable of being truly affirmed of one single person, at least

in the same sense. For, though there are many persons who bear that name, it

is not conferred upon them to indicate any qualities, or any thing which

belongs to them in common; and can not be said to be affirmed of them in

any sense at all, consequently not in the same sense. “The king who

succeeded William the Conqueror,” is also an individual name. For, that there

can not be more than one person of whom it can be truly affirmed, is implied

in the meaning of the words. Even “the king,” when the occasion or the

context defines the individual of whom it is to be understood, may justly be

regarded as an individual name.

              It is not unusual, by way of explaining what is meant by a general

name, to say that it is the name of a class . But this, though a convenient

mode of expression for some purposes, is objectionable as a definition, since

it explains the clearer of two things by the more obscure. It would be more

logical to reverse the proposition, and turn it into a definition of the word

class : “A class is the indefinite multitude of individuals denoted by a general

name.”

              It is necessary to distinguish general from collective names. A

general name is one which can be predicated of each individual of a

multitude; a collective name can not be predicated of each separately, but

only of all taken together. “The 76th regiment of foot in the British army,”

which is a collective name, is not a general but an individual name; for

though it can be predicated of a multitude of individual soldiers taken jointly,

it can not be predicated of them severally. We may say, Jones is a soldier,

and Thompson is a soldier, and Smith is a soldier, but we can not say, Jones

is the 76th regiment, and Thompson is the 76th regiment, and Smith is the

76th regiment. We can only say, Jones, and Thompson, and Smith, and

Brown, and so forth (enumerating all the soldiers), are the 76th regiment.

              “The 76th regiment” is a collective name, but not a general one: “a

regiment” is both a collective and a general name. General with respect to all

individual regiments, of each of which separately it can be affirmed:

collective with respect to the individual soldiers of whom any regiment is

composed.

              § 4. The second general division of names is into concrete andabstract . A concrete name is a name which stands for a thing; an abstract

name is a name which stands for an attribute of a thing. Thus John , the sea ,

this table , are names of things. White , also, is a name of a thing, or rather of

things. Whiteness, again, is the name of a quality or attribute of those things.

Man is a name of many things; humanity is a name of an attribute of those

things. Old is a name of things: old age is a name of one of their attributes.

              I have used the words concrete and abstract in the sense annexed to

them by the schoolmen, who, notwithstanding the imperfections of their

philosophy, were unrivaled in the construction of technical language, and

whose definitions, in logic at least, though they never went more than a little

way into the subject, have seldom, I think, been altered but to be spoiled. A

practice, however, has grown up in more modern times, which, if not

introduced by Locke, has gained currency chiefly from his example, of

applying the expression “abstract name” to all names which are the result of

abstraction or generalization, and consequently to all general names, instead

of confining it to the names of attributes. The metaphysicians of the

Condillac school — whose admiration of Locke, passing over the

profoundest speculations of that truly original genius, usually fastens with

peculiar eagerness upon his weakest points — have gone on imitating him in

this abuse of language, until there is now some difficulty in restoring the

word to its original signification. A more wanton alteration in the meaning of

a word is rarely to be met with; for the expression general name , the exact

equivalent of which exists in all languages I am acquainted with, was already

available for the purpose to which abstract has been misappropriated, while

the misappropriation leaves that important class of words, the names of

attributes, without any compact distinctive appellation. The old acceptation,

however, has not gone so completely out of use as to deprive those who still

adhere to it of all chance of being understood. By abstract , then, I shall

always, in Logic proper, mean the opposite of concrete ; by an abstract name,

the name of an attribute; by a concrete name, the name of an object.

              Do abstract names belong to the class of general, or to that of

singular names? Some of them are certainly general. I mean those which are

names not of one single and definite attribute, but of a class of attributes.

Such is the word color , which is a name common to whiteness, redness, etc.

Such is even the word whiteness, in respect of the different shades of

whiteness to which it is applied in common: the word magnitude, in respectof the various degrees of magnitude and the various dimensions of space; the

word weight, in respect of the various degrees of weight. Such also is the

word attribute itself, the common name of all particular attributes. But when

only one attribute, neither variable in degree nor in kind, is designated by the

name; as visibleness; tangibleness; equality; squareness; milk-whiteness; then

the name can hardly be considered general; for though it denotes an attribute

of many different objects, the attribute itself is always conceived as one, not
      9
many. To avoid needless logomachies, the best course would probably be to

consider these names as neither general nor individual, and to place them in a

class apart.

              It may be objected to our definition of an abstract name, that not

only the names which we have called abstract, but adjectives, which we have

placed in the concrete class, are names of attributes; that white , for example,

is as much the name of the color as whiteness is. But (as before remarked) a

word ought to be considered as the name of that which we intend to be

understood by it when we put it to its principal use, that is, when we employ

it in predication. When we say snow is white, milk is white, linen is white,

we do not mean it to be understood that snow, or linen, or milk, is a color.

We mean that they are things having the color. The reverse is the case with

the word whiteness; what we affirm to be whiteness is not snow, but the color

of snow. Whiteness, therefore, is the name of the color exclusively: white is a

name of all things whatever having the color; a name, not of the quality

whiteness, but of every white object. It is true, this name was given to all

those various objects on account of the quality; and we may therefore say,

without impropriety, that the quality forms part of its signification; but a

name can only be said to stand for, or to be a name of, the things of which it

can be predicated. We shall presently see that all names which can be said to

have any signification, all names by applying which to an individual we give

any information respecting that individual, may be said to imply an attribute

of some sort; but they are not names of the attribute; it has its own proper

abstract name.

              § 5. This leads to the consideration of a third great division of

names, into connotative and non-connotative , the latter sometimes, but

improperly, called absolute . This is one of the most important distinctions

which we shall have occasion to point out, and one of those which go deepest

into the nature of language.              A non-connotative term is one which signifies a subject only, or an

attribute only. A connotative term is one which denotes a subject, and implies

an attribute. By a subject is here meant any thing which possesses attributes.

Thus John, or London, or England, are names which signify a subject only.

Whiteness, length, virtue, signify an attribute only. None of these names,

therefore, are connotative. But white , long , virtuous , are connotative. The

word white, denotes all white things, as snow, paper, the foam of the sea, etc.,
                                                                      10
and implies, or in the language of the schoolmen, connotes , the attribute

whiteness . The word white is not predicated of the attribute, but of the

subjects, snow, etc.; but when we predicate it of them, we convey the

meaning that the attribute whiteness belongs to them. The same may be said

of the other words above cited. Virtuous, for example, is the name of a class,

which includes Socrates, Howard, the Man of Ross, and an undefinable

number of other individuals, past, present, and to come. These individuals,

collectively and severally, can alone be said with propriety to be denoted by

the word: of them alone can it properly be said to be a name. But it is a name

applied to all of them in consequence of an attribute which they are supposed

to possess in common, the attribute which has received the name of virtue. It

is applied to all beings that are considered to possess this attribute; and to

none which are not so considered.

              All concrete general names are connotative. The word man , for

example, denotes Peter, Jane, John, and an indefinite number of other

individuals, of whom, taken as a class, it is the name. But it is applied to

them, because they possess, and to signify that they possess, certain

attributes. These seem to be, corporeity, animal life, rationality, and a certain

external form, which for distinction we call the human. Every existing thing,

which possessed all these attributes, would be called a man; and any thing

which possessed none of them, or only one, or two, or even three of them

without the fourth, would not be so called. For example, if in the interior of

Africa there were to be discovered a race of animals possessing reason equal

to that of human beings, but with the form of an elephant, they would not be

called men. Swift’s Houyhnhnms would not be so called. Or if such newly-

discovered beings possessed the form of man without any vestige of reason, it

is probable that some other name than that of man would be found for them.

How it happens that there can be any doubt about the matter, will appear

hereafter. The word man , therefore, signifies all these attributes, and all

subjects which possess these attributes. But it can be predicated only of thesubjects. What we call men, are the subjects, the individual Stiles and Nokes;

not the qualities by which their humanity is constituted. The name, therefore,

is said to signify the subjects directly , the attributes indirectly ; it denotes the

subjects, and implies, or involves, or indicates, or as we shall say henceforth

connotes , the attributes. It is a connotative name.

              Connotative names have hence been also called denominative ,

because the subject which they denote is denominated by, or receives a name

from the attribute which they connote. Snow, and other objects, receive the

name white, because they possess the attribute which is called whiteness;

Peter, James, and others receive the name man because they possess the

attributes which are considered to constitute humanity. The attribute, or

attributes, may therefore be said to denominate those objects, or to give them
                  11
a common name.

              It has been seen that all concrete general names are connotative.

Even abstract names, though the names only of attributes, may in some

instances be justly considered as connotative; for attributes themselves may

have attributes ascribed to them; and a word which denotes attributes may

connote an attribute of those attributes. Of this description, for example, is

such a word as fault ; equivalent to bad or hurtful quality . This word is a

name common to many attributes, and connotes hurtfulness, an attribute of

those various attributes. When, for example, we say that slowness, in a horse,

is a fault, we do not mean that the slow movement, the actual change of pace

of the slow horse, is a bad thing, but that the property or peculiarity of the

horse, from which it derives that name, the quality of being a slow mover, is

an undesirable peculiarity.

              In regard to those concrete names which are not general but

individual, a distinction must be made.

              Proper names are not connotative: they denote the individuals who

are called by them; but they do not indicate or imply any attributes as

belonging to those individuals. When we name a child by the name Paul, or a

dog by the name Cæsar, these names are simply marks used to enable those

individuals to be made subjects of discourse. It may be said, indeed, that we

must have had some reason for giving them those names rather than any

others; and this is true; but the name, once given, is independent of the

reason. A man may have been named John, because that was the name of hisfather; a town may have been named Dartmouth, because it is situated at the

mouth of the Dart. But it is no part of the signification of the word John, that

the father of the person so called bore the same name; nor even of the word

Dartmouth, to be situated at the mouth of the Dart. If sand should choke up

the mouth of the river, or an earthquake change its course, and remove it to a

distance from the town, the name of the town would not necessarily be

changed. That fact, therefore, can form no part of the signification of the

word; for otherwise, when the fact confessedly ceased to be true, no one

would any longer think of applying the name. Proper names are attached to

the objects themselves, and are not dependent on the continuance of any

attribute of the object.

              But there is another kind of names, which, although they are

individual names — that is, predicable only of one object — are really

connotative. For, though we may give to an individual a name utterly

unmeaning, which we call a proper name — a word which answers the

purpose of showing what thing it is we are talking about, but not of telling

any thing about it; yet a name peculiar to an individual is not necessarily of

this description. It may be significant of some attribute, or some union of

attributes, which, being possessed by no object but one, determines the name

exclusively to that individual. “The sun” is a name of this description; “God,”

when used by a monotheist, is another. These, however, are scarcely

examples of what we are now attempting to illustrate, being, in strictness of

language, general, not individual names: for, however they may be in fact

predicable only of one object, there is nothing in the meaning of the words

themselves which implies this: and, accordingly, when we are imagining and

not affirming, we may speak of many suns; and the majority of mankind have

believed, and still believe, that there are many gods. But it is easy to produce

words which are real instances of connotative individual names. It may be

part of the meaning of the connotative name itself, that there can exist but one

individual possessing the attribute which it connotes: as, for instance, “the

only son of John Stiles;” “the first emperor of Rome.” Or the attribute

connoted may be a connection with some determinate event, and the

connection may be of such a kind as only one individual could have; or may

at least be such as only one individual actually had; and this may be implied

in the form of the expression. “The father of Socrates” is an example of the

one kind (since Socrates could not have had two fathers); “the author of the

Iliad,” “the murderer of Henri Quatre,” of the second. For, though it isconceivable that more persons than one might have participated in the

authorship of the Iliad, or in the murder of Henri Quatre, the employment of

the article the implies that, in fact, this was not the case. What is here done by

the word the , is done in other cases by the context: thus, “Cæsar’s army” is

an individual name, if it appears from the context that the army meant is that

which Cæsar commanded in a particular battle. The still more general

expressions, “the Roman army,” or “the Christian army,” may be

individualized in a similar manner. Another case of frequent occurrence has

already been noticed; it is the following: The name, being a many-worded

one, may consist, in the first place, of a general name, capable therefore in

itself of being affirmed of more things than one, but which is, in the second

place, so limited by other words joined with it, that the entire expression can

only be predicated of one object, consistently with the meaning of the general

term. This is exemplified in such an instance as the following: “the present

prime minister of England.” Prime Minister of England is a general name; the

attributes which it connotes may be possessed by an indefinite number of

persons: in succession however, not simultaneously; since the meaning of the

name itself imports (among other things) that there can be only one such

person at a time. This being the case, and the application of the name being

afterward limited by the article and the word present , to such individuals as

possess the attributes at one indivisible point of time, it becomes applicable

only to one individual. And as this appears from the meaning of the name,

without any extrinsic proof, it is strictly an individual name.

              From the preceding observations it will easily be collected, that

whenever the names given to objects convey any information — that is,

whenever they have properly any meaning — the meaning resides not in

what they denote , but in what they connote . The only names of objects

which connote nothing are proper names; and these have, strictly speaking,
                  12
no signification.

              If, like the robber in the Arabian Nights, we make a mark with chalk

on a house to enable us to know it again, the mark has a purpose, but it has

not properly any meaning. The chalk does not declare any thing about the

house; it does not mean, This is such a person’s house, or This is a house

which contains booty. The object of making the mark is merely distinction. I

say to myself, All these houses are so nearly alike that if I lose sight of them I

shall not again be able to distinguish that which I am now looking at, fromany of the others; I must therefore contrive to make the appearance of this

one house unlike that of the others, that I may hereafter know when I see the

mark — not indeed any attribute of the house — but simply that it is the same

house which I am now looking at. Morgiana chalked all the other houses in a

similar manner, and defeated the scheme: how? simply by obliterating the

difference of appearance between that house and the others. The chalk was

still there, but it no longer served the purpose of a distinctive mark.

              When we impose a proper name, we perform an operation in some

degree analogous to what the robber intended in chalking the house. We put a

mark, not indeed upon the object itself, but, so to speak, upon the idea of the

object. A proper name is but an unmeaning mark which we connect in our

minds with the idea of the object, in order that whenever the mark meets our

eyes or occurs to our thoughts, we may think of that individual object. Not

being attached to the thing itself, it does not, like the chalk, enable us to

distinguish the object when we see it; but it enables us to distinguish it when

it is spoken of, either in the records of our own experience, or in the discourse

of others; to know that what we find asserted in any proposition of which it is

the subject, is asserted of the individual thing with which we were previously

acquainted.

              When we predicate of any thing its proper name; when we say,

pointing to a man, this is Brown or Smith, or pointing to a city, that it is

York, we do not, merely by so doing, convey to the reader any information

about them, except that those are their names. By enabling him to identify the

individuals, we may connect them with information previously possessed by

him; by saying, This is York, we may tell him that it contains the Minster.

But this is in virtue of what he has previously heard concerning York; not by

any thing implied in the name. It is otherwise when objects are spoken of by

connotative names. When we say, The town is built of marble, we give the

hearer what may be entirely new information, and this merely by the

signification of the many-worded connotative name, “built of marble.” Such

names are not signs of the mere objects, invented because we have occasion

to think and speak of those objects individually; but signs which accompany

an attribute; a kind of livery in which the attribute clothes all objects which

are recognized as possessing it. They are not mere marks, but more, that is to

say, significant marks; and the connotation is what constitutes their

significance.              As a proper name is said to be the name of the one individual which

it is predicated of, so (as well from the importance of adhering to analogy, as

for the other reasons formerly assigned) a connotative name ought to be

considered a name of all the various individuals which it is predicable of, or

in other words denotes , and not of what it connotes. But by learning what

things it is a name of, we do not learn the meaning of the name: for to the

same thing we may, with equal propriety, apply many names, not equivalent

in meaning. Thus, I call a certain man by the name Sophroniscus: I call him

by another name, The father of Socrates. Both these are names of the same

individual, but their meaning is altogether different; they are applied to that

individual for two different purposes: the one, merely to distinguish him from

other persons who are spoken of; the other to indicate a fact relating to him,

the fact that Socrates was his son. I further apply to him these other

expressions: a man, a Greek, an Athenian, a sculptor, an old man, an honest

man, a brave man. All these are, or may be, names of Sophroniscus, not

indeed of him alone, but of him and each of an indefinite number of other

human beings. Each of these names is applied to Sophroniscus for a different

reason, and by each whoever understands its meaning is apprised of a distinct

fact or number of facts concerning him; but those who knew nothing about

the names except that they were applicable to Sophroniscus, would be

altogether ignorant of their meaning. It is even possible that I might know

every single individual of whom a given name could be with truth affirmed,

and yet could not be said to know the meaning of the name. A child knows

who are its brothers and sisters, long before it has any definite conception of

the nature of the facts which are involved in the signification of those words.

              In some cases it is not easy to decide precisely how much a

particular word does or does not connote; that is, we do not exactly know (the

case not having arisen) what degree of difference in the object would

occasion a difference in the name. Thus, it is clear that the word man, besides

animal life and rationality, connotes also a certain external form; but it would

be impossible to say precisely what form; that is, to decide how great a

deviation from the form ordinarily found in the beings whom we are

accustomed to call men, would suffice in a newly-discovered race to make us

refuse them the name of man. Rationality, also, being a quality which admits

of degrees, it has never been settled what is the lowest degree of that quality

which would entitle any creature to be considered a human being. In all such

cases, the meaning of the general name is so far unsettled and vague;mankind have not come to any positive agreement about the matter. When we

come to treat of Classification, we shall have occasion to show under what

conditions this vagueness may exist without practical inconvenience; and

cases will appear in which the ends of language are better promoted by it than

by complete precision; in order that, in natural history for instance,

individuals or species of no very marked character may be ranged with those

more strongly characterized individuals or species to which, in all their

properties taken together, they bear the nearest resemblance.

              But this partial uncertainty in the connotation of names can only be

free from mischief when guarded by strict precautions. One of the chief

sources, indeed, of lax habits of thought, is the custom of using connotative

terms without a distinctly ascertained connotation, and with no more precise

notion of their meaning than can be loosely collected from observing what

objects they are used to denote. It is in this manner that we all acquire, and

inevitably so, our first knowledge of our vernacular language. A child learns

the meaning of the words man , or white , by hearing them applied to a

variety of individual objects, and finding out, by a process of generalization

and analysis which he could not himself describe, what those different

objects have in common. In the case of these two words the process is so easy

as to require no assistance from culture; the objects called human beings, and

the objects called white, differing from all others by qualities of a peculiarly

definite and obvious character. But in many other cases, objects bear a

general resemblance to one another, which leads to their being familiarly

classed together under a common name, while, without more analytic habits

than the generality of mankind possess, it is not immediately apparent what

are the particular attributes, upon the possession of which in common by

them all, their general resemblance depends. When this is the case, people

use the name without any recognized connotation, that is, without any precise

meaning; they talk, and consequently think, vaguely, and remain contented to

attach only the same degree of significance to their own words, which a child

three years old attaches to the words brother and sister. The child at least is

seldom puzzled by the starting up of new individuals, on whom he is ignorant

whether or not to confer the title; because there is usually an authority close

at hand competent to solve all doubts. But a similar resource does not exist in

the generality of cases; and new objects are continually presenting themselves

to men, women, and children, which they are called upon to class proprio

motu . They, accordingly, do this on no other principle than that of superficialsimilarity, giving to each new object the name of that familiar object, the idea

of which it most readily recalls, or which, on a cursory inspection, it seems to

them most to resemble: as an unknown substance found in the ground will be

called, according to its texture, earth, sand, or a stone. In this manner, names

creep on from subject to subject, until all traces of a common meaning

sometimes disappear, and the word comes to denote a number of things not

only independently of any common attribute, but which have actually no

attribute in common; or none but what is shared by other things to which the
                                13
name is capriciously refused. Even scientific writers have aided in this

perversion of general language from its purpose; sometimes because, like the

vulgar, they knew no better; and sometimes in deference to that aversion to

admit new words, which induces mankind, on all subjects not considered

technical, to attempt to make the original stock of names serve with but little

augmentation to express a constantly increasing number of objects and

distinctions, and, consequently, to express them in a manner progressively

more and more imperfect.

              To what a degree this loose mode of classing and denominating

objects has rendered the vocabulary of mental and moral philosophy unfit for

the purposes of accurate thinking, is best known to whoever has most

meditated on the present condition of those branches of knowledge. Since,

however, the introduction of a new technical language as the vehicle of

speculations on subjects belonging to the domain of daily discussion, is

extremely difficult to effect, and would not be free from inconvenience even

if effected, the problem for the philosopher, and one of the most difficult

which he has to resolve, is, in retaining the existing phraseology, how best to

alleviate its imperfections. This can only be accomplished by giving to every

general concrete name which there is frequent occasion to predicate, a

definite and fixed connotation; in order that it may be known what attributes,

when we call an object by that name, we really mean to predicate of the

object. And the question of most nicety is, how to give this fixed connotation

to a name, with the least possible change in the objects which the name is

habitually employed to denote; with the least possible disarrangement, either

by adding or subtraction, of the group of objects which, in however imperfect

a manner, it serves to circumscribe and hold together; and with the least

vitiation of the truth of any propositions which are commonly received as

true.              This desirable purpose, of giving a fixed connotation where it is

wanting, is the end aimed at whenever any one attempts to give a definition

of a general name already in use; every definition of a connotative name

being an attempt either merely to declare, or to declare and analyze, the

connotation of the name. And the fact, that no questions which have arisen in

the moral sciences have been subjects of keener controversy than the

definitions of almost all the leading expressions, is a proof how great an

extent the evil to which we have adverted has attained.

              Names with indeterminate connotation are not to be confounded

with names which have more than one connotation, that is to say, ambiguous

words. A word may have several meanings, but all of them fixed and

recognized ones; as the word post , for example, or the word box , the various

senses of which it would be endless to enumerate. And the paucity of existing

names, in comparison with the demand for them, may often render it

advisable and even necessary to retain a name in this multiplicity of

acceptations, distinguishing these so clearly as to prevent their being

confounded with one another. Such a word may be considered as two or more
                                                    14
names, accidentally written and spoken alike.

              § 6. The fourth principal division of names, is into positive and

negative . Positive, as man , tree , good ; negative, as not-man , not-tree , not-

good . To every positive concrete name, a corresponding negative one might

be framed. After giving a name to any one thing, or to any plurality of things,

we might create a second name which should be a name of all things

whatever, except that particular thing or things. These negative names are

employed whenever we have occasion to speak collectively of all things other

than some thing or class of things. When the positive name is connotative, the

corresponding negative name is connotative likewise; but in a peculiar way,

connoting not the presence but the absence of an attribute. Thus, not-white

denotes all things whatever except white things; and connotes the attribute of

not possessing whiteness. For the non-possession of any given attribute is

also an attribute, and may receive a name as such; and thus negative concrete
                                                                            15
names may obtain negative abstract names to correspond to them.

              Names which are positive in form are often negative in reality, and

others are really positive though their form is negative. The word

inconvenient , for example, does not express the mere absence of

convenience; it expresses a positive attribute — that of being the cause ofdiscomfort or annoyance. So the word unpleasant , notwithstanding its

negative form, does not connote the mere absence of pleasantness, but a less

degree of what is signified by the word painful , which, it is hardly necessary

to say, is positive. Idle , on the other hand, is a word which, though positive

in form, expresses nothing but what would be signified either by the phrase

not working , or by the phrase not disposed to work ; and sober , either by not

drunk or by not drunken .

              There is a class of names called privative . A privative name is

equivalent in its signification to a positive and a negative name taken

together; being the name of something which has once had a particular

attribute, or for some other reason might have been expected to have it, but

which has it not. Such is the word blind , which is not equivalent to not

seeing , or to not capable of seeing , for it would not, except by a poetical or

rhetorical figure, be applied to stocks and stones. A thing is not usually said

to be blind, unless the class to which it is most familiarly referred, or to

which it is referred on the particular occasion, be chiefly composed of things

which can see, as in the case of a blind man, or a blind horse; or unless it is

supposed for any reason that it ought to see; as in saying of a man, that he

rushed blindly into an abyss, or of philosophers or the clergy that the greater

part of them are blind guides. The names called privative, therefore, connote

two things; the absence of certain attributes, and the presence of others, from

which the presence also of the former might naturally have been expected.

              § 7. The fifth leading division of names is into relative and absolute ,

or let us rather say, relative and non-relative ; for the word absolute is put

upon much too hard duty in metaphysics, not to be willingly spared when its

services can be dispensed with. It resembles the word civil in the language of

jurisprudence, which stands for the opposite of criminal, the opposite of

ecclesiastical, the opposite of military, the opposite of political — in short,

the opposite of any positive word which wants a negative.

              Relative names are such as father, son; ruler, subject; like; equal;

unlike; unequal; longer, shorter; cause, effect. Their characteristic property is,

that they are always given in pairs. Every relative name which is predicated

of an object, supposes another object (or objects), of which we may predicate

either that same name or another relative name which is said to be the

correlative of the former. Thus, when we call any person a son, we suppose

other persons who must be called parents. When we call any event a cause,we suppose another event which is an effect. When we say of any distance

that it is longer, we suppose another distance which is shorter. When we say

of any object that it is like, we mean that it is like some other object, which is

also said to be like the first. In this last case both objects receive the same

name; the relative term is its own correlative.

              It is evident that these words, when concrete, are, like other concrete

general names, connotative; they denote a subject, and connote an attribute;

and each of them has, or might have, a corresponding abstract name, to

denote the attribute connoted by the concrete. Thus the concrete like has its

abstract likeness ; the concretes, father and son, have, or might have, the

abstracts, paternity, and filiety, or sonship. The concrete name connotes an

attribute, and the abstract name which answers to it denotes that attribute. But

of what nature is the attribute? Wherein consists the peculiarity in the

connotation of a relative name?

              The attribute signified by a relative name, say some, is a relation;

and this they give, if not as a sufficient explanation, at least as the only one

attainable. If they are asked, What then is a relation? they do not profess to be

able to tell. It is generally regarded as something peculiarly recondite and

mysterious. I can not, however, perceive in what respect it is more so than

any other attribute; indeed, it appears to me to be so in a somewhat less

degree. I conceive rather, that it is by examining into the signification of

relative names, or, in other words, into the nature of the attribute which they

connote, that a clear insight may best be obtained into the nature of all

attributes: of all that is meant by an attribute.

              It is obvious, in fact, that if we take any two correlative names,

father and son for instance, though the objects de noted by the names are

different, they both, in a certain sense, connote the same thing. They can not,

indeed, be said to connote the same attribute : to be a father, is not the same

thing as to be a son. But when we call one man a father, another a son, what

we mean to affirm is a set of facts, which are exactly the same in both cases.

To predicate of A that he is the father of B, and of B that he is the son of A, is

to assert one and the same fact in different words. The two propositions are

exactly equivalent: neither of them asserts more or asserts less than the other.

The paternity of A and the filiety of B are not two facts, but two modes of

expressing the same fact. That fact, when analysed, consists of a series of

physical events or phenomena, in which both A and B are parties concerned,and from which they both derive names. What those names really connote, is

this series of events: that is the meaning, and the whole meaning, which

either of them is intended to convey. The series of events may be said to

constitute the relation; the schoolmen called it the foundation of the relation,

fundamentum relationis .

              In this manner any fact, or series of facts, in which two different

objects are implicated, and which is therefore predicable of both of them,

may be either considered as constituting an attribute of the one, or an attribute

of the other. According as we consider it in the former, or in the latter aspect,

it is connoted by the one or the other of the two correlative names. Father

connotes the fact, regarded as constituting an attribute of A; son connotes the

same fact, as constituting an attribute of B. It may evidently be regarded with

equal propriety in either light. And all that appears necessary to account for

the existence of relative names, is, that whenever there is a fact in which two

individuals are concerned, an attribute grounded on that fact may be ascribed

to either of these individuals.

              A name, therefore, is said to be relative, when, over and above the

object which it denotes, it implies in its signification the existence of another

object, also deriving a denomination from the same fact which is the ground

of the first name. Or (to express the same meaning in other words) a name is

relative, when, being the name of one thing, its signification can not be

explained but by mentioning another. Or we may state it thus — when the

name can not be employed in discourse so as to have a meaning, unless the

name of some other thing than what it is itself the name of, be either

expressed or understood. These definitions are all, at bottom, equivalent,

being modes of variously expressing this one distinctive circumstance — that

every other attribute of an object might, without any contradiction, be
                                                                                16
conceived still to exist if no object besides that one had ever existed; but

those of its attributes which are expressed by relative names, would on that

supposition be swept away.

              § 8. Names have been further distinguished into univocal and

æquivocal : these, however, are not two kinds of names, but two different

modes of employing names. A name is univocal, or applied univocally, with

respect to all things of which it can be predicated in the same sense ; it is

æquivocal, or applied æquivocally, as respects those things of which it is

predicated in different senses. It is scarcely necessary to give instances of afact so familiar as the double meaning of a word. In reality, as has been

already observed, an æquivocal or ambiguous word is not one name, but two

names, accidentally coinciding in sound. File meaning a steel instrument, and

file meaning a line of soldiers, have no more title to be considered one word,

because written alike, than grease and Greece have, because they are

pronounced alike. They are one sound, appropriated to form two different

words.

              An intermediate case is that of a name used analogically or

metaphorically; that is, a name which is predicated of two things, not

univocally, or exactly in the same signification, but in significations

somewhat similar, and which being derived one from the other, one of them

may be considered the primary, and the other a secondary signification. As

when we speak of a brilliant light and a brilliant achievement. The word is

not applied in the same sense to the light and to the achievement; but having

been applied to the light in its original sense, that of brightness to the eye, it

is transferred to the achievement in a derivative signification, supposed to be

somewhat like the primitive one. The word, however, is just as properly two

names instead of one, in this case, as in that of the most perfect ambiguity.

And one of the commonest forms of fallacious reasoning arising from

ambiguity, is that of arguing from a metaphorical expression as if it were

literal; that is, as if a word, when applied metaphorically, were the same name

as when taken in its original sense: which will be seen more particularly in its

place.

 

 

               Chapter III. – Of The Things Denoted By Names.

 

 

              § 1. Looking back now to the commencement of our inquiry, let us

attempt to measure how far it has advanced. Logic, we found, is the Theory

of Proof. But proof supposes something provable, which must be a

Proposition or Assertion; since nothing but a Proposition can be an object of

belief, or therefore of proof. A Proposition is, discourse which affirms or

denies something of some other thing. This is one step: there must, it seems,

be two things concerned in every act of belief. But what are these Things?

They can be no other than those signified by the two names, which being

joined together by a copula constitute the Proposition. If, therefore, we knew

what all names signify, we should know every thing which, in the existing

state of human knowledge, is capable either of being made a subject of

affirmation or denial, or of being itself affirmed or denied of a subject. We

have accordingly, in the preceding chapter, reviewed the various kinds of

Names, in order to ascertain what is signified by each of them. And we have

now carried this survey far enough to be able to take an account of its results,

and to exhibit an enumeration of all kinds of Things which are capable of

being made predicates, or of having any thing predicated of them: after which

to determine the import of Predication, that is, of Propositions, can be no

arduous task.

              The necessity of an enumeration of Existences, as the basis of Logic,

did not escape the attention of the schoolmen, and of their master Aristotle,

the most comprehensive, if not also the most sagacious, of the ancient

philosophers. The Categories, or Predicaments — the former a Greek word,

the latter its literal translation in the Latin language — were believed to be an

enumeration of all things capable of being named; an enumeration by the

summa genera , i.e. , the most extensive classes into which things could be

distributed; which, therefore, were so many highest Predicates, one or other

of which was supposed capable of being affirmed with truth of every

namable thing whatsoever. The following are the classes into which,

according to this school of philosophy, Things in general might be reduced:

              Οὐσία, Substantia. Ποσὸν, Quantitas. Ποιόν, Qualitas. Πρός τι,

Relatio. Ποιεῖν, Actio. Πάσχειν, Passio. Ποῦ, Ubi. Πότε, Quando. Κεῖσθακ,Situs. Ἔχειν, Habitus.

              The imperfections of this classification are too obvious to require,

and its merits are not sufficient to reward, a minute examination. It is a mere

catalogue of the distinctions rudely marked out by the language of familiar

life, with little or no attempt to penetrate, by philosophic analysis, to the

rationale even of those common distinctions. Such an analysis, however

superficially conducted, would have shown the enumeration to be both

redundant and defective. Some objects are omitted, and others repeated

several times under different heads. It is like a division of animals into men,

quadrupeds, horses, asses, and ponies. That, for instance, could not be a very

comprehensive view of the nature of Relation which could exclude action,

passivity, and local situation from that category. The same observation

applies to the categories Quando (or position in time), and Ubi (or position in

space); while the distinction between the latter and Situs is merely verbal.

The incongruity of erecting into a summum genus the class which forms the

tenth category is manifest. On the other hand, the enumeration takes no

notice of any thing besides substances and attributes. In what category are we

to place sensations, or any other feelings and states of mind; as hope, joy,

fear; sound, smell, taste; pain, pleasure; thought, judgment, conception, and

the like? Probably all these would have been placed by the Aristotelian

school in the categories of actio and passio ; and the relation of such of them

as are active, to their objects, and of such of them as are passive, to their

causes, would rightly be so placed; but the things themselves, the feelings or

states of mind, wrongly. Feelings, or states of consciousness, are assuredly to

be accounted among realities, but they can not be reckoned either among
                          17
substances or attributes.

              § 2. Before recommencing, under better auspices, the attempt made

with such imperfect success by the early logicians, we must take notice of an

unfortunate ambiguity in all the concrete names which correspond to the most

general of all abstract terms, the word Existence. When we have occasion for

a name which shall be capable of denoting whatever exists, as

contradistinguished from non-entity or Nothing, there is hardly a word

applicable to the purpose which is not also, and even more familiarly, taken

in a sense in which it denotes only substances. But substances are not all that

exists; attributes, if such things are to be spoken of, must be said to exist;

feelings certainly exist. Yet when we speak of an object , or of a thing , weare almost always supposed to mean a substance. There seems a kind of

contradiction in using such an expression as that one thing is merely an

attribute of another thing. And the announcement of a Classification of

Things would, I believe, prepare most readers for an enumeration like those

in natural history, beginning with the great divisions of animal, vegetable,

and mineral, and subdividing them into classes and orders. If, rejecting the

word Thing, we endeavor to find another of a more general import, or at least

more exclusively confined to that general import, a word denoting all that

exists, and connoting only simple existence; no word might be presumed

fitter for such a purpose than being : originally the present participle of a verb

which in one of its meanings is exactly equivalent to the verb exists ; and

therefore suitable, even by its grammatical formation, to be the concrete of

the abstract existence . But this word, strange as the fact may appear, is still

more completely spoiled for the purpose which it seemed expressly made for,

than the word Thing. Being is, by custom, exactly synonymous with

substance; except that it is free from a slight taint of a second ambiguity;

being implied impartially to matter and to mind, while substance, though

originally and in strictness applicable to both, is apt to suggest in preference

the idea of matter. Attributes are never called Beings; nor are feelings. A

Being is that which excites feelings, and which possesses attributes. The soul

is called a Being; God and angels are called Beings; but if we were to say,

extension, color, wisdom, virtue, are beings, we should perhaps be suspected

of thinking with some of the ancients, that the cardinal virtues are animals;

or, at the least, of holding with the Platonic school the doctrine of self-

existent Ideas, or with the followers of Epicurus that of Sensible Forms,

which detach themselves in every direction from bodies, and by coming in

contact with our organs, cause our perceptions. We should be supposed, in

short, to believe that Attributes are Substances.

              In consequence of this perversion of the word Being, philosophers

looking about for something to supply its place, laid their hands upon the

word Entity, a piece of barbarous Latin, invented by the schoolmen to be

used as an abstract name, in which class its grammatical form would seem to

place it: but being seized by logicians in distress to stop a leak in their

terminology, it has ever since been used as a concrete name. The kindred

word essence , born at the same time and of the same parents, scarcely

underwent a more complete transformation when, from being the abstract of

the verb to be , it came to denote something sufficiently concrete to beinclosed in a glass bottle. The word Entity, since it settled down into a

concrete name, has retained its universality of signification somewhat less

impaired than any of the names before mentioned. Yet the same gradual

decay to which, after a certain age, all the language of psychology seems

liable, has been at work even here. If you call virtue an entity , you are indeed

somewhat less strongly suspected of believing it to be a substance than if you

called it a being ; but you are by no means free from the suspicion. Every

word which was originally intended to connote mere existence, seems, after a

time, to enlarge its connotation to separate existence, or existence freed from

the condition of belonging to a substance; which condition being precisely

what constitutes an attribute, attributes are gradually shut out; and along with

them feelings, which in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred have no other

name than that of the attribute which is grounded on them. Strange that when

the greatest embarrassment felt by all who have any considerable number of

thoughts to express, is to find a sufficient variety of precise words fitted to

express them, there should be no practice to which even scientific thinkers

are more addicted than that of taking valuable words to express ideas which

are sufficiently expressed by other words already appropriated to them.

              When it is impossible to obtain good tools, the next best thing is to

understand thoroughly the defects of those we have. I have therefore warned

the reader of the ambiguity of the names which, for want of better, I am

necessitated to employ. It must now be the writer’s endeavor so to employ

them as in no case to leave the meaning doubtful or obscure. No one of the

above terms being altogether unambiguous, I shall not confine myself to any

one, but shall employ on each occasion the word which seems least likely in

the particular case to lead to misunderstanding; nor do I pretend to use either

these or any other words with a rigorous adherence to one single sense. To do

so would often leave us without a word to express what is signified by a

known word in some one or other of its senses: unless authors had an

unlimited license to coin new words, together with (what it would be more

difficult to assume) unlimited power of making readers understand them. Nor

would it be wise in a writer, on a subject involving so much of abstraction, to

deny himself the advantage derived from even an improper use of a term,

when, by means of it, some familiar association is called up which brings the

meaning home to the mind, as it were by a flash.

              The difficulty both to the writer and reader, of the attempt whichmust be made to use vague words so as to convey a precise meaning, is not

wholly a matter of regret. It is not unfitting that logical treatises should afford

an example of that, to facilitate which is among the most important uses of

logic. Philosophical language will for a long time, and popular language still

longer, retain so much of vagueness and ambiguity, that logic would be of

little value if it did not, among its other advantages, exercise the

understanding in doing its work neatly and correctly with these imperfect

tools.

              After this preamble it is time to proceed to our enumeration. We

shall commence with Feelings, the simplest class of namable things; the term

Feeling being of course understood in its most enlarged sense.

              I. Feelings, Or States of Consciousness.

              § 3. A Feeling and a State of consciousness are, in the language of

philosophy, equivalent expressions: every thing is a feeling of which the

mind is conscious; every thing which it feels , or, in other words, which forms

a part of its own sentient existence. In popular language Feeling is not always

synonymous with State of Consciousness; being often taken more peculiarly

for those states which are conceived as belonging to the sensitive, or to the

emotional, phasis of our nature, and sometimes, with a still narrower

restriction, to the emotional alone, as distinguished from what are conceived

as belonging to the percipient or to the intellectual phasis. But this is an

admitted departure from correctness of language; just as, by a popular

perversion the exact converse of this, the word Mind is withdrawn from its

rightful generality of signification, and restricted to the intellect. The still

greater perversion by which Feeling is sometimes confined not only to bodily

sensations, but to the sensations of a single sense, that of touch, needs not be

more particularly adverted to.

              Feeling, in the proper sense of the term, is a genus, of which

Sensation, Emotion, and Thought, are subordinate species. Under the word

Thought is here to be included whatever we are internally conscious of when

we are said to think; from the consciousness we have when we think of a red

color without having it before our eyes, to the most recondite thoughts of a

philosopher or poet. Be it remembered, however, that by a thought is to be

understood what passes in the mind itself, and not any object external to the

mind, which the person is commonly said to be thinking of. He may bethinking of the sun, or of God, but the sun and God are not thoughts; his

mental image, however, of the sun, and his idea of God, are thoughts; states

of his mind, not of the objects themselves; and so also is his belief of the

existence of the sun, or of God; or his disbelief, if the case be so. Even

imaginary objects (which are said to exist only in our ideas) are to be

distinguished from our ideas of them. I may think of a hobgoblin, as I may

think of the loaf which was eaten yesterday, or of the flower which will

bloom to-morrow. But the hobgoblin which never existed is not the same

thing with my idea of a hobgoblin, any more than the loaf which once existed

is the same thing with my idea of a loaf, or the flower which does not yet

exist, but which will exist, is the same with my idea of a flower. They are all,

not thoughts, but objects of thought; though at the present time all the objects

are alike non-existent.

              In like manner, a Sensation is to be carefully distinguished from the

object which causes the sensation; our sensation of white from a white object:

nor is it less to be distinguished from the attribute whiteness, which we

ascribe to the object in consequence of its exciting the sensation.

Unfortunately for clearness and due discrimination in considering these

subjects, our sensations seldom receive separate names. We have a name for

the objects which produce in us a certain sensation: the word white . We have

a name for the quality in those objects, to which we ascribe the sensation: the

name whiteness . But when we speak of the sensation itself (as we have not

occasion to do this often except in our scientific speculations), language,

which adapts itself for the most part only to the common uses of life, has

provided us with no single-worded or immediate designation; we must

employ a circumlocution, and say, The sensation of white, or The sensation

of whiteness; we must denominate the sensation either from the object, or

from the attribute, by which it is excited. Yet the sensation, though it never

does , might very well be conceived to exist, without any thing whatever to

excite it. We can conceive it as arising spontaneously in the mind. But if it so

arose, we should have no name to denote it which would not be a misnomer.

In the case of our sensations of hearing we are better provided; we have the

word Sound, and a whole vocabulary of words to denote the various kinds of

sounds. For as we are often conscious of these sensations in the absence of

any perceptible object, we can more easily conceive having them in the

absence of any object whatever. We need only shut our eyes and listen to

music, to have a conception of a universe with nothing in it except sounds,and ourselves hearing them: and what is easily conceived separately, easily

obtains a separate name. But in general our names of sensations denote

indiscriminately the sensation and the attribute. Thus, color stands for the

sensations of white, red, etc., but also for the quality in the colored object.

We talk of the colors of things as among their properties .

              § 4. In the case of sensations, another distinction has also to be kept

in view, which is often confounded, and never without mischievous

consequences. This is, the distinction between the sensation itself, and the

state of the bodily organs which precedes the sensation, and which constitutes

the physical agency by which it is produced. One of the sources of confusion

on this subject is the division commonly made of feelings into Bodily and

Mental. Philosophically speaking, there is no foundation at all for this

distinction: even sensations are states of the sentient mind, not states of the

body, as distinguished from it. What I am conscious of when I see the color

blue, is a feeling of blue color, which is one thing; the picture on my retina,

or the phenomenon of hitherto mysterious nature which takes place in my

optic nerve or in my brain, is another thing, of which I am not at all

conscious, and which scientific investigation alone could have apprised me

of. These are states of my body; but the sensation of blue, which is the

consequence of these states of body, is not a state of body: that which

perceives and is conscious is called Mind. When sensations are called bodily

feelings, it is only as being the class of feelings which are immediately

occasioned by bodily states; whereas the other kinds of feelings, thoughts, for

instance, or emotions, are immediately excited not by any thing acting upon

the bodily organs, but by sensations, or by previous thoughts. This, however,

is a distinction not in our feelings, but in the agency which produces our

feelings: all of them when actually produced are states of mind.

              Besides the affection of our bodily organs from without, and the

sensation thereby produced in our minds, many writers admit a third link in

the chain of phenomena, which they call a Perception, and which consists in

the recognition of an external object as the exciting cause of the sensation.

This perception, they say, is an act of the mind, proceeding from its own

spontaneous activity; while in a sensation the mind is passive, being merely

acted upon by the outward object. And according to some metaphysicians, it

is by an act of the mind, similar to perception, except in not being preceded

by any sensation, that the existence of God, the soul, and other hyperphysicalobjects, is recognized.

              These acts of what is termed perception, whatever be the conclusion

ultimately come to respecting their nature, must, I conceive, take their place

among the varieties of feelings or states of mind. In so classing them, I have

not the smallest intention of declaring or insinuating any theory as to the law

of mind in which these mental processes may be supposed to originate, or the

conditions under which they may be legitimate or the reverse. Far less do I

mean (as Dr. Whewell seems to suppose must be meant in an analogous
  18
case ) to indicate that as they are “merely states of mind,” it is superfluous

to inquire into their distinguishing peculiarities. I abstain from the inquiry as

irrelevant to the science of logic. In these so-called perceptions, or direct

recognitions by the mind, of objects, whether physical or spiritual, which are

external to itself, I can see only cases of belief; but of belief which claims to

be intuitive, or independent of external evidence. When a stone lies before

me, I am conscious of certain sensations which I receive from it; but if I say

that these sensations come to me from an external object which I perceive ,

the meaning of these words is, that receiving the sensations, I intuitively

believe that an external cause of those sensations exists. The laws of intuitive

belief, and the conditions under which it is legitimate, are a subject which, as

we have already so often remarked, belongs not to logic, but to the science of

the ultimate laws of the human mind.

              To the same region of speculation belongs all that can be said

respecting the distinction which the German metaphysicians and their French

and English followers so elaborately draw between the acts of the mind and

its merely passive states ; between what it receives from, and what it gives to,

the crude materials of its experience. I am aware that with reference to the

view which those writers take of the primary elements of thought and

knowledge, this distinction is fundamental. But for the present purpose,

which is to examine, not the original groundwork of our knowledge, but how

we come by that portion of it which is not original; the difference between

active and passive states of mind is of secondary importance. For us, they all

are states of mind, they all are feelings; by which, let it be said once more, I

mean to imply nothing of passivity, but simply that they are psychological

facts, facts which take place in the mind, and are to be carefully distinguished

from the external or physical facts with which they may be connected either

as effects or as causes.              § 5. Among active states of mind, there is, however, one species

which merits particular attention, because it forms a principal part of the

connotation of some important classes of names. I mean volitions , or acts of

the will. When we speak of sentient beings by relative names, a large portion

of the connotation of the name usually consists of the actions of those beings;

actions past, present, and possible or probable future. Take, for instance, the

words Sovereign and Subject. What meaning do these words convey, but that

of innumerable actions, done or to be done by the sovereign and the subjects,

to or in regard to one another reciprocally? So with the words physician and

patient, leader and follower, tutor and pupil. In many cases the words also

connote actions which would be done under certain contingencies by persons

other than those denoted: as the words mortgagor and mortgagee, obligor and

obligee, and many other words expressive of legal relation, which connote

what a court of justice would do to enforce the legal obligation if not

fulfilled. There are also words which connote actions previously done by

persons other than those denoted either by the name itself or by its

correlative; as the word brother. From these instances, it may be seen how

large a portion of the connotation of names consists of actions. Now what is

an action? Not one thing, but a series of two things: the state of mind called a

volition, followed by an effect. The volition or intention to produce the effect,

is one thing; the effect produced in consequence of the intention, is another

thing; the two together constitute the action. I form the purpose of instantly

moving my arm; that is a state of my mind: my arm (not being tied or

paralytic) moves in obedience to my purpose; that is a physical fact,

consequent on a state of mind. The intention, followed by the fact, or (if we

prefer the expression) the fact when preceded and caused by the intention, is

called the action of moving my arm.

              § 6. Of the first leading division of namable things, viz., Feelings or

States of Consciousness, we began by recognizing three subdivisions;

Sensations, Thoughts, and Emotions. The first two of these we have

illustrated at considerable length; the third, Emotions, not being perplexed by

similar ambiguities, does not require similar exemplification. And, finally, we

have found it necessary to add to these three a fourth species, commonly

known by the name Volitions. We shall now proceed to the two remaining

classes of namable things; all things which are regarded as external to the

mind being considered as belonging either to the class of Substances or to

that of Attributes.              II. Substances.

              Logicians have endeavored to define Substance and Attribute; but

their definitions are not so much attempts to draw a distinction between the

things themselves, as instructions what difference it is customary to make in

the grammatical structure of the sentence, according as we are speaking of

substances or of attributes. Such definitions are rather lessons of English, or

of Greek, Latin, or German, than of mental philosophy. An attribute, say the

school logicians, must be the attribute of something; color, for example, must

be the color of something; goodness must be the goodness of something; and

if this something should cease to exist, or should cease to be connected with

the attribute, the existence of the attribute would be at an end. A substance,

on the contrary, is self-existent; in speaking about it, we need not put of after

its name. A stone is not the stone of any thing; the moon is not the moon of

any thing, but simply the moon. Unless, indeed, the name which we choose to

give to the substance be a relative name; if so, it must be followed either by

of , or by some other particle, implying, as that preposition does, a reference

to something else: but then the other characteristic peculiarity of an attribute

would fail; the something might be destroyed, and the substance might still

subsist. Thus, a father must be the father of something, and so far resembles

an attribute, in being referred to something besides himself: if there were no

child, there would be no father: but this, when we look into the matter, only

means that we should not call him father. The man called father might still

exist though there were no child, as he existed before there was a child; and

there would be no contradiction in supposing him to exist, though the whole

universe except himself were destroyed. But destroy all white substances, and

where would be the attribute whiteness? Whiteness, without any white thing,

is a contradiction in terms.

              This is the nearest approach to a solution of the difficulty, that will

be found in the common treatises on logic. It will scarcely be thought to be a

satisfactory one. If an attribute is distinguished from a substance by being the

attribute of something, it seems highly necessary to understand what is meant

by of ; a particle which needs explanation too much itself, to be placed in

front of the explanation of any thing else. And as for the self-existence of

substance, it is very true that a substance may be conceived to exist without

any other substance, but so also may an attribute without any other attribute:

and we can no more imagine a substance without attributes than we canimagine attributes without a substance.

              Metaphysicians, however, have probed the question deeper, and

given an account of Substance considerably more satisfactory than this.

Substances are usually distinguished as Bodies or Minds. Of each of these,

philosophers have at length provided us with a definition which seems

unexceptionable.

              § 7. A body, according to the received doctrine of modern

metaphysicians, may be defined, the external cause to which we ascribe our

sensations. When I see and touch a piece of gold, I am conscious of a

sensation of yellow color, and sensations of hardness and weight; and by

varying the mode of handling, I may add to these sensations many others

completely distinct from them. The sensations are all of which I am directly

conscious; but I consider them as produced by something not only existing

independently of my will, but external to my bodily organs and to my mind.

This external something I call a body.

              It may be asked, how come we to ascribe our sensations to any

external cause? And is there sufficient ground for so ascribing them? It is

known, that there are metaphysicians who have raised a controversy on the

point; maintaining that we are not warranted in referring our sensations to a

cause such as we understand by the word Body, or to any external cause

whatever. Though we have no concern here with this controversy, nor with

the metaphysical niceties on which it turns, one of the best ways of showing

what is meant by Substance is, to consider what position it is necessary to

take up, in order to maintain its existence against opponents.

              It is certain, then, that a part of our notion of a body consists of the

notion of a number of sensations of our own, or of other sentient beings,

habitually occurring simultaneously. My conception of the table at which I

am writing is compounded of its visible form and size, which are complex

sensations of sight; its tangible form and size, which are complex sensations

of our organs of touch and of our muscles; its weight, which is also a

sensation of touch and of the muscles; its color, which is a sensation of sight;

its hardness, which is a sensation of the muscles; its composition, which is

another word for all the varieties of sensation which we receive under various

circumstances from the wood of which it is made, and so forth. All or most of

these various sensations frequently are, and, as we learn by experience,always might be, experienced simultaneously, or in many different orders of

succession at our own choice: and hence the thought of any one of them

makes us think of the others, and the whole becomes mentally amalgamated

into one mixed state of consciousness, which, in the language of the school of

Locke and Hartley, is termed a Complex Idea.

              Now, there are philosophers who have argued as follows: If we

conceive an orange to be divested of its natural color without acquiring any

new one; to lose its softness without becoming hard, its roundness without

becoming square or pentagonal, or of any other regular or irregular figure

whatever; to be deprived of size, of weight, of taste, of smell; to lose all its

mechanical and all its chemical properties, and acquire no new ones; to

become, in short, invisible, intangible, imperceptible not only by all our

senses, but by the senses of all other sentient beings, real or possible; nothing,

say these thinkers, would remain. For of what nature, they ask, could be the

residuum? and by what token could it manifest its presence? To the

unreflecting its existence seems to rest on the evidence of the senses. But to

the senses nothing is apparent except the sensations. We know, indeed, that

these sensations are bound together by some law; they do not come together

at random, but according to a systematic order, which is part of the order

established in the universe. When we experience one of these sensations, we

usually experience the others also, or know that we have it in our power to

experience them. But a fixed law of connection, making the sensations occur

together, does not, say these philosophers, necessarily require what is called a

substratum to support them. The conception of a substratum is but one of

many possible forms in which that connection presents itself to our

imagination; a mode of, as it were, realizing the idea. If there be such a

substratum, suppose it at this instant miraculously annihilated, and let the

sensations continue to occur in the same order, and how would the

substratum be missed? By what signs should we be able to discover that its

existence had terminated? Should we not have as much reason to believe that

it still existed as we now have? And if we should not then be warranted in

believing it, how can we be so now? A body, therefore, according to these

metaphysicians, is not any thing intrinsically different from the sensations

which the body is said to produce in us; it is, in short, a set of sensations, or

rather, of possibilities of sensation, joined together according to a fixed law.

              The controversies to which these speculations have given rise, andthe doctrines which have been developed in the attempt to find a conclusive

answer to them, have been fruitful of important consequences to the Science

of Mind. The sensations (it was answered) which we are conscious of, and

which we receive, not at random, but joined together in a certain uniform

manner, imply not only a law or laws of connection, but a cause external to

our mind, which cause, by its own laws, determines the laws according to

which the sensations are connected and experienced. The schoolmen used to

call this external cause by the name we have already employed, a substratum

; and its attributes (as they expressed themselves) inhered , literally stuck , in

it. To this substratum the name Matter is usually given in philosophical

discussions. It was soon, however, acknowledged by all who reflected on the

subject, that the existence of matter can not be proved by extrinsic evidence.

The answer, therefore, now usually made to Berkeley and his followers, is,

that the belief is intuitive; that mankind, in all ages, have felt themselves

compelled, by a necessity of their nature, to refer their sensations to an

external cause: that even those who deny it in theory, yield to the necessity in

practice, and both in speech, thought, and feeling, do, equally with the vulgar,

acknowledge their sensations to be the effects of something external to them:

this knowledge, therefore, it is affirmed, is as evidently intuitive as our

knowledge of our sensations themselves is intuitive. And here the question

merges in the fundamental problem of metaphysics properly so called: to

which science we leave it.

              But although the extreme doctrine of the Idealist metaphysicians,

that objects are nothing but our sensations and the laws which connect them,

has not been generally adopted by subsequent thinkers; the point of most real

importance is one on which those metaphysicians are now very generally

considered to have made out their case: viz., that all we know of objects is the

sensations which they give us, and the order of the occurrence of those

sensations. Kant himself, on this point, is as explicit as Berkeley or Locke.

However firmly convinced that there exists a universe of “Things in

themselves,” totally distinct from the universe of phenomena, or of things as

they appear to our senses; and even when bringing into use a technical

expression (Noumenon ) to denote what the thing is in itself, as contrasted

with the representation of it in our minds; he allows that this representation

(the matter of which, he says, consists of our sensations, though the form is

given by the laws of the mind itself) is all we know of the object: and that the

real nature of the Thing is, and by the constitution of our faculties ever mustremain, at least in the present state of existence, an impenetrable mystery to
                                                                                    19
us. “Of things absolutely or in themselves,” says Sir William Hamilton, “be

they external, be they internal, we know nothing, or know them only as

incognizable; and become aware of their incomprehensible existence, only as

this is indirectly and accidentally revealed to us, through certain qualities

related to our faculties of knowledge, and which qualities, again, we can not

think as unconditional, irrelative, existent in and of ourselves. All that we
                                                                            20
know is therefore phenomenal — phenomenal of the unknown.” The same

doctrine is laid down in the clearest and strongest terms by M. Cousin, whose

observations on the subject are the more worthy of attention, as, in

consequence of the ultra-German and ontological character of his philosophy
                                                                                      21
in other respects, they may be regarded as the admissions of an opponent.

              There is not the slightest reason for believing that what we call the

sensible qualities of the object are a type of any thing inherent in itself, or

bear any affinity to its own nature. A cause does not, as such, resemble its

effects; an east wind is not like the feeling of cold, nor heat like the steam of

boiling water. Why then should matter resemble our sensations? Why should

the inmost nature of fire or water resemble the impressions made by those
                            22
objects upon our senses? Or on what principle are we authorized to deduce

from the effects, any thing concerning the cause, except that it is a cause

adequate to produce those effects? It may, therefore, safely be laid down as a

truth both obvious in itself, and admitted by all whom it is at present

necessary to take into consideration, that, of the outward world, we know and

can know absolutely nothing, except the sensations which we experience
      23
from it.

              § 8. Body having now been defined the external cause, and

(according to the more reasonable opinion) the unknown external cause, to

which we refer our sensations; it remains to frame a definition of Mind. Nor,

after the preceding observations, will this be difficult. For, as our conception

of a body is that of an unknown exciting cause of sensations, so our

conception of a mind is that of an unknown recipient or percipient, of them;

and not of them alone, but of all our other feelings. As body is understood to

be the mysterious something which excites the mind to feel, so mind is the

mysterious something which feels and thinks. It is unnecessary to give in the

case of mind, as we gave in the case of matter, a particular statement of the

skeptical system by which its existence as a Thing in itself, distinct from theseries of what are denominated its states, is called in question. But it is

necessary to remark, that on the inmost nature (whatever be meant by inmost

nature) of the thinking principle, as well as on the inmost nature of matter, we

are, and with our faculties must always remain, entirely in the dark. All which

we are aware of, even in our own minds, is (in the words of James Mill) a

certain “thread of consciousness;” a series of feelings, that is, of sensations,

thoughts, emotions, and volitions, more or less numerous and complicated.

There is a something I call Myself, or, by another form of expression, my

mind, which I consider as distinct from these sensations, thoughts, etc.; a

something which I conceive to be not the thoughts, but the being that has the

thoughts, and which I can conceive as existing forever in a state of

quiescence, without any thoughts at all. But what this being is, though it is

myself, I have no knowledge, other than the series of its states of

consciousness. As bodies manifest themselves to me only through the

sensations of which I regard them as the causes, so the thinking principle, or

mind, in my own nature, makes itself known to me only by the feelings of

which it is conscious. I know nothing about myself, save my capacities of

feeling or being conscious (including, of course, thinking and willing): and

were I to learn any thing new concerning my own nature, I can not with my

present faculties conceive this new information to be any thing else, than that

I have some additional capacities, as yet unknown to me, of feeling, thinking,

or willing.

              Thus, then, as body is the unsentient cause to which we are naturally

prompted to refer a certain portion of our feelings, so mind may be described

as the sentient subject (in the scholastic sense of the term) of all feelings; that

which has or feels them. But of the nature of either body or mind, further than

the feelings which the former excites, and which the latter experiences, we do

not, according to the best existing doctrine, know any thing; and if any thing,

logic has nothing to do with it, or with the manner in which the knowledge is

acquired. With this result we may conclude this portion of our subject, and

pass to the third and only remaining class or division of Namable Things.

              III. Attributes: and, first, Qualities.

              § 9. From what has already been said of Substance, what is to be

said of Attribute is easily deducible. For if we know not, and can not know,

any thing of bodies but the sensations which they excite in us or in others,

those sensations must be all that we can, at bottom, mean by their attributes;and the distinction which we verbally make between the properties of things

and the sensations we receive from them, must originate in the convenience

of discourse rather than in the nature of what is signified by the terms.

              Attributes are usually distributed under the three heads of Quality,

Quantity, and Relation. We shall come to the two latter presently: in the first

place we shall confine ourselves to the former.

              Let us take, then, as our example, one of what are termed the

sensible qualities of objects, and let that example be whiteness. When we

ascribe whiteness to any substance, as, for instance, snow; when we say that

snow has the quality whiteness, what do we really assert? Simply, that when

snow is present to our organs, we have a particular sensation, which we are

accustomed to call the sensation of white. But how do I know that snow is

present? Obviously by the sensations which I derive from it, and not

otherwise. I infer that the object is present, because it gives me a certain

assemblage or series of sensations. And when I ascribe to it the attribute

whiteness, my meaning is only, that, of the sensations composing this group

or series, that which I call the sensation of white color is one.

              This is one view which may be taken of the subject. But there is also

another and a different view. It may be said, that it is true we know nothing of

sensible objects, except the sensations they excite in us; that the fact of our

receiving from snow the particular sensation which is called a sensation of

white, is the ground on which we ascribe to that substance the quality

whiteness; the sole proof of its possessing that quality. But because one thing

may be the sole evidence of the existence of another thing, it does not follow

that the two are one and the same. The attribute whiteness (it may be said) is

not the fact of receiving the sensation, but something in the object itself; a

power inherent in it; something in virtue of which the object produces the

sensation. And when we affirm that snow possesses the attribute whiteness,

we do not merely assert that the presence of snow produces in us that

sensation, but that it does so through, and by reason of, that power or quality.

              For the purposes of logic it is not of material importance which of

these opinions we adopt. The full discussion of the subject belongs to the

other department of scientific inquiry, so often alluded to under the name of

metaphysics; but it may be said here, that for the doctrine of the existence of

a peculiar species of entities called qualities, I can see no foundation exceptin a tendency of the human mind which is the cause of many delusions. I

mean, the disposition, wherever we meet with two names which are not

precisely synonymous, to suppose that they must be the names of two

different things; whereas in reality they may be names of the same thing

viewed in two different lights, or under different suppositions as to

surrounding circumstances. Because quality and sensation can not be put

indiscriminately one for the other, it is supposed that they can not both

signify the same thing, namely, the impression or feeling with which we are

affected through our senses by the presence of an object; though there is at

least no absurdity in supposing that this identical impression or feeling may

be called a sensation when considered merely in itself, and a quality when

looked at in relation to any one of the numerous objects, the presence of

which to our organs excites in our minds that among various other sensations

or feelings. And if this be admissible as a supposition, it rests with those who

contend for an entity per se called a quality, to show that their opinion is

preferable, or is any thing in fact but a lingering remnant of the old doctrine

of occult causes; the very absurdity which Molière so happily ridiculed when

he made one of his pedantic physicians account for the fact that opium

produces sleep by the maxim, Because it has a soporific virtue.

              It is evident that when the physician stated that opium has a soporific

virtue, he did not account for, but merely asserted over again, the fact that it

produces sleep. In like manner, when we say that snow is white because it

has the quality of whiteness, we are only re-asserting in more technical

language the fact that it excites in us the sensation of white. If it be said that

the sensation must have some cause, I answer, its cause is the presence of the

assemblage of phenomena which is termed the object. When we have

asserted that as often as the object is present, and our organs in their normal

state, the sensation takes place, we have stated all that we know about the

matter. There is no need, after assigning a certain and intelligible cause, to

suppose an occult cause besides, for the purpose of enabling the real cause to

produce its effect. If I am asked, why does the presence of the object cause

this sensation in me, I can not tell: I can only say that such is my nature, and

the nature of the object; that the fact forms a part of the constitution of things.

And to this we must at last come, even after interpolating the imaginary

entity. Whatever number of links the chain of causes and effects may consist

of, how any one link produces the one which is next to it, remains equally

inexplicable to us. It is as easy to comprehend that the object should producethe sensation directly and at once, as that it should produce the same

sensation by the aid of something else called the power of producing it.

              But, as the difficulties which may be felt in adopting this view of the

subject can not be removed without discussions transcending the bounds of

our science, I content myself with a passing indication, and shall, for the

purposes of logic, adopt a language compatible with either view of the nature

of qualities. I shall say — what at least admits of no dispute — that the

quality of whiteness ascribed to the object snow, is grounded on its exciting

in us the sensation of white; and adopting the language already used by the

school logicians in the case of the kind of attributes called Relations, I shall

term the sensation of white the foundation of the quality whiteness. For

logical purposes the sensation is the only essential part of what is meant by

the word; the only part which we ever can be concerned in proving. When

that is proved, the quality is proved; if an object excites a sensation, it has, of

course, the power of exciting it.

              IV. Relations.

              § 10. The qualities of a body, we have said, are the attributes

grounded on the sensations which the presence of that particular body to our

organs excites in our minds. But when we ascribe to any object the kind of

attribute called a Relation, the foundation of the attribute must be something

in which other objects are concerned besides itself and the percipient.

              As there may with propriety be said to be a relation between any two

things to which two correlative names are or may be given, we may expect to

discover what constitutes a relation in general, if we enumerate the principal

cases in which mankind have imposed correlative names, and observe what

these cases have in common.

              What, then, is the character which is possessed in common by states

of circumstances so heterogeneous and discordant as these: one thing like

another; one thing unlike another; one thing near another; one thing far from

another; one thing before , after , along with another; one thing greater ,

equal , less , than another; one thing the cause of another, the effect of

another; one person the master , servant , child , parent , debtor , creditor ,

sovereign , subject , attorney , client , of another, and so on?

              Omitting, for the present, the case of Resemblance, (a relation whichrequires to be considered separately,) there seems to be one thing common to

all these cases, and only one; that in each of them there exists or occurs, or

has existed or occurred, or may be expected to exist or occur, some fact or

phenomenon, into which the two things which are said to be related to each

other, both enter as parties concerned. This fact, or phenomenon, is what the

Aristotelian logicians called the fundamentum relationis . Thus in the relation

of greater and less between two magnitudes, the fundamentum relationis is

the fact that one of the two magnitudes could, under certain conditions, be

included in, without entirely filling, the space occupied by the other

magnitude. In the relation of master and servant, the fundamentum relationis

is the fact that the one has undertaken, or is compelled, to perform certain

services for the benefit and at the bidding of the other. Examples might be

indefinitely multiplied; but it is already obvious that whenever two things are

said to be related, there is some fact, or series of facts, into which they both

enter; and that whenever any two things are involved in some one fact, or

series of facts, we may ascribe to those two things a mutual relation grounded

on the fact. Even if they have nothing in common but what is common to all

things, that they are members of the universe, we call that a relation, and

denominate them fellow-creatures, fellow-beings, or fellow-denizens of the

universe. But in proportion as the fact into which the two objects enter as

parts is of a more special and peculiar, or of a more complicated nature, so

also is the relation grounded upon it. And there are as many conceivable

relations as there are conceivable kinds of fact in which two things can be

jointly concerned.

              In the same manner, therefore, as a quality is an attribute grounded

on the fact that a certain sensation or sensations are produced in us by the

object, so an attribute grounded on some fact into which the object enters

jointly with another object, is a relation between it and that other object. But

the fact in the latter case consists of the very same kind of elements as the

fact in the former; namely, states of consciousness. In the case, for example,

of any legal relation, as debtor and creditor, principal and agent, guardian and

ward, the fundamentum relationis consists entirely of thoughts, feelings, and

volitions (actual or contingent), either of the persons themselves or of other

persons concerned in the same series of transactions; as, for instance, the

intentions which would be formed by a judge, in case a complaint were made

to his tribunal of the infringement of any of the legal obligations imposed by

the relation; and the acts which the judge would perform in consequence; actsbeing (as we have already seen) another word for intentions followed by an

effect, and that effect being but another word for sensations, or some other

feelings, occasioned either to the agent himself or to somebody else. There is

no part of what the names expressive of the relation imply, that is not

resolvable into states of consciousness; outward objects being, no doubt,

supposed throughout as the causes by which some of those states of

consciousness are excited, and minds as the subjects by which all of them are

experienced, but neither the external objects nor the minds making their

existence known otherwise than by the states of consciousness.

              Cases of relation are not always so complicated as those to which we

last alluded. The simplest of all cases of relation are those expressed by the

words antecedent and consequent, and by the word simultaneous. If we say,

for instance, that dawn preceded sunrise, the fact in which the two things,

dawn and sunrise, were jointly concerned, consisted only of the two things

themselves; no third thing entered into the fact or phenomenon at all. Unless,

indeed, we choose to call the succession of the two objects a third thing; but

their succession is not something added to the things themselves; it is

something involved in them. Dawn and sunrise announce themselves to our

consciousness by two successive sensations. Our consciousness of the

succession of these sensations is not a third sensation or feeling added to

them; we have not first the two feelings, and then a feeling of their

succession. To have two feelings at all, implies having them either

successively, or else simultaneously. Sensations, or other feelings, being

given, succession and simultaneousness are the two conditions, to the

alternative of which they are subjected by the nature of our faculties; and no

one has been able, or needs expect, to analyze the matter any further.

              § 11. In a somewhat similar position are two other sorts of relations,

Likeness and Unlikeness. I have two sensations; we will suppose them to be

simple ones; two sensations of white, or one sensation of white and another

of black. I call the first two sensations like ; the last two unlike . What is the

fact or phenomenon constituting the fundamentum of this relation? The two

sensations first, and then what we call a feeling of resemblance, or of want of

resemblance. Let us confine ourselves to the former case. Resemblance is

evidently a feeling; a state of the consciousness of the observer. Whether the

feeling of the resemblance of the two colors be a third state of consciousness,

which I have after having the two sensations of color, or whether (like thefeeling of their succession) it is involved in the sensations themselves, may

be a matter of discussion. But in either case, these feelings of resemblance,

and of its opposite dissimilarity, are parts of our nature; and parts so far from

being capable of analysis, that they are presupposed in every attempt to

analyze any of our other feelings. Likeness and unlikeness, therefore, as well

as antecedence, sequence, and simultaneousness, must stand apart among

relations, as things sui generis . They are attributes grounded on facts, that is,

on states of consciousness, but on states which are peculiar, unresolvable, and

inexplicable.

              But, though likeness or unlikeness can not be resolved into any thing

else, complex cases of likeness or unlikeness can be resolved into simpler

ones. When we say of two things which consist of parts, that they are like one

another, the likeness of the wholes does admit of analysis; it is compounded

of likenesses between the various parts respectively, and of likeness in their

arrangement. Of how vast a variety of resemblances of parts must that

resemblance be composed, which induces us to say that a portrait, or a

landscape, is like its original. If one person mimics another with any success,

of how many simple likenesses must the general or complex likeness be

compounded: likeness in a succession of bodily postures; likeness in voice, or

in the accents and intonations of the voice; likeness in the choice of words,

and in the thoughts or sentiments expressed, whether by word, countenance,

or gesture.

              All likeness and unlikeness of which we have any cognizance,

resolve themselves into likeness and unlikeness between states of our own, or

some other, mind. When we say that one body is like another, (since we

know nothing of bodies but the sensations which they excite,) we mean really

that there is a resemblance between the sensations excited by the two bodies,

or between some portions at least of those sensations. If we say that two

attributes are like one another (since we know nothing of attributes except the

sensations or states of feeling on which they are grounded), we mean really

that those sensations, or states of feeling, resemble each other. We may also

say that two relations are alike. The fact of resemblance between relations is

sometimes called analogy , forming one of the numerous meanings of that

word. The relation in which Priam stood to Hector, namely, that of father and

son, resembles the relation in which Philip stood to Alexander; resembles it

so closely that they are called the same relation. The relation in whichCromwell stood to England resembles the relation in which Napoleon stood

to France, though not so closely as to be called the same relation. The

meaning in both these instances must be, that a resemblance existed between

the facts which constituted the fundamentum relationis .

              This resemblance may exist in all conceivable gradations, from

perfect undistinguishableness to something extremely slight. When we say,

that a thought suggested to the mind of a person of genius is like a seed cast

into the ground, because the former produces a multitude of other thoughts,

and the latter a multitude of other seeds, this is saying that between the

relation of an inventive mind to a thought contained in it, and the relation of a

fertile soil to a seed contained in it, there exists a resemblance: the real

resemblance being in the two fundamenta relationis , in each of which there

occurs a germ, producing by its development a multitude of other things

similar to itself. And as, whenever two objects are jointly concerned in a

phenomenon, this constitutes a relation between those objects, so, if we

suppose a second pair of objects concerned in a second phenomenon, the

slightest resemblance between the two phenomena is sufficient to admit of its

being said that the two relations resemble; provided, of course, the points of

resemblance are found in those portions of the two phenomena respectively

which are connoted by the relative names.

              While speaking of resemblance, it is necessary to take notice of an

ambiguity of language, against which scarcely any one is sufficiently on his

guard. Resemblance, when it exists in the highest degree of all, amounting to

undistinguishableness, is often called identity, and the two similar things are

said to be the same. I say often, not always; for we do not say that two visible

objects, two persons, for instance, are the same, because they are so much

alike that one might be mistaken for the other: but we constantly use this

mode of expression when speaking of feelings; as when I say that the sight of

any object gives me the same sensation or emotion to-day that it did

yesterday, or the same which it gives to some other person. This is evidently

an incorrect application of the word same ; for the feeling which I had

yesterday is gone, never to return; what I have to-day is another feeling,

exactly like the former, perhaps, but distinct from it; and it is evident that two

different persons can not be experiencing the same feeling, in the sense in

which we say that they are both sitting at the same table. By a similar

ambiguity we say, that two persons are ill of the same disease; that twopersons hold the same office; not in the sense in which we say that they are

engaged in the same adventure, or sailing in the same ship, but in the sense

that they fill offices exactly similar, though, perhaps, in distant places. Great

confusion of ideas is often produced, and many fallacies engendered, in

otherwise enlightened understandings, by not being sufficiently alive to the

fact (in itself not always to be avoided), that they use the same name to

express ideas so different as those of identity and undistinguishable

resemblance. Among modern writers, Archbishop Whately stands almost

alone in having drawn attention to this distinction, and to the ambiguity

connected with it.

              Several relations, generally called by other names, are really cases of

resemblance. As, for example, equality; which is but another word for the

exact resemblance commonly called identity, considered as subsisting

between things in respect of their quantity . And this example forms a

suitable transition to the third and last of the three heads under which, as

already remarked, Attributes are commonly arranged.

              V. Quantity.

              § 12. Let us imagine two things, between which there is no

difference (that is, no dissimilarity), except in quantity alone; for instance, a

gallon of water, and more than a gallon of water. A gallon of water, like any

other external object, makes its presence known to us by a set of sensations

which it excites. Ten gallons of water are also an external object, making its

presence known to us in a similar manner; and as we do not mistake ten

gallons of water for a gallon of water, it is plain that the set of sensations is

more or less different in the two cases. In like manner, a gallon of water, and

a gallon of wine, are two external objects, making their presence known by

two sets of sensations, which sensations are different from each other. In the

first case, however, we say that the difference is in quantity; in the last there

is a difference in quality, while the quantity of the water and of the wine is

the same. What is the real distinction between the two cases? It is not within

the province of Logic to analyze it; nor to decide whether it is susceptible of

analysis or not. For us the following considerations are sufficient: It is

evident that the sensations I receive from the gallon of water, and those I

receive from the gallon of wine, are not the same, that is, not precisely alike;

neither are they altogether unlike: they are partly similar, partly dissimilar;

and that in which they resemble is precisely that in which alone the gallon ofwater and the ten gallons do not resemble. That in which the gallon of water

and the gallon of wine are like each other, and in which the gallon and the ten

gallons of water are unlike each other, is called their quantity. This likeness

and unlikeness I do not pretend to explain, no more than any other kind of

likeness or unlikeness. But my object is to show, that when we say of two

things that they differ in quantity, just as when we say that they differ in

quality, the assertion is always grounded on a difference in the sensations

which they excite. Nobody, I presume, will say, that to see, or to lift, or to

drink, ten gallons of water, does not include in itself a different set of

sensations from those of seeing, lifting, or drinking one gallon; or that to see

or handle a foot-rule, and to see or handle a yard-measure made exactly like

it, are the same sensations. I do not undertake to say what the difference in

the sensations is. Every body knows, and nobody can tell; no more than any

one could tell what white is to a person who had never had the sensation. But

the difference, so far as cognizable by our faculties, lies in the sensations.

Whatever difference we say there is in the things themselves, is, in this as in

all other cases, grounded, and grounded exclusively, on a difference in the

sensations excited by them.

              VI. Attributes Concluded.

              § 13. Thus, then, all the attributes of bodies which are classed under

Quality or Quantity, are grounded on the sensations which we receive from

those bodies, and may be defined, the powers which the bodies have of

exciting those sensations. And the same general explanation has been found

to apply to most of the attributes usually classed under the head of Relation.

They, too, are grounded on some fact or phenomenon into which the related

objects enter as parts; that fact or phenomenon having no meaning and no

existence to us, except the series of sensations or other states of

consciousness by which it makes itself known; and the relation being simply

the power or capacity which the object possesses of taking part along with the

correlated object in the production of that series of sensations or states of

consciousness. We have been obliged, indeed, to recognize a somewhat

different character in certain peculiar relations, those of succession and

simultaneity, of likeness and unlikeness. These, not being grounded on any

fact or phenomenon distinct from the related objects themselves, do not admit

of the same kind of analysis. But these relations, though not, like other

relations, grounded on states of consciousness, are themselves states ofconsciousness: resemblance is nothing but our feeling of resemblance;

succession is nothing but our feeling of succession. Or, if this be disputed

(and we can not, without transgressing the bounds of our science, discuss it

here), at least our knowledge of these relations, and even our possibility of

knowledge, is confined to those which subsist between sensations, or other

states of consciousness; for, though we ascribe resemblance, or succession, or

simultaneity, to objects and to attributes, it is always in virtue of resemblance

or succession or simultaneity in the sensations or states of consciousness

which those objects excite, and on which those attributes are grounded.

              § 14. In the preceding investigation we have, for the sake of

simplicity, considered bodies only, and omitted minds. But what we have

said, is applicable, mutatis mutandis , to the latter. The attributes of minds, as

well as those of bodies, are grounded on states of feeling or consciousness.

But in the case of a mind, we have to consider its own states, as well as those

which it produces in other minds. Every attribute of a mind consists either in

being itself affected in a certain way, or affecting other minds in a certain

way. Considered in itself, we can predicate nothing of it but the series of its

own feelings. When we say of any mind, that it is devout, or superstitious, or

meditative, or cheerful, we mean that the ideas, emotions, or volitions

implied in those words, form a frequently recurring part of the series of

feelings, or states of consciousness, which fill up the sentient existence of

that mind.

              In addition, however, to those attributes of a mind which are

grounded on its own states of feeling, attributes may also be ascribed to it, in

the same manner as to a body, grounded on the feelings which it excites in

other minds. A mind does not, indeed, like a body, excite sensations, but it

may excite thoughts or emotions. The most important example of attributes

ascribed on this ground, is the employment of terms expressive of

approbation or blame. When, for example, we say of any character, or (in

other words) of any mind, that it is admirable, we mean that the

contemplation of it excites the sentiment of admiration; and indeed somewhat

more, for the word implies that we not only feel admiration, but approve that

sentiment in ourselves. In some cases, under the semblance of a single

attribute, two are really predicated: one of them, a state of the mind itself; the

other, a state with which other minds are affected by thinking of it. As when

we say of any one that he is generous. The word generosity expresses acertain state of mind, but being a term of praise, it also expresses that this

state of mind excites in us another mental state, called approbation. The

assertion made, therefore, is twofold, and of the following purport: Certain

feelings form habitually a part of this person’s sentient existence; and the idea

of those feelings of his, excites the sentiment of approbation in ourselves or

others.

              As we thus ascribe attributes to minds on the ground of ideas and

emotions, so may we to bodies on similar grounds, and not solely on the

ground of sensations: as in speaking of the beauty of a statue; since this

attribute is grounded on the peculiar feeling of pleasure which the statue

produces in our minds; which is not a sensation, but an emotion.

              VII. General Results.

              § 15. Our survey of the varieties of Things which have been, or

which are capable of being, named — which have been, or are capable of

being, either predicated of other Things, or themselves made the subject of

predications — is now concluded.

              Our enumeration commenced with Feelings. These we scrupulously

distinguished from the objects which excite them, and from the organs by

which they are, or may be supposed to be, conveyed. Feelings are of four

sorts: Sensations, Thoughts, Emotions, and Volitions. What are called

Perceptions are merely a particular case of Belief, and Belief is a kind of

thought. Actions are merely volitions followed by an effect.

              After Feelings we proceeded to Substances. These are either Bodies

or Minds. Without entering into the grounds of the metaphysical doubts

which have been raised concerning the existence of Matter and Mind as

objective realities, we stated as sufficient for us the conclusion in which the

best thinkers are now for the most part agreed, that all we can know of Matter

is the sensations which it gives us, and the order of occurrence of those

sensations; and that while the substance Body is the unknown cause of our

sensations, the substance Mind is the unknown recipient.

              The only remaining class of Namable Things is Attributes; and these

are of three kinds, Quality, Relation, and Quantity. Qualities, like substances,

are known to us no otherwise than by the sensations or other states of

consciousness which they excite: and while, in compliance with commonusage, we have continued to speak of them as a distinct class of Things, we

showed that in predicating them no one means to predicate any thing but

those sensations or states of consciousness, on which they may be said to be

grounded, and by which alone they can be defined or described. Relations,

except the simple cases of likeness and unlikeness, succession and

simultaneity, are similarly grounded on some fact or phenomenon, that is, on

some series of sensations or states of consciousness, more or less

complicated. The third species of Attribute, Quantity, is also manifestly

grounded on something in our sensations or states of feeling, since there is an

indubitable difference in the sensations excited by a larger and a smaller bulk,

or by a greater or a less degree of intensity, in any object of sense or of

consciousness. All attributes, therefore, are to us nothing but either our

sensations and other states of feeling, or something inextricably involved

therein; and to this even the peculiar and simple relations just adverted to are

not exceptions. Those peculiar relations, however, are so important, and, even

if they might in strictness be classed among states of consciousness, are so

fundamentally distinct from any other of those states, that it would be a vain

subtlety to bring them under that common description, and it is necessary that
                                24
they should be classed apart.

              As the result, therefore, of our analysis, we obtain the following as

an enumeration and classification of all Namable Things:

              1st. Feelings, or States of Consciousness.

              2d. The Minds which experience those feelings.

              3d. The Bodies, or external objects which excite certain of those

feelings, together with the powers or properties whereby they excite them;

these latter (at least) being included rather in compliance with common

opinion, and because their existence is taken for granted in the common

language from which I can not prudently deviate, than because the

recognition of such powers or properties as real existences appears to be

warranted by a sound philosophy.

              4th, and last. The Successions and Co-existences, the Likenesses and

Unlikenesses, between feelings or states of consciousness. Those relations,

when considered as subsisting between other things, exist in reality only

between the states of consciousness which those things, if bodies, excite, if

minds, either excite or experience.              This, until a better can be suggested, may serve as a substitute for the

Categories of Aristotle considered as a classification of Existences. The

practical application of it will appear when we commence the inquiry into the

Import of Propositions; in other words, when we inquire what it is which the

mind actually believes, when it gives what is called its assent to a

proposition.

              These four classes comprising, if the classification be correct, all

Namable Things, these or some of them must of course compose the

signification of all names: and of these, or some of them, is made up

whatever we call a fact.

              For distinction’s sake, every fact which is solely composed of

feelings or states of consciousness considered as such, is often called a

Psychological or Subjective fact; while every fact which is composed, either

wholly or in part, of something different from these, that is, of substances and

attributes, is called an Objective fact. We may say, then, that every objective

fact is grounded on a corresponding subjective one; and has no meaning to us

(apart from the subjective fact which corresponds to it), except as a name for

the unknown and inscrutable process by which that subjective or

psychological fact is brought to pass.

 

 

                           Chapter IV. – Of Propositions.

 

 

              § 1. In treating of Propositions, as already in treating of Names,

some considerations of a comparatively elementary nature respecting their

form and varieties must be premised, before entering upon that analysis of the

import conveyed by them, which is the real subject and purpose of this

preliminary book.

              A proposition, we have before said, is a portion of discourse in

which a predicate is affirmed or denied of a subject. A predicate and a subject

are all that is necessarily required to make up a proposition: but as we can not

conclude from merely seeing two names put together, that they are a

predicate and a subject, that is, that one of them is intended to be affirmed or

denied of the other, it is necessary that there should be some mode or form of

indicating that such is the intention; some sign to distinguish a predication

from any other kind of discourse. This is sometimes done by a slight

alteration of one of the words, called an inflection ; as when we say, Fire

burns; the change of the second word from burn to burns showing that we

mean to affirm the predicate burn of the subject fire. But this function is more

commonly fulfilled by the word is , when an affirmation is intended, is not ,

when a negation; or by some other part of the verb to be . The word which

thus serves the purpose of a sign of predication is called, as we formerly

observed, the copula . It is important that there should be no indistinctness in

our conception of the nature and office of the copula; for confused notions

respecting it are among the causes which have spread mysticism over the

field of logic, and perverted its speculations into logomachies.

              It is apt to be supposed that the copula is something more than a

mere sign of predication; that it also signifies existence. In the proposition,

Socrates is just, it may seem to be implied not only that the quality just can be

affirmed of Socrates, but moreover that Socrates is , that is to say, exists.

This, however, only shows that there is an ambiguity in the word is ; a word

which not only performs the function of the copula in affirmations, but has

also a meaning of its own, in virtue of which it may itself be made the

predicate of a proposition. That the employment of it as a copula does not

necessarily include the affirmation of existence, appears from such aproposition as this, A centaur is a fiction of the poets; where it can not

possibly be implied that a centaur exists, since the proposition itself expressly

asserts that the thing has no real existence.

              Many volumes might be filled with the frivolous speculations

concerning the nature of Being (το ὄν, οὐσία, Ens, Entitas, Essentia, and the

like), which have arisen from overlooking this double meaning of the word to

be ; from supposing that when it signifies to exist , and when it signifies to be

some specified thing, as to be a man, to be Socrates, to be seen or spoken of,

to be a phantom, even to be a nonentity, it must still, at bottom, answer to the

same idea; and that a meaning must be found for it which shall suit all these

cases. The fog which rose from this narrow spot diffused itself at an early

period over the whole surface of metaphysics. Yet it becomes us not to

triumph over the great intellects of Plato and Aristotle because we are now

able to preserve ourselves from many errors into which they, perhaps

inevitably, fell. The fire-teazer of a modern steam-engine produces by his

exertions far greater effects than Milo of Crotona could, but he is not

therefore a stronger man. The Greeks seldom knew any language but their

own. This rendered it far more difficult for them than it is for us, to acquire a

readiness in detecting ambiguities. One of the advantages of having

accurately studied a plurality of languages, especially of those languages

which eminent thinkers have used as the vehicle of their thoughts, is the

practical lesson we learn respecting the ambiguities of words, by finding that

the same word in one language corresponds, on different occasions, to

different words in another. When not thus exercised, even the strongest

understandings find it difficult to believe that things which have a common

name, have not in some respect or other a common nature; and often expend

much labor very unprofitably (as was frequently done by the two

philosophers just mentioned) in vain attempts to discover in what this

common nature consists. But, the habit once formed, intellects much inferior

are capable of detecting even ambiguities which are common to many

languages: and it is surprising that the one now under consideration, though it

exists in the modern languages as well as in the ancient, should have been

overlooked by almost all authors. The quantity of futile speculation which

had been caused by a misapprehension of the nature of the copula, was hinted
                                      25
at by Hobbes; but Mr. James Mill was, I believe, the first who distinctly

characterized the ambiguity, and pointed out how many errors in the received

systems of philosophy it has had to answer for. It has, indeed, misled themoderns scarcely less than the ancients, though their mistakes, because our

understandings are not yet so completely emancipated from their influence,

do not appear equally irrational.

              We shall now briefly review the principal distinctions which exist

among propositions, and the technical terms most commonly in use to

express those distinctions.

              § 2. A proposition being a portion of discourse in which something

is affirmed or denied of something, the first division of propositions is into

affirmative and negative. An affirmative proposition is that in which the

predicate is affirmed of the subject; as, Cæsar is dead. A negative proposition

is that in which the predicate is denied of the subject; as, Cæsar is not dead.

The copula, in this last species of proposition, consists of the words is not ,

which are the sign of negation; is being the sign of affirmation.

              Some logicians, among whom may be mentioned Hobbes, state this

distinction differently; they recognize only one form of copula, is , and attach

the negative sign to the predicate. “Cæsar is dead,” and “Cæsar is not dead,”

according to these writers, are propositions agreeing not in the subject and

predicate, but in the subject only. They do not consider “dead,” but “not

dead,” to be the predicate of the second proposition, and they accordingly

define a negative proposition to be one in which the predicate is a negative

name. The point, though not of much practical moment, deserves notice as an

example (not unfrequent in logic) where by means of an apparent

simplification, but which is merely verbal, matters are made more complex

than before. The notion of these writers was, that they could get rid of the

distinction between affirming and denying, by treating every case of denying

as the affirming of a negative name. But what is meant by a negative name?

A name expressive of the absence of an attribute. So that when we affirm a

negative name, what we are really predicating is absence and not presence;

we are asserting not that any thing is, but that something is not; to express

which operation no word seems so proper as the word denying. The

fundamental distinction is between a fact and the non-existence of that fact;

between seeing something and not seeing it, between Cæsar’s being dead and

his not being dead; and if this were a merely verbal distinction, the

generalization which brings both within the same form of assertion would be

a real simplification: the distinction, however, being real, and in the facts, it is

the generalization confounding the distinction that is merely verbal; and tendsto obscure the subject, by treating the difference between two kinds of truths

as if it were only a difference between two kinds of words. To put things

together, and to put them or keep them asunder, will remain different

operations, whatever tricks we may play with language.

              A remark of a similar nature may be applied to most of those

distinctions among propositions which are said to have reference to their

modality ; as, difference of tense or time; the sun did rise, the sun is rising,

the sun will rise. These differences, like that between affirmation and

negation, might be glossed over by considering the incident of time as a mere

modification of the predicate: thus, The sun is an object having risen , The

sun is an object now rising , The sun is an object to rise hereafter . But the

simplification would be merely verbal. Past, present, and future, do not

constitute so many different kinds of rising; they are designations belonging

to the event asserted, to the sun’s rising to-day. They affect, not the predicate,

but the applicability of the predicate to the particular subject. That which we

affirm to be past, present, or future, is not what the subject signifies, nor what

the predicate signifies, but specifically and expressly what the predication

signifies; what is expressed only by the proposition as such, and not by either

or both of the terms. Therefore the circumstance of time is properly

considered as attaching to the copula, which is the sign of predication, and

not to the predicate. If the same can not be said of such modifications as

these, Cæsar may be dead; Cæsar is perhaps dead; it is possible that Cæsar is

dead; it is only because these fall altogether under another head, being

properly assertions not of any thing relating to the fact itself, but of the state

of our own mind in regard to it; namely, our absence of disbelief of it. Thus

“Cæsar may be dead” means “I am not sure that Cæsar is alive.”

              § 3. The next division of propositions is into Simple and Complex;
                                  26
more aptly (by Professor Bain ) termed Compound. A simple proposition is

that in which one predicate is affirmed or denied of one subject. A compound

proposition is that in which there is more than one predicate, or more than

one subject, or both.

              At first sight this division has the air of an absurdity; a solemn

distinction of things into one and more than one; as if we were to divide

horses into single horses and teams of horses. And it is true that what is

called a complex (or compound) proposition is often not a proposition at all,

but several propositions, held together by a conjunction. Such, for example, isthis: Cæsar is dead, and Brutus is alive: or even this, Cæsar is dead, but

Brutus is alive. There are here two distinct assertions; and we might as well

call a street a complex house, as these two propositions a complex

proposition. It is true that the syncategorematic words and and but have a

meaning; but that meaning is so far from making the two propositions one,

that it adds a third proposition to them. All particles are abbreviations, and

generally abbreviations of propositions; a kind of short-hand, whereby

something which, to be expressed fully, would have required a proposition or

a series of propositions, is suggested to the mind at once. Thus the words,

Cæsar is dead and Brutus is alive, are equivalent to these: Cæsar is dead;

Brutus is alive; it is desired that the two preceding propositions should be

thought of together. If the words were, Cæsar is dead, but Brutus is alive, the

sense would be equivalent to the same three propositions together with a

fourth; “between the two preceding propositions there exists a contrast:” viz.,

either between the two facts themselves, or between the feelings with which

it is desired that they should be regarded.

              In the instances cited the two propositions are kept visibly distinct,

each subject having its separate predicate, and each predicate its separate

subject. For brevity, however, and to avoid repetition, the propositions are

often blended together: as in this, “Peter and James preached at Jerusalem

and in Galilee,” which contains four propositions: Peter preached at

Jerusalem, Peter preached in Galilee, James preached at Jerusalem, James

preached in Galilee.

              We have seen that when the two or more propositions comprised in

what is called a complex proposition are stated absolutely, and not under any

condition or proviso, it is not a proposition at all, but a plurality of

propositions; since what it expresses is not a single assertion, but several

assertions, which, if true when joined, are true also when separated. But there

is a kind of proposition which, though it contains a plurality of subjects and

of predicates, and may be said in one sense of the word to consist of several

propositions, contains but one assertion; and its truth does not at all imply

that of the simple propositions which compose it. An example of this is, when

the simple propositions are connected by the particle or ; as, either A is B or

C is D; or by the particle if ; as, A is B if C is D. In the former case, the

proposition is called disjunctive , in the latter, conditional : the name

hypothetical was originally common to both.              As has been well remarked by Archbishop Whately and others, the

disjunctive form is resolvable into the conditional; every disjunctive

proposition being equivalent to two or more conditional ones. “Either A is B

or C is D,” means, “if A is not B, C is D; and if C is not D, A is B.” All

hypothetical propositions, therefore, though disjunctive in form, are

conditional in meaning; and the words hypothetical and conditional may be,

as indeed they generally are, used synonymously. Propositions in which the

assertion is not dependent on a condition, are said, in the language of

logicians, to be categorical .

              A hypothetical proposition is not, like the pretended complex

propositions which we previously considered, a mere aggregation of simple

propositions. The simple propositions which form part of the words in which

it is couched, form no part of the assertion which it conveys. When we say, If

the Koran comes from God, Mohammed is the prophet of God, we do not

intend to affirm either that the Koran does come from God, or that

Mohammed is really his prophet. Neither of these simple propositions may be

true, and yet the truth of the hypothetical proposition may be indisputable.

What is asserted is not the truth of either of the propositions, but the

inferribility of the one from the other. What, then, is the subject, and what the

predicate of the hypothetical proposition? “The Koran” is not the subject of

it, nor is “Mohammed:” for nothing is affirmed or denied either of the Koran

or of Mohammed. The real subject of the predication is the entire proposition,

“Mohammed is the prophet of God;” and the affirmation is, that this is a

legitimate inference from the proposition, “The Koran comes from God.” The

subject and predicate, therefore, of a hypothetical proposition are names of

propositions. The subject is some one proposition. The predicate is a general

relative name applicable to propositions; of this form — “an inference from

so and so.” A fresh instance is here afforded of the remark, that particles are

abbreviations; since “If A is B, C is D,” is found to be an abbreviation of the

following: “The proposition C is D, is a legitimate inference from the

proposition A is B.”

              The distinction, therefore, between hypothetical and categorical

propositions is not so great as it at first appears. In the conditional, as well as

in the categorical form, one predicate is affirmed of one subject, and no more:

but a conditional proposition is a proposition concerning a proposition; the

subject of the assertion is itself an assertion. Nor is this a property peculiar tohypothetical propositions. There are other classes of assertions concerning

propositions. Like other things, a proposition has attributes which may be

predicated of it. The attribute predicated of it in a hypothetical proposition, is

that of being an inference from a certain other proposition. But this is only

one of many attributes that might be predicated. We may say, That the whole

is greater than its part, is an axiom in mathematics: That the Holy Ghost

proceeds from the Father alone, is a tenet of the Greek Church: The doctrine

of the divine right of kings was renounced by Parliament at the Revolution:

The infallibility of the Pope has no countenance from Scripture. In all these

cases the subject of the predication is an entire proposition. That which these

different predicates are affirmed of, is the proposition , “the whole is greater

than its part;” the proposition , “the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father

alone;” the proposition , “kings have a divine right;” the proposition , “the

Pope is infallible.”

              Seeing, then, that there is much less difference between hypothetical

propositions and any others, than one might be led to imagine from their

form, we should be at a loss to account for the conspicuous position which

they have been selected to fill in treatises on logic, if we did not remember

that what they predicate of a proposition, namely, its being an inference from

something else, is precisely that one of its attributes with which most of all a

logician is concerned.

              § 4. The next of the common divisions of Propositions is into

Universal, Particular, Indefinite, and Singular: a distinction founded on the

degree of generality in which the name, which is the subject of the

proposition, is to be understood. The following are examples:

              All men are mortal — Universal. Some men are mortal — Particular.

Man is mortal — Indefinite. Julius Cæsar is mortal — Singular.

              The proposition is Singular, when the subject is an individual name.

The individual name needs not be a proper name. “The Founder of

Christianity was crucified,” is as much a singular proposition as “Christ was

crucified.”

              When the name which is the subject of the proposition is a general

name, we may intend to affirm or deny the predicate, either of all the things

that the subject denotes, or only of some. When the predicate is affirmed or

denied of all and each of the things denoted by the subject, the proposition isuniversal; when of some undefined portion of them only, it is particular.

Thus, All men are mortal; Every man is mortal; are universal propositions.

No man is immortal, is also a universal proposition, since the predicate,

immortal, is denied of each and every individual denoted by the term man;

the negative proposition being exactly equivalent to the following, Every man

is not-immortal. But “some men are wise,” “some men are not wise,” are

particular propositions; the predicate wise being in the one case affirmed and

in the other denied not of each and every individual denoted by the term man,

but only of each and every one of some portion of those individuals, without

specifying what portion; for if this were specified, the proposition would be

changed either into a singular proposition, or into a universal proposition

with a different subject; as, for instance, “all properly instructed men are

wise.” There are other forms of particular propositions; as, “Most men are

imperfectly educated:” it being immaterial how large a portion of the subject

the predicate is asserted of, as long as it is left uncertain how that portion is to
                                  27
be distinguished from the rest.

              When the form of the expression does not clearly show whether the

general name which is the subject of the proposition is meant to stand for all

the individuals denoted by it, or only for some of them, the proposition is, by

some logicians, called Indefinite; but this, as Archbishop Whately observes,

is a solecism, of the same nature as that committed by some grammarians

when in their list of genders they enumerate the doubtful gender. The speaker

must mean to assert the proposition either as a universal or as a particular

proposition, though he has failed to declare which: and it often happens that

though the words do not show which of the two he intends, the context, or the

custom of speech, supplies the deficiency. Thus, when it is affirmed that

“Man is mortal,” nobody doubts that the assertion is intended of all human

beings; and the word indicative of universality is commonly omitted, only

because the meaning is evident without it. In the proposition, “Wine is good,”

it is understood with equal readiness, though for somewhat different reasons,
                                                                          28
that the assertion is not intended to be universal, but particular. As is
                                29
observed by Professor Bain, the chief examples of Indefinite propositions

occur “with names of material, which are the subjects sometimes of

universal, and at other times of particular predication. ‘Food is chemically

constituted by carbon, oxygen, etc.,’ is a proposition of universal quantity;

the meaning is all food — all kinds of food. ‘Food is necessary to animal life’

is a case of particular quantity; the meaning is some sort of food, notnecessarily all sorts. ‘Metal is requisite in order to strength’ does not mean all

kinds of metal. ‘Gold will make a way,’ means a portion of gold.”

              When a general name stands for each and every individual which it

is a name of, or in other words, which it denotes, it is said by logicians to be

distributed , or taken distributively. Thus, in the proposition, All men are

mortal, the subject, Man, is distributed, because mortality is affirmed of each

and every man. The predicate, Mortal, is not distributed, because the only

mortals who are spoken of in the proposition are those who happen to be

men; while the word may, for aught that appears, and in fact does,

comprehend within it an indefinite number of objects besides men. In the

proposition, Some men are mortal, both the predicate and the subject are

undistributed. In the following, No men have wings, both the predicate and

the subject are distributed. Not only is the attribute of having wings denied of

the entire class Man, but that class is severed and cast out from the whole of

the class Winged, and not merely from some part of that class.

              This phraseology, which is of great service in stating and

demonstrating the rules of the syllogism, enables us to express very concisely

the definitions of a universal and a particular proposition. A universal

proposition is that of which the subject is distributed; a particular proposition

is that of which the subject is undistributed.

              There are many more distinctions among propositions than those we

have here stated, some of them of considerable importance. But, for

explaining and illustrating these, more suitable opportunities will occur in the

sequel.

 

 

                 Chapter V. – Of The Import Of Propositions.

 

 

              § 1. An inquiry into the nature of propositions must have one of two

objects: to analyze the state of mind called Belief, or to analyze what is

believed. All language recognizes a difference between a doctrine or opinion,

and the fact of entertaining the opinion; between assent, and what is assented

to.

              Logic, according to the conception here formed of it, has no concern

with the nature of the act of judging or believing; the consideration of that

act, as a phenomenon of the mind, belongs to another science. Philosophers,

however, from Descartes downward, and especially from the era of Leibnitz

and Locke, have by no means observed this distinction; and would have

treated with great disrespect any attempt to analyze the import of

Propositions, unless founded on an analysis of the act of Judgment. A

proposition, they would have said, is but the expression in words of a

Judgment. The thing expressed, not the mere verbal expression, is the

important matter. When the mind assents to a proposition, it judges. Let us

find out what the mind does when it judges, and we shall know what

propositions mean, and not otherwise.

              Conformably to these views, almost all the writers on Logic in the

last two centuries, whether English, German, or French, have made their

theory of Propositions, from one end to the other, a theory of Judgments.

They considered a Proposition, or a Judgment, for they used the two words

indiscriminately, to consist in affirming or denying one idea of another. To

judge, was to put two ideas together, or to bring one idea under another, or to

compare two ideas, or to perceive the agreement or disagreement between

two ideas: and the whole doctrine of Propositions, together with the theory of

Reasoning (always necessarily founded on the theory of Propositions), was

stated as if Ideas, or Conceptions, or whatever other term the writer preferred

as a name for mental representations generally, constituted essentially the

subject-matter and substance of those operations.

              It is, of course, true, that in any case of judgment, as for instance

when we judge that gold is yellow, a process takes place in our minds, ofwhich some one or other of these theories is a partially correct account. We

must have the idea of gold and the idea of yellow, and these two ideas must

be brought together in our mind. But in the first place, it is evident that this is

only a part of what takes place; for we may put two ideas together without

any act of belief; as when we merely imagine something, such as a golden

mountain; or when we actually disbelieve: for in order even to disbelieve that

Mohammed was an apostle of God, we must put the idea of Mohammed and

that of an apostle of God together. To determine what it is that happens in the

case of assent or dissent besides putting two ideas together, is one of the most

intricate of metaphysical problems. But whatever the solution may be, we

may venture to assert that it can have nothing whatever to do with the import

of propositions; for this reason, that propositions (except sometimes when the

mind itself is the subject treated of) are not assertions respecting our ideas of

things, but assertions respecting the things themselves. In order to believe

that gold is yellow, I must, indeed, have the idea of gold, and the idea of

yellow, and something having reference to those ideas must take place in my

mind; but my belief has not reference to the ideas, it has reference to the

things. What I believe, is a fact relating to the outward thing, gold, and to the

impression made by that outward thing upon the human organs; not a fact

relating to my conception of gold, which would be a fact in my mental

history, not a fact of external nature. It is true, that in order to believe this fact

in external nature, another fact must take place in my mind, a process must be

performed upon my ideas; but so it must in every thing else that I do. I can

not dig the ground unless I have the idea of the ground, and of a spade, and of

all the other things I am operating upon, and unless I put those ideas
        30
together. But it would be a very ridiculous description of digging the ground

to say that it is putting one idea into another. Digging is an operation which is

performed upon the things themselves, though it can not be performed unless

I have in my mind the ideas of them. And in like manner, believing is an act

which has for its subject the facts themselves, though a previous mental

conception of the facts is an indispensable condition. When I say that fire

causes heat, do I mean that my idea of fire causes my idea of heat? No: I

mean that the natural phenomenon, fire, causes the natural phenomenon, heat.

When I mean to assert any thing respecting the ideas, I give them their proper

name, I call them ideas: as when I say, that a child’s idea of a battle is unlike

the reality, or that the ideas entertained of the Deity have a great effect on the

characters of mankind.              The notion that what is of primary importance to the logician in a

proposition, is the relation between the two ideas corresponding to the

subject and predicate (instead of the relation between the two phenomena

which they respectively express), seems to me one of the most fatal errors

ever introduced into the philosophy of Logic; and the principal cause why the

theory of the science has made such inconsiderable progress during the last

two centuries. The treatises on Logic, and on the branches of Mental

Philosophy connected with Logic, which have been produced since the

intrusion of this cardinal error, though sometimes written by men of

extraordinary abilities and attainments, almost always tacitly imply a theory

that the investigation of truth consists in contemplating and handling our

ideas, or conceptions of things, instead of the things themselves: a doctrine

tantamount to the assertion, that the only mode of acquiring knowledge of

nature is to study it at second hand, as represented in our own minds.

Meanwhile, inquiries into every kind of natural phenomena were incessantly

establishing great and fruitful truths on most important subjects, by processes

upon which these views of the nature of Judgment and Reasoning threw no

light, and in which they afforded no assistance whatever. No wonder that

those who knew by practical experience how truths are arrived at, should

deem a science futile, which consisted chiefly of such speculations. What has

been done for the advancement of Logic since these doctrines came into

vogue, has been done not by professed logicians, but by discoverers in the

other sciences; in whose methods of investigation many principles of logic,

not previously thought of, have successively come forth into light, but who

have generally committed the error of supposing that nothing whatever was

known of the art of philosophizing by the old logicians, because their modern

interpreters have written to so little purpose respecting it.

              We have to inquire, then, on the present occasion, not into Judgment,

but judgments; not into the act of believing, but into the thing believed. What

is the immediate object of belief in a Proposition? What is the matter of fact

signified by it? What is it to which, when I assert the proposition, I give my

assent, and call upon others to give theirs? What is that which is expressed by

the form of discourse called a Proposition, and the conformity of which to

fact constitutes the truth of the proposition?

              § 2. One of the clearest and most consecutive thinkers whom this

country or the world has produced, I mean Hobbes, has given the followinganswer to this question. In every proposition (says he) what is signified is, the

belief of the speaker that the predicate is a name of the same thing of which

the subject is a name; and if it really is so, the proposition is true. Thus the

proposition, All men are living beings (he would say) is true, because living

being is a name of every thing of which man is a name. All men are six feet

high, is not true, because six feet high is not a name of every thing (though it

is of some things) of which man is a name.

              What is stated in this theory as the definition of a true proposition,

must be allowed to be a property which all true propositions possess. The

subject and predicate being both of them names of things, if they were names

of quite different things the one name could not, consistently with its

signification, be predicated of the other. If it be true that some men are

copper-colored, it must be true — and the proposition does really assert —

that among the individuals denoted by the name man, there are some who are

also among those denoted by the name copper-colored. If it be true that all

oxen ruminate, it must be true that all the individuals denoted by the name ox

are also among those denoted by the name ruminating; and whoever asserts

that all oxen ruminate, undoubtedly does assert that this relation subsists

between the two names.

              The assertion, therefore, which, according to Hobbes, is the only one

made in any proposition, really is made in every proposition: and his analysis

has consequently one of the requisites for being the true one. We may go a

step further; it is the only analysis that is rigorously true of all propositions

without exception. What he gives as the meaning of propositions, is part of

the meaning of all propositions, and the whole meaning of some. This,

however, only shows what an extremely minute fragment of meaning it is

quite possible to include within the logical formula of a proposition. It does

not show that no proposition means more. To warrant us in putting together

two words with a copula between them, it is really enough that the thing or

things denoted by one of the names should be capable, without violation of

usage, of being called by the other name also. If, then, this be all the meaning

necessarily implied in the form of discourse called a Proposition, why do I

object to it as the scientific definition of what a proposition means? Because,

though the mere collocation which makes the proposition a proposition,

conveys no more than this scanty amount of meaning, that same collocation

combined with other circumstances, that form combined with other matter ,does convey more, and the proposition in those other circumstances does

assert more, than merely that relation between the two names.

              The only propositions of which Hobbes’s principle is a sufficient

account, are that limited and unimportant class in which both the predicate

and the subject are proper names. For, as has already been remarked, proper

names have strictly no meaning; they are mere marks for individual objects:

and when a proper name is predicated of another proper name, all the

signification conveyed is, that both the names are marks for the same object.

But this is precisely what Hobbes produces as a theory of predication in

general. His doctrine is a full explanation of such predications as these: Hyde

was Clarendon, or, Tully is Cicero. It exhausts the meaning of those

propositions. But it is a sadly inadequate theory of any others. That it should

ever have been thought of as such, can be accounted for only by the fact, that

Hobbes, in common with the other Nominalists, bestowed little or no

attention upon the connotation of words; and sought for their meaning

exclusively in what they denote : as if all names had been (what none but

proper names really are) marks put upon individuals; and as if there were no

difference between a proper and a general name, except that the first denotes

only one individual, and the last a greater number.

              It has been seen, however, that the meaning of all names, except

proper names and that portion of the class of abstract names which are not

connotative, resides in the connotation. When, therefore, we are analyzing the

meaning of any proposition in which the predicate and the subject, or either

of them, are connotative names, it is to the connotation of those terms that we

must exclusively look, and not to what they denote , or in the language of

Hobbes (language so far correct) are names of.

              In asserting that the truth of a proposition depends on the conformity

of import between its terms, as, for instance, that the proposition, Socrates is

wise, is a true proposition, because Socrates and wise are names applicable

to, or, as he expresses it, names of, the same person; it is very remarkable that

so powerful a thinker should not have asked himself the question, But how

came they to be names of the same person? Surely not because such was the

intention of those who invented the words. When mankind fixed the meaning

of the word wise, they were not thinking of Socrates, nor, when his parents

gave him the name of Socrates, were they thinking of wisdom. The names

happen to fit the same person because of a certain fact , which fact was notknown, nor in being, when the names were invented. If we want to know

what the fact is, we shall find the clue to it in the connotation of the names.

              A bird or a stone, a man, or a wise man, means simply, an object

having such and such attributes. The real meaning of the word man, is those

attributes, and not Smith, Brown, and the remainder of the individuals. The

word mortal , in like manner connotes a certain attribute or attributes; and

when we say, All men are mortal, the meaning of the proposition is, that all

beings which possess the one set of attributes, possess also the other. If, in

our experience, the attributes connoted by man are always accompanied by

the attribute connoted by mortal , it will follow as a consequence, that the

class man will be wholly included in the class mortal , and that mortal will be

a name of all things of which man is a name: but why? Those objects are

brought under the name, by possessing the attributes connoted by it: but their

possession of the attributes is the real condition on which the truth of the

proposition depends; not their being called by the name. Connotative names

do not precede, but follow, the attributes which they connote. If one attribute

happens to be always found in conjunction with another attribute, the

concrete names which answer to those attributes will of course be predicable

of the same subjects, and may be said, in Hobbes’s language (in the propriety

of which on this occasion I fully concur), to be two names for the same

things. But the possibility of a concurrent application of the two names, is a

mere consequence of the conjunction between the two attributes, and was, in

most cases, never thought of when the names were introduced and their

signification fixed. That the diamond is combustible, was a proposition

certainly not dreamed of when the words Diamond and Combustible first

received their meaning; and could not have been discovered by the most

ingenious and refined analysis of the signification of those words. It was

found out by a very different process, namely, by exerting the senses, and

learning from them, that the attribute of combustibility existed in the

diamonds upon which the experiment was tried; the number or character of

the experiments being such, that what was true of those individuals might be

concluded to be true of all substances “called by the name,” that is, of all

substances possessing the attributes which the name connotes. The assertion,

therefore, when analyzed, is, that wherever we find certain attributes, there

will be found a certain other attribute: which is not a question of the

signification of names, but of laws of nature; the order existing among

phenomena.              § 3. Although Hobbes’s theory of Predication has not, in the terms in

which he stated it, met with a very favorable reception from subsequent

thinkers, a theory virtually identical with it, and not by any means so

perspicuously expressed, may almost be said to have taken the rank of an

established opinion. The most generally received notion of Predication

decidedly is that it consists in referring something to a class, i.e. , either

placing an individual under a class, or placing one class under another class.

Thus, the proposition, Man is mortal, asserts, according to this view of it, that

the class man is included in the class mortal. “Plato is a philosopher,” asserts

that the individual Plato is one of those who compose the class philosopher.

If the proposition is negative, then instead of placing something in a class, it

is said to exclude something from a class. Thus, if the following be the

proposition, The elephant is not carnivorous; what is asserted (according to

this theory) is, that the elephant is excluded from the class carnivorous, or is

not numbered among the things comprising that class. There is no real

difference, except in language, between this theory of Predication and the

theory of Hobbes. For a class is absolutely nothing but an indefinite number

of individuals denoted by a general name. The name given to them in

common, is what makes them a class. To refer any thing to a class, therefore,

is to look upon it as one of the things which are to be called by that common

name. To exclude it from a class, is to say that the common name is not

applicable to it.

              How widely these views of predication have prevailed, is evident

from this, that they are the basis of the celebrated dictum de omni et nullo .

When the syllogism is resolved, by all who treat of it, into an inference that

what is true of a class is true of all things whatever that belong to the class;

and when this is laid down by almost all professed logicians as the ultimate

principle to which all reasoning owes its validity; it is clear that in the general

estimation of logicians, the propositions of which reasonings are composed

can be the expression of nothing but the process of dividing things into

classes, and referring every thing to its proper class.

              This theory appears to me a signal example of a logical error very

often committed in logic, that of ὕστερον προτέρον, or explaining a thing by

something which presupposes it. When I say that snow is white, I may and

ought to be thinking of snow as a class, because I am asserting a proposition

as true of all snow: but I am certainly not thinking of white objects as a class;I am thinking of no white object whatever except snow, but only of that, and

of the sensation of white which it gives me. When, indeed, I have judged, or

assented to the propositions, that snow is white, and that several other things

are also white, I gradually begin to think of white objects as a class, including

snow and those other things. But this is a conception which followed, not

preceded, those judgments, and therefore can not be given as an explanation

of them. Instead of explaining the effect by the cause, this doctrine explains

the cause by the effect, and is, I conceive, founded on a latent misconception

of the nature of classification.

              There is a sort of language very generally prevalent in these

discussions, which seems to suppose that classification is an arrangement and

grouping of definite and known individuals: that when names were imposed,

mankind took into consideration all the individual objects in the universe,

distributed them into parcels or lists, and gave to the objects of each list a

common name, repeating this operation toties quoties until they had invented

all the general names of which language consists; which having been once

done, if a question subsequently arises whether a certain general name can be

truly predicated of a certain particular object, we have only (as it were) to

read the roll of the objects upon which that name was conferred, and see

whether the object about which the question arises is to be found among

them. The framers of language (it would seem to be supposed) have

predetermined all the objects that are to compose each class, and we have

only to refer to the record of an antecedent decision.

              So absurd a doctrine will be owned by nobody when thus nakedly

stated; but if the commonly received explanations of classification and

naming do not imply this theory, it requires to be shown how they admit of

being reconciled with any other.

              General names are not marks put upon definite objects; classes are

not made by drawing a line round a given number of assignable individuals.

The objects which compose any given class are perpetually fluctuating. We

may frame a class without knowing the individuals, or even any of the

individuals, of which it may be composed; we may do so while believing that

no such individuals exist. If by the meaning of a general name are to be

understood the things which it is the name of, no general name, except by

accident, has a fixed meaning at all, or ever long retains the same meaning.

The only mode in which any general name has a definite meaning, is bybeing a name of an indefinite variety of things; namely, of all things, known

or unknown, past, present, or future, which possess certain definite attributes.

When, by studying not the meaning of words, but the phenomena of nature,

we discover that these attributes are possessed by some object not previously

known to possess them (as when chemists found that the diamond was

combustible), we include this new object in the class; but it did not already

belong to the class. We place the individual in the class because the

proposition is true; the proposition is not true because the object is placed in
        31
the class.

              It will appear hereafter, in treating of reasoning, how much the

theory of that intellectual process has been vitiated by the influence of these

erroneous notions, and by the habit which they exemplify of assimilating all

the operations of the human understanding which have truth for their object,

to processes of mere classification and naming. Unfortunately, the minds

which have been entangled in this net are precisely those which have escaped

the other cardinal error commented upon in the beginning of the present

chapter. Since the revolution which dislodged Aristotle from the schools,

logicians may almost be divided into those who have looked upon reasoning

as essentially an affair of Ideas, and those who have looked upon it as

essentially an affair of Names.

              Although, however, Hobbes’s theory of Predication, according to the
                                                                              32
well-known remark of Leibnitz, and the avowal of Hobbes himself, renders

truth and falsity completely arbitrary, with no standard but the will of men, it

must not be concluded that either Hobbes, or any of the other thinkers who

have in the main agreed with him, did in fact consider the distinction between

truth and error as less real, or attached less importance to it, than other

people. To suppose that they did so would argue total unacquaintance with

their other speculations. But this shows how little hold their doctrine

possessed over their own minds. No person, at bottom, ever imagined that

there was nothing more in truth than propriety of expression; than using

language in conformity to a previous convention. When the inquiry was

brought down from generals to a particular case, it has always been

acknowledged that there is a distinction between verbal and real questions;

that some false propositions are uttered from ignorance of the meaning of

words, but that in others the source of the error is a misapprehension of

things; that a person who has not the use of language at all may formpropositions mentally, and that they may be untrue — that is, he may believe

as matters of fact what are not really so. This last admission can not be made
                                                      33
in stronger terms than it is by Hobbes himself, though he will not allow

such erroneous belief to be called falsity, but only error. And he has himself

laid down, in other places, doctrines in which the true theory of predication is

by implication contained. He distinctly says that general names are given to

things on account of their attributes, and that abstract names are the names of

those attributes. “Abstract is that which in any subject denotes the cause of

the concrete name.... And these causes of names are the same with the causes

of our conceptions, namely, some power of action, or affection, of the thing

conceived, which some call the manner by which any thing works upon our
                                                            34
senses, but by most men they are called accidents .” It is strange that having

gone so far, he should not have gone one step further, and seen that what he

calls the cause of the concrete name, is in reality the meaning of it; and that

when we predicate of any subject a name which is given because of an

attribute (or, as he calls it, an accident), our object is not to affirm the name,

but, by means of the name, to affirm the attribute.

              § 4. Let the predicate be, as we have said, a connotative term; and to

take the simplest case first, let the subject be a proper name: “The summit of

Chimborazo is white.” The word white connotes an attribute which is

possessed by the individual object designated by the words “summit of

Chimborazo;” which attribute consists in the physical fact, of its exciting in

human beings the sensation which we call a sensation of white. It will be

admitted that, by asserting the proposition, we wish to communicate

information of that physical fact, and are not thinking of the names, except as

the necessary means of making that communication. The meaning of the

proposition, therefore, is, that the individual thing denoted by the subject, has

the attributes connoted by the predicate.

              If we now suppose the subject also to be a connotative name, the

meaning expressed by the proposition has advanced a step further in

complication. Let us first suppose the proposition to be universal, as well as

affirmative: “All men are mortal.” In this case, as in the last, what the

proposition asserts (or expresses a belief of) is, of course, that the objects

denoted by the subject (man) possess the attributes connoted by the predicate

(mortal). But the characteristic of this case is, that the objects are no longer

individually designated. They are pointed out only by some of their attributes:they are the objects called men, that is, possessing the attributes connoted by

the name man; and the only thing known of them may be those attributes:

indeed, as the proposition is general, and the objects denoted by the subject

are therefore indefinite in number, most of them are not known individually

at all. The assertion, therefore, is not, as before, that the attributes which the

predicate connotes are possessed by any given individual, or by any number

of individuals previously known as John, Thomas, etc., but that those

attributes are possessed by each and every individual possessing certain other

attributes; that whatever has the attributes connoted by the subject, has also

those connoted by the predicate; that the latter set of attributes constantly

accompany the former set. Whatever has the attributes of man has the

attribute of mortality; mortality constantly accompanies the attributes of
    35
man.

              If it be remembered that every attribute is grounded on some fact or

phenomenon, either of outward sense or of inward consciousness, and that to

possess an attribute is another phrase for being the cause of, or forming part

of, the fact or phenomenon upon which the attribute is grounded; we may add

one more step to complete the analysis. The proposition which asserts that

one attribute always accompanies another attribute, really asserts thereby no

other thing than this, that one phenomenon always accompanies another

phenomenon; insomuch that where we find the latter, we have assurance of

the existence of the former. Thus, in the proposition, All men are mortal, the

word man connotes the attributes which we ascribe to a certain kind of living

creatures, on the ground of certain phenomena which they exhibit, and which

are partly physical phenomena, namely the impressions made on our senses

by their bodily form and structure, and partly mental phenomena, namely the

sentient and intellectual life which they have of their own. All this is

understood when we utter the word man, by any one to whom the meaning of

the word is known. Now, when we say, Man is mortal, we mean that

wherever these various physical and mental phenomena are all found, there

we have assurance that the other physical and mental phenomenon, called

death, will not fail to take place. The proposition does not affirm when ; for

the connotation of the word mortal goes no further than to the occurrence of

the phenomenon at some time or other, leaving the particular time undecided.

              § 5. We have already proceeded far enough, not only to demonstrate

the error of Hobbes, but to ascertain the real import of by far the mostnumerous class of propositions. The object of belief in a proposition, when it

asserts any thing more than the meaning of words, is generally, as in the

cases which we have examined, either the co-existence or the sequence of

two phenomena. At the very commencement of our inquiry, we found that

every act of belief implied two Things: we have now ascertained what, in the

most frequent case, these two things are, namely, two Phenomena; in other

words, two states of consciousness; and what it is which the proposition

affirms (or denies) to subsist between them, namely, either succession or co-

existence. And this case includes innumerable instances which no one,

previous to reflection, would think of referring to it. Take the following

example: A generous person is worthy of honor. Who would expect to

recognize here a case of co-existence between phenomena? But so it is. The

attribute which causes a person to be termed generous, is ascribed to him on

the ground of states of his mind, and particulars of his conduct: both are

phenomena: the former are facts of internal consciousness; the latter, so far as

distinct from the former, are physical facts, or perceptions of the senses.

Worthy of honor admits of a similar analysis. Honor, as here used, means a

state of approving and admiring emotion, followed on occasion by

corresponding outward acts. “Worthy of honor” connotes all this, together

with our approval of the act of showing honor. All these are phenomena;

states of internal consciousness, accompanied or followed by physical facts.

When we say, A generous person is worthy of honor, we affirm co-existence

between the two complicated phenomena connoted by the two terms

respectively. We affirm, that wherever and whenever the inward feelings and

outward facts implied in the word generosity have place, then and there the

existence and manifestation of an inward feeling, honor, would be followed

in our minds by another inward feeling, approval.

              After the analysis, in a former chapter, of the import of names, many

examples are not needed to illustrate the import of propositions. When there

is any obscurity, or difficulty, it does not lie in the meaning of the

proposition, but in the meaning of the names which compose it; in the

extremely complicated connotation of many words; the immense multitude

and prolonged series of facts which often constitute the phenomenon

connoted by a name. But where it is seen what the phenomenon is, there is

seldom any difficulty in seeing that the assertion conveyed by the proposition

is, the co-existence of one such phenomenon with another; or the succession

of one such phenomenon to another: so that where the one is found, we maycalculate on finding the other, though perhaps not conversely.

              This, however, though the most common, is not the only meaning

which propositions are ever intended to convey. In the first place, sequences

and co-existences are not only asserted respecting Phenomena; we make

propositions also respecting those hidden causes of phenomena, which are

named substances and attributes. A substance, however, being to us nothing

but either that which causes, or that which is conscious of, phenomena; and

the same being true, mutatis mutandis , of attributes; no assertion can be

made, at least with a meaning, concerning these unknown and unknowable

entities, except in virtue of the Phenomena by which alone they manifest

themselves to our faculties. When we say Socrates was contemporary with

the Peloponnesian war, the foundation of this assertion, as of all assertions

concerning substances, is an assertion concerning the phenomena which they

exhibit — namely, that the series of facts by which Socrates manifested

himself to mankind, and the series of mental states which constituted his

sentient existence, went on simultaneously with the series of facts known by

the name of the Peloponnesian war. Still, the proposition as commonly

understood does not assert that alone; it asserts that the Thing in itself, the

noumenon Socrates, was existing, and doing or experiencing those various

facts during the same time. Co-existence and sequence, therefore, may be

affirmed or denied not only between phenomena, but between noumena, or

between a noumenon and phenomena. And both of noumena and of

phenomena we may affirm simple existence. But what is a noumenon? An

unknown cause. In affirming, therefore, the existence of a noumenon, we

affirm causation. Here, therefore, are two additional kinds of fact, capable of

being asserted in a proposition. Besides the propositions which assert
                                                                                      36
Sequence or Co-existence, there are some which assert simple Existence;

and others assert Causation, which, subject to the explanations which will

follow in the Third Book, must be considered provisionally as a distinct and

peculiar kind of assertion.

              § 6. To these four kinds of matter-of-fact or assertion, must be added

a fifth, Resemblance. This was a species of attribute which we found it

impossible to analyze; for which no fundamentum , distinct from the objects

themselves, could be assigned. Besides propositions which assert a sequence

or co-existence between two phenomena, there are therefore also propositions

which assert resemblance between them; as, This color is like that color; Theheat of to-day is equal to the heat of yesterday. It is true that such an assertion

might with some plausibility be brought within the description of an

affirmation of sequence, by considering it as an assertion that the

simultaneous contemplation of the two colors is followed by a specific feeling

termed the feeling of resemblance. But there would be nothing gained by

incumbering ourselves, especially in this place, with a generalization which

may be looked upon as strained. Logic does not undertake to analyze mental

facts into their ultimate elements. Resemblance between two phenomena is

more intelligible in itself than any explanation could make it, and under any

classification must remain specifically distinct from the ordinary cases of

sequence and co-existence.

              It is sometimes said, that all propositions whatever, of which the

predicate is a general name, do, in point of fact, affirm or deny resemblance.

All such propositions affirm that a thing belongs to a class; but things being

classed together according to their resemblance, every thing is of course

classed with the things which it is supposed to resemble most; and thence, it

may be said, when we affirm that Gold is a metal, or that Socrates is a man,

the affirmation intended is, that gold resembles other metals, and Socrates

other men, more nearly than they resemble the objects contained in any other

of the classes co-ordinate with these.

              There is some slight degree of foundation for this remark, but no

more than a slight degree. The arrangement of things into classes, such as the

class metal , or the class man , is grounded indeed on a resemblance among

the things which are placed in the same class, but not on a mere general

resemblance: the resemblance it is grounded on consists in the possession by

all those things, of certain common peculiarities; and those peculiarities it is

which the terms connote, and which the propositions consequently assert; not

the resemblance. For though when I say, Gold is a metal, I say by implication

that if there be any other metals it must resemble them, yet if there were no

other metals I might still assert the proposition with the same meaning as at

present, namely, that gold has the various properties implied in the word

metal; just as it might be said, Christians are men, even if there were no men

who were not Christians. Propositions, therefore, in which objects are

referred to a class because they possess the attributes constituting the class,

are so far from asserting nothing but resemblance, that they do not, properly

speaking, assert resemblance at all.              But we remarked some time ago (and the reasons of the remark will
                                                        37
be more fully entered into in a subsequent Book ) that there is sometimes a

convenience in extending the boundaries of a class so as to include things

which possess in a very inferior degree, if in any, some of the characteristic

properties of the class — provided they resemble that class more than any

other, insomuch that the general propositions which are true of the class, will

be nearer to being true of those things than any other equally general

propositions. For instance, there are substances called metals which have

very few of the properties by which metals are commonly recognized; and

almost every great family of plants or animals has a few anomalous genera or

species on its borders, which are admitted into it by a sort of courtesy, and

concerning which it has been matter of discussion to what family they

properly belonged. Now when the class-name is predicated of any object of

this description, we do, by so predicating it, affirm resemblance and nothing

more. And in order to be scrupulously correct it ought to be said, that in every

case in which we predicate a general name, we affirm, not absolutely that the

object possesses the properties designated by the name, but that it either

possesses those properties, or if it does not, at any rate resembles the things

which do so, more than it resembles any other things. In most cases, however,

it is unnecessary to suppose any such alternative, the latter of the two grounds

being very seldom that on which the assertion is made: and when it is, there

is generally some slight difference in the form of the expression, as, This

species (or genus) is considered , or may be ranked , as belonging to such and

such a family: we should hardly say positively that it does belong to it, unless

it possessed unequivocally the properties of which the class-name is

scientifically significant.

              There is still another exceptional case, in which, though the

predicate is the name of a class, yet in predicating it we affirm nothing but

resemblance, the class being founded not on resemblance in any given

particular, but on general unanalyzable resemblance. The classes in question

are those into which our simple sensations, or other simple feelings, are

divided. Sensations of white, for instance, are classed together, not because

we can take them to pieces, and say they are alike in this, and not alike in

that, but because we feel them to be alike altogether, though in different

degrees. When, therefore, I say, The color I saw yesterday was a white color,

or, The sensation I feel is one of tightness, in both cases the attribute I affirm

of the color or of the other sensation is mere resemblance — simple likenessto sensations which I have had before, and which have had those names

bestowed upon them. The names of feelings, like other concrete general

names, are connotative; but they connote a mere resemblance. When

predicated of any individual feeling, the information they convey is that of its

likeness to the other feelings which we have been accustomed to call by the

same name. Thus much may suffice in illustration of the kind of propositions

in which the matter-of-fact asserted (or denied) is simple Resemblance.

              Existence, Co-existence, Sequence, Causation, Resemblance: one or

other of these is asserted (or denied) in every proposition which is not merely

verbal. This five-fold division is an exhaustive classification of matters-of-

fact; of all things that can be believed, or tendered for belief; of all questions

that can be propounded, and all answers that can be returned to them.

                          38
              Professor Bain distinguishes two kinds of Propositions of Co-

existence. “In the one kind, account is taken of Place; they may be described

as propositions of Order in Place.” In the other kind, the co-existence which

is predicated is termed by Mr. Bain Co-inherence of Attributes. “This is a

distinct variety of Propositions of Co-existence. Instead of an arrangement in

place with numerical intervals, we have the concurrence of two or more

attributes or powers in the same part or locality. A mass of gold contains, in

every atom, the concurring attributes that mark the substance — weight,

hardness, color, lustre, incorrosibility, etc. An animal, besides having parts

situated in place, has co-inhering functions in the same parts, exerted by the

very same masses and molecules of its substance.... The Mind, which affords

no Propositions of Order in Place, has co-inhering functions. We affirm mind

to contain Feeling, Will, and Thought, not in local separation, but in

commingling exercise. The concurring properties of minerals, of plants, and

of the bodily and the mental structure of animals, are united in affirmations of

co-inherence.”

              The distinction is real and important. But, as has been seen, an

Attribute, when it is any thing but a simple unanalyzable Resemblance

between the subject and some other things, consists in causing impressions of

some sort on consciousness. Consequently, the co-inherence of two attributes

is but the co-existence of the two states of consciousness implied in their

meaning: with the difference, however, that this co-existence is sometimes

potential only, the attribute being considered as in existence, though the fact

on which it is grounded may not be actually, but only potentially present.Snow, for instance, is, with great convenience, said to be white even in a state

of total darkness, because, though we are not now conscious of the color, we

shall be conscious of it as soon as morning breaks. Co-inherence of attributes

is therefore still a case, though a complex one, of co-existence of states of

consciousness; a totally different thing, however, from Order in Place. Being

a part of simultaneity, it belongs not to Place but to Time.

              We may therefore (and we shall sometimes find it a convenience)

instead of Co-existence and Sequence, say, for greater particularity, Order in

Place and Order in Time: Order in Place being a specific mode of co-

existence, not necessary to be more particularly analyzed here; while the

mere fact of co-existence, whether between actual sensations, or between the

potentialities of causing them, known by the name of attributes, may be

classed, together with Sequence, under the head of Order in Time.

              § 7. In the foregoing inquiry into the import of propositions, we have

thought it necessary to analyze directly those alone, in which the terms of the

proposition (or the predicate at least) are concrete terms. But, in doing so, we

have indirectly analyzed those in which the terms are abstract. The distinction

between an abstract term and its corresponding concrete, does not turn upon

any difference in what they are appointed to signify; for the real signification

of a concrete general name is, as we have so often said, its connotation; and

what the concrete term connotes, forms the entire meaning of the abstract

name. Since there is nothing in the import of an abstract name which is not in

the import of the corresponding concrete, it is natural to suppose that neither

can there be any thing in the import of a proposition of which the terms are

abstract, but what there is in some proposition which can be framed of

concrete terms.

              And this presumption a closer examination will confirm. An abstract

name is the name of an attribute, or combination of attributes. The

corresponding concrete is a name given to things, because of, and in order to

express, their possessing that attribute, or that combination of attributes.

When, therefore, we predicate of any thing a concrete name, the attribute is

what we in reality predicate of it. But it has now been shown that in all

propositions of which the predicate is a concrete name, what is really

predicated is one of five things: Existence, Co-existence, Causation,

Sequence, or Resemblance. An attribute, therefore, is necessarily either an

existence, a co-existence, a causation, a sequence, or a resemblance. When aproposition consists of a subject and predicate which are abstract terms, it

consists of terms which must necessarily signify one or other of these things.

When we predicate of any thing an abstract name, we affirm of the thing that

it is one or other of these five things; that it is a case of Existence, or of Co-

existence, or of Causation, or of Sequence, or of Resemblance.

              It is impossible to imagine any proposition expressed in abstract

terms, which can not be transformed into a precisely equivalent proposition

in which the terms are concrete; namely, either the concrete names which

connote the attributes themselves, or the names of the fundamenta of those

attributes; the facts or phenomena on which they are grounded. To illustrate

the latter case, let us take this proposition, of which the subject only is an

abstract name, “Thoughtlessness is dangerous.” Thoughtlessness is an

attribute, grounded on the facts which we call thoughtless actions; and the

proposition is equivalent to this, Thoughtless actions are dangerous. In the

next example the predicate as well as the subject are abstract names:

“Whiteness is a color;” or “The color of snow is a whiteness.” These

attributes being grounded on sensations, the equivalent propositions in the

concrete would be, The sensation of white is one of the sensations called

those of color — The sensation of sight, caused by looking at snow, is one of

the sensations called sensations of white. In these propositions, as we have

before seen, the matter-of-fact asserted is a Resemblance. In the following

examples, the concrete terms are those which directly correspond to the

abstract names; connoting the attribute which these denote. “Prudence is a

virtue:” this may be rendered, “All prudent persons, in so far as prudent, are

virtuous:” “Courage is deserving of honor;” thus, “All courageous persons

are deserving of honor in so far as they are courageous:” which is equivalent

to this — “All courageous persons deserve an addition to the honor, or a

diminution of the disgrace, which would attach to them on other grounds.”

              In order to throw still further light upon the import of propositions of

which the terms are abstract, we will subject one of the examples given above

to a minuter analysis. The proposition we shall select is the following:

“Prudence is a virtue.” Let us substitute for the word virtue an equivalent but

more definite expression, such as “a mental quality beneficial to society,” or

“a mental quality pleasing to God,” or whatever else we adopt as the

definition of virtue. What the proposition asserts is a sequence, accompanied

with causation; namely, that benefit to society, or that the approval of God, isconsequent on, and caused by, prudence. Here is a sequence; but between

what? We understand the consequent of the sequence, but we have yet to

analyze the antecedent. Prudence is an attribute; and, in connection with it,

two things besides itself are to be considered; prudent persons, who are the

subjects of the attribute, and prudential conduct, which may be called the

foundation of it. Now is either of these the antecedent? and, first, is it meant,

that the approval of God, or benefit to society, is attendant upon all prudent

persons ? No; except in so far as they are prudent; for prudent persons who

are scoundrels can seldom, on the whole, be beneficial to society, nor can

they be acceptable to a good being. Is it upon prudential conduct , then, that

divine approbation and benefit to mankind are supposed to be invariably

consequent? Neither is this the assertion meant, when it is said that prudence

is a virtue; except with the same reservation as before, and for the same

reason, namely, that prudential conduct, although in so far as it is prudential

it is beneficial to society, may yet, by reason of some other of its qualities, be

productive of an injury outweighing the benefit, and deserve a displeasure

exceeding the approbation which would be due to the prudence. Neither the

substance, therefore (viz., the person), nor the phenomenon (the conduct), is

an antecedent on which the other term of the sequence is universally

consequent. But the proposition, “Prudence is a virtue,” is a universal

proposition. What is it, then, upon which the proposition affirms the effects in

question to be universally consequent? Upon that in the person, and in the

conduct, which causes them to be called prudent, and which is equally in

them when the action, though prudent, is wicked; namely, a correct foresight

of consequences, a just estimation of their importance to the object in view,

and repression of any unreflecting impulse at variance with the deliberate

purpose. These, which are states of the person’s mind, are the real antecedent

in the sequence, the real cause in the causation, asserted by the proposition.

But these are also the real ground, or foundation, of the attribute Prudence;

since wherever these states of mind exist we may predicate prudence, even

before we know whether any conduct has followed. And in this manner every

assertion respecting an attribute, may be transformed into an assertion exactly

equivalent respecting the fact or phenomenon which is the ground of the

attribute. And no case can be assigned, where that which is predicated of the

fact or phenomenon, does not belong to one or other of the five species

formerly enumerated: it is either simple Existence, or it is some Sequence,

Co-existence, Causation, or Resemblance.              And as these five are the only things which can be affirmed, so are

they the only things which can be denied. “No horses are web-footed” denies

that the attributes of a horse ever co-exist with web-feet. It is scarcely

necessary to apply the same analysis to Particular affirmations and negations.

“Some birds are web-footed,” affirms that, with the attributes connoted by

bird , the phenomenon web-feet is sometimes co-existent: “Some birds are

not web-footed,” asserts that there are other instances in which this co-

existence does not have place. Any further explanation of a thing which, if

the previous exposition has been assented to, is so obvious, may here be

spared.

 

 

                 Chapter VI. – Of Propositions Merely Verbal.

 

 

              § 1. As a preparation for the inquiry which is the proper object of

Logic, namely, in what manner propositions are to be proved, we have found

it necessary to inquire what they contain which requires, or is susceptible of,

proof; or (which is the same thing) what they assert. In the course of this

preliminary investigation into the import of Propositions, we examined the

opinion of the Conceptualists, that a proposition is the expression of a

relation between two ideas; and the doctrine of the extreme Nominalists, that

it is the expression of an agreement or disagreement between the meanings of

two names. We decided that, as general theories, both of these are erroneous;

and that, though propositions may be made both respecting names and

respecting ideas, neither the one nor the other are the subject-matter of

Propositions considered generally. We then examined the different kinds of

Propositions, and found that, with the exception of those which are merely

verbal, they assert five different kinds of matters of fact, namely, Existence,

Order in Place, Order in Time, Causation, and Resemblance; that in every

proposition one of these five is either affirmed, or denied, of some fact or

phenomenon, or of some object the unknown source of a fact or

phenomenon.

              In distinguishing, however, the different kinds of matters of fact

asserted in propositions, we reserved one class of propositions, which do not

relate to any matter of fact, in the proper sense of the term at all, but to the

meaning of names. Since names and their signification are entirely arbitrary,

such propositions are not, strictly speaking, susceptible of truth or falsity, but

only of conformity or disconformity to usage or convention; and all the proof

they are capable of, is proof of usage; proof that the words have been

employed by others in the acceptation in which the speaker or writer desires

to use them. These propositions occupy, however, a conspicuous place in

philosophy; and their nature and characteristics are of as much importance in

logic, as those of any of the other classes of propositions previously adverted

to.

              If all propositions respecting the signification of words were as

simple and unimportant as those which served us for examples whenexamining Hobbes’s theory of predication, viz., those of which the subject

and predicate are proper names, and which assert only that those names have,

or that they have not, been conventionally assigned to the same individual,

there would be little to attract to such propositions the attention of

philosophers. But the class of merely verbal propositions embraces not only

much more than these, but much more than any propositions which at first

sight present themselves as verbal; comprehending a kind of assertions which

have been regarded not only as relating to things, but as having actually a

more intimate relation with them than any other propositions whatever. The

student in philosophy will perceive that I allude to the distinction on which so

much stress was laid by the schoolmen, and which has been retained either

under the same or under other names by most metaphysicians to the present

day, viz., between what were called essential , and what were called

accidental , propositions, and between essential and accidental properties or

attributes.

              § 2. Almost all metaphysicians prior to Locke, as well as many since

his time, have made a great mystery of Essential Predication, and of

predicates which are said to be of the essence of the subject. The essence of a

thing, they said, was that without which the thing could neither be, nor be

conceived to be. Thus, rationality was of the essence of man, because without

rationality, man could not be conceived to exist. The different attributes

which made up the essence of the thing were called its essential properties;

and a proposition in which any of these were predicated of it was called an

Essential Proposition, and was considered to go deeper into the nature of the

thing, and to convey more important information respecting it, than any other

proposition could do. All properties, not of the essence of the thing, were

called its accidents; were supposed to have nothing at all, or nothing

comparatively, to do with its inmost nature; and the propositions in which

any of these were predicated of it were called Accidental Propositions. A

connection may be traced between this distinction, which originated with the

schoolmen, and the well-known dogmas of substantiæ secundæ or general

substances, and substantial forms , doctrines which under varieties of

language pervaded alike the Aristotelian and the Platonic schools, and of

which more of the spirit has come down to modern times than might be

conjectured from the disuse of the phraseology. The false views of the nature

of classification and generalization which prevailed among the schoolmen,

and of which these dogmas were the technical expression, afford the onlyexplanation which can be given of their having misunderstood the real nature

of those Essences which held so conspicuous a place in their philosophy.

They said, truly, that man can not be conceived without rationality. But

though man can not, a being may be conceived exactly like a man in all

points except that one quality, and those others which are the conditions or

consequences of it. All, therefore, which is really true in the assertion that

man can not be conceived without rationality, is only, that if he had not

rationality, he would not be reputed a man. There is no impossibility in

conceiving the thing , nor, for aught we know, in its existing: the

impossibility is in the conventions of language, which will not allow the

thing, even if it exist, to be called by the name which is reserved for rational

beings. Rationality, in short, is involved in the meaning of the word man: is

one of the attributes connoted by the name. The essence of man, simply

means the whole of the attributes connoted by the word; and any one of those

attributes taken singly, is an essential property of man.

              But these reflections, so easy to us, would have been difficult to

persons who thought, as most of the later Aristotelians did, that objects were

made what they were called, that gold (for instance) was made gold, not by

the possession of certain properties to which mankind have chosen to attach

that name, but by participation in the nature of a general substance, called

gold in general, which substance, together with all the properties that
                                                                  39
belonged to it, inhered in every individual piece of gold. As they did not

consider these universal substances to be attached to all general names, but

only to some, they thought that an object borrowed only a part of its

properties from a universal substance, and that the rest belonged to it

individually: the former they called its essence, and the latter its accidents.

The scholastic doctrine of essences long survived the theory on which it

rested, that of the existence of real entities corresponding to general terms;

and it was reserved for Locke, at the end of the seventeenth century, to

convince philosophers that the supposed essences of classes were merely the

signification of their names; nor, among the signal services which his

writings rendered to philosophy, was there one more needful or more

valuable.

              Now, as the most familiar of the general names by which an object is

designated usually connotes not one only, but several attributes of the object,

each of which attributes separately forms also the bond of union of someclass, and the meaning of some general name; we may predicate of a name

which connotes a variety of attributes, another name which connotes only one

of these attributes, or some smaller number of them than all. In such cases,

the universal affirmative proposition will be true; since whatever possesses

the whole of any set of attributes, must possess any part of that same set. A

proposition of this sort, however, conveys no information to any one who

previously understood the whole meaning of the terms. The propositions,

Every man is a corporeal being, Every man is a living creature, Every man is

rational, convey no knowledge to any one who was already aware of the

entire meaning of the word man , for the meaning of the word includes all

this: and that every man has the attributes connoted by all these predicates, is

already asserted when he is called a man. Now, of this nature are all the

propositions which have been called essential. They are, in fact, identical

propositions.

              It is true that a proposition which predicates any attribute, even

though it be one implied in the name, is in most cases understood to involve a

tacit assertion that there exists a thing corresponding to the name, and

possessing the attributes connoted by it; and this implied assertion may

convey information, even to those who understood the meaning of the name.

But all information of this sort, conveyed by all the essential propositions of

which man can be made the subject, is included in the assertion, Men exist.

And this assumption of real existence is, after all, the result of an

imperfection of language. It arises from the ambiguity of the copula, which,

in addition to its proper office of a mark to show that an assertion is made, is

also, as formerly remarked, a concrete word connoting existence. The actual

existence of the subject of the proposition is therefore only apparently, not

really, implied in the predication, if an essential one: we may say, A ghost is

a disembodied spirit, without believing in ghosts. But an accidental, or non-

essential, affirmation, does imply the real existence of the subject, because in

the case of a non-existent subject there is nothing for the proposition to

assert. Such a proposition as, The ghost of a murdered person haunts the

couch of the murderer, can only have a meaning if understood as implying a

belief in ghosts; for since the signification of the word ghost implies nothing

of the kind, the speaker either means nothing, or means to assert a thing

which he wishes to be believed to have really taken place.

              It will be hereafter seen that when any important consequences seemto follow, as in mathematics, from an essential proposition, or, in other

words, from a proposition involved in the meaning of a name, what they

really flow from is the tacit assumption of the real existence of the objects so

named. Apart from this assumption of real existence, the class of propositions

in which the predicate is of the essence of the subject (that is, in which the

predicate connotes the whole or part of what the subject connotes, but

nothing besides) answer no purpose but that of unfolding the whole or some

part of the meaning of the name, to those who did not previously know it.

Accordingly, the most useful, and in strictness the only useful kind of

essential propositions, are Definitions: which, to be complete, should unfold

the whole of what is involved in the meaning of the word defined; that is

(when it is a connotative word), the whole of what it connotes. In defining a

name, however, it is not usual to specify its entire connotation, but so much

only as is sufficient to mark out the objects usually denoted by it from all

other known objects. And sometimes a merely accidental property, not

involved in the meaning of the name, answers this purpose equally well. The

various kinds of definition which these distinctions give rise to, and the

purposes to which they are respectively subservient, will be minutely

considered in the proper place.

              § 3. According to the above view of essential propositions, no

proposition can be reckoned such which relates to an individual by name, that

is, in which the subject is a proper name. Individuals have no essences. When

the schoolmen talked of the essence of an individual, they did not mean the

properties implied in its name, for the names of individuals imply no

properties. They regarded as of the essence of an individual, whatever was of

the essence of the species in which they were accustomed to place that

individual; i.e. , of the class to which it was most familiarly referred, and to

which, therefore, they conceived that it by nature belonged. Thus, because the

proposition Man is a rational being, was an essential proposition, they

affirmed the same thing of the proposition, Julius Cæsar is a rational being.

This followed very naturally if genera and species were to be considered as

entities, distinct from, but inhering in, the individuals composing them. If

man was a substance inhering in each individual man, the essence of man

(whatever that might mean) was naturally supposed to accompany it; to

inhere in John Thompson, and to form the common essence of Thompson and

Julius Cæsar. It might then be fairly said, that rationality, being of the essence

of Man, was of the essence also of Thompson. But if Man altogether be onlythe individual men and a name bestowed upon them in consequence of

certain common properties, what becomes of John Thompson’s essence?

              A fundamental error is seldom expelled from philosophy by a single

victory. It retreats slowly, defends every inch of ground, and often, after it

has been driven from the open country, retains a footing in some remote

fastness. The essences of individuals were an unmeaning figment arising

from a misapprehension of the essences of classes, yet even Locke, when he

extirpated the parent error, could not shake himself free from that which was

its fruit. He distinguished two sorts of essences, Real and Nominal. His

nominal essences were the essences of classes, explained nearly as we have

now explained them. Nor is any thing wanting to render the third book of

Locke’s Essay a nearly unexceptional treatise on the connotation of names,

except to free its language from the assumption of what are called Abstract

Ideas, which unfortunately is involved in the phraseology, though not

necessarily connected with the thoughts contained in that immortal Third
      40
Book. But besides nominal essences, he admitted real essences, or essences

of individual objects, which he supposed to be the causes of the sensible

properties of those objects. We know not (said he) what these are (and this

acknowledgment rendered the fiction comparatively innocuous); but if we

did, we could, from them alone, demonstrate the sensible properties of the

object, as the properties of the triangle are demonstrated from the definition

of the triangle. I shall have occasion to revert to this theory in treating of

Demonstration, and of the conditions under which one property of a thing

admits of being demonstrated from another property. It is enough here to

remark that, according to this definition, the real essence of an object has, in

the progress of physics, come to be conceived as nearly equivalent, in the

case of bodies, to their corpuscular structure: what it is now supposed to

mean in the case of any other entities, I would not take upon myself to define.

              § 4. An essential proposition, then, is one which is purely verbal;

which asserts of a thing under a particular name, only what is asserted of it in

the fact of calling it by that name; and which, therefore, either gives no

information, or gives it respecting the name, not the thing. Non-essential, or

accidental propositions, on the contrary, may be called Real Propositions, in

opposition to Verbal. They predicate of a thing some fact not involved in the

signification of the name by which the proposition speaks of it; some

attribute not connoted by that name. Such are all propositions concerningthings individually designated, and all general or particular propositions in

which the predicate connotes any attribute not connoted by the subject. All

these, if true, add to our knowledge: they convey information, not already

involved in the names employed. When I am told that all, or even that some

objects, which have certain qualities, or which stand in certain relations, have

also certain other qualities, or stand in certain other relations, I learn from this

proposition a new fact; a fact not included in my knowledge of the meaning

of the words, nor even of the existence of Things answering to the

signification of those words. It is this class of propositions only which are in

themselves instructive, or from which any instructive propositions can be
        41
inferred.

              Nothing has probably contributed more to the opinion so long

prevalent of the futility of the school logic, than the circumstance that almost

all the examples used in the common school books to illustrate the doctrine of

predication and that of the syllogism, consist of essential propositions. They

were usually taken either from the branches or from the main trunk of the

Predicamental Tree, which included nothing but what was of the essence of

the species: Omne corpus est substantia , Omne animal est corpus , Omnis

homo est corpus , Omnis homo est animal , Omnis homo est rationalis , and

so forth. It is far from wonderful that the syllogistic art should have been

thought to be of no use in assisting correct reasoning, when almost the only

propositions which, in the hands of its professed teachers, it was employed to

prove, were such as every one assented to without proof the moment he

comprehended the meaning of the words; and stood exactly on a level, in

point of evidence, with the premises from which they were drawn. I have,

therefore, throughout this work, avoided the employment of essential

propositions as examples, except where the nature of the principle to be

illustrated specifically required them.

              § 5. With respect to propositions which do convey information —

which assert something of a Thing, under a name that does not already

presuppose what is about to be asserted; there are two different aspects in

which these, or rather such of them as are general propositions, may be

considered: we may either look at them as portions of speculative truth, or as

memoranda for practical use. According as we consider propositions in one

or the other of these lights, their import may be conveniently expressed in

one or in the other of two formulas.              According to the formula which we have hitherto employed, and

which is best adapted to express the import of the proposition as a portion of

our theoretical knowledge, All men are mortal, means that the attributes of

man are always accompanied by the attribute mortality: No men are gods,

means that the attributes of man are never accompanied by the attributes, or

at least never by all the attributes, signified by the word god. But when the

proposition is considered as a memorandum for practical use, we shall find a

different mode of expressing the same meaning better adapted to indicate the

office which the proposition performs. The practical use of a proposition is,

to apprise or remind us what we have to expect, in any individual case which

comes within the assertion contained in the proposition. In reference to this

purpose, the proposition, All men are mortal, means that the attributes of man

are evidence of , are a mark of, mortality; an indication by which the presence

of that attribute is made manifest. No men are gods, means that the attributes

of man are a mark or evidence that some or all of the attributes understood to

belong to a god are not there; that where the former are, we need not expect

to find the latter.

              These two forms of expression are at bottom equivalent; but the one

points the attention more directly to what a proposition means, the latter to

the manner in which it is to be used.

              Now it is to be observed that Reasoning (the subject to which we are

next to proceed) is a process into which propositions enter not as ultimate

results, but as means to the establishment of other propositions. We may

expect, therefore, that the mode of exhibiting the import of a general

proposition which shows it in its application to practical use, will best express

the function which propositions perform in Reasoning. And accordingly, in

the theory of Reasoning, the mode of viewing the subject which considers a

Proposition as asserting that one fact or phenomenon is a mark or evidence of

another fact or phenomenon, will be found almost indispensable. For the

purposes of that Theory, the best mode of defining the import of a

proposition is not the mode which shows most clearly what it is in itself, but

that which most distinctly suggests the manner in which it may be made

available for advancing from it to other propositions.

 

        Chapter VII. – Of The Nature Of Classification, And The Five

                                      Predicables.

 

 

              § 1. In examining into the nature of general propositions, we have

adverted much less than is usual with logicians to the ideas of a Class, and

Classification; ideas which, since the Realist doctrine of General Substances

went out of vogue, have formed the basis of almost every attempt at a

philosophical theory of general terms and general propositions. We have

considered general names as having a meaning, quite independently of their

being the names of classes. That circumstance is in truth accidental, it being

wholly immaterial to the signification of the name whether there are many

objects, or only one, to which it happens to be applicable, or whether there be

any at all. God is as much a general term to the Christian or Jew as to the

Polytheist; and dragon, hippogriff, chimera, mermaid, ghost, are as much so

as if real objects existed, corresponding to those names. Every name the

signification of which is constituted by attributes, is potentially a name of an

indefinite number of objects; but it needs not be actually the name of any;

and if of any, it may be the name of only one. As soon as we employ a name

to connote attributes, the things, be they more or fewer, which happen to

possess those attributes, are constituted ipso facto a class. But in predicating

the name we predicate only the attributes; and the fact of belonging to a class

does not, in many cases, come into view at all.

              Although, however, Predication does not presuppose Classification,

and though the theory of Names and of Propositions is not cleared up, but

only encumbered, by intruding the idea of classification into it, there is

nevertheless a close connection between Classification and the employment

of General Names. By every general name which we introduce, we create a

class, if there be any things, real or imaginary, to compose it; that is, any

Things corresponding to the signification of the name. Classes, therefore,

mostly owe their existence to general language. But general language, also,

though that is not the most common case, sometimes owes its existence to

classes. A general, which is as much as to say a significant, name, is indeed

mostly introduced because we have a signification to express by it; because

we need a word by means of which to predicate the attributes which itconnotes. But it is also true that a name is sometimes introduced because we

have found it convenient to create a class; because we have thought it useful

for the regulation of our mental operations, that a certain group of objects

should be thought of together. A naturalist, for purposes connected with his

particular science, sees reason to distribute the animal or vegetable creation

into certain groups rather than into any others, and he requires a name to

bind, as it were, each of his groups together. It must not, however, be

supposed that such names, when introduced, differ in any respect, as to their

mode of signification, from other connotative names. The classes which they

denote are, as much as any other classes, constituted by certain common

attributes, and their names are significant of those attributes, and of nothing

else. The names of Cuvier’s classes and orders, Plantigrades , Digitigrades ,

etc., are as much the expression of attributes as if those names had preceded,

instead of grown out of, his classification of animals. The only peculiarity of

the case is, that the convenience of classification was here the primary motive

for introducing the names; while in other cases the name is introduced as a

means of predication, and the formation of a class denoted by it is only an

indirect consequence.

              The principles which ought to regulate Classification, as a logical

process subservient to the investigation of truth, can not be discussed to any

purpose until a much later stage of our inquiry. But, of Classification as

resulting from, and implied in, the fact of employing general language, we

can not forbear to treat here, without leaving the theory of general names, and

of their employment in predication, mutilated and formless.

              § 2. This portion of the theory of general language is the subject of

what is termed the doctrine of the Predicables; a set of distinctions handed

down from Aristotle, and his follower Porphyry, many of which have taken a

firm root in scientific, and some of them even in popular, phraseology. The

predicables are a fivefold division of General Names, not grounded as usual

on a difference in their meaning, that is, in the attribute which they connote,

but on a difference in the kind of class which they denote. We may predicate

of a thing five different varieties of class-name:

              A genus of the thing: (γὲνος). A species : (εἶσος). A differentia :

(διαφορὰ). A proprium : (ἰδιών). An accidens : (συμβεβηκός).

              It is to be remarked of these distinctions, that they express, not whatthe predicate is in its own meaning, but what relation it bears to the subject of

which it happens on the particular occasion to be predicated. There are not

some names which are exclusively genera, and others which are exclusively

species, or differentiæ; but the same name is referred to one or another

predicable, according to the subject of which it is predicated on the particular

occasion. Animal , for instance, is a genus with respect to man, or John; a

species with respect to Substance, or Being. Rectangular is one of the

Differentiæ of a geometrical square; it is merely one of the Accidentia of the

table at which I am writing. The words genus, species, etc., are therefore

relative terms; they are names applied to certain predicates, to express the

relation between them and some given subject: a relation grounded, as we

shall see, not on what the predicate connotes, but on the class which it

denotes, and on the place which, in some given classification, that class

occupies relatively to the particular subject.

              § 3. Of these five names, two, Genus and Species, are not only used

by naturalists in a technical acceptation not precisely agreeing with their

philosophical meaning, but have also acquired a popular acceptation, much

more general than either. In this popular sense any two classes, one of which

includes the whole of the other and more, may be called a Genus and a

Species. Such, for instance, are Animal and Man; Man and Mathematician.

Animal is a Genus; Man and Brute are its two species; or we may divide it

into a greater number of species, as man, horse, dog, etc. Biped , or two-

footed animal , may also be considered a genus, of which man and bird are

two species. Taste is a genus, of which sweet taste, sour taste, salt taste, etc.,

are species. Virtue is a genus; justice, prudence, courage, fortitude,

generosity, etc., are its species.

              The same class which is a genus with reference to the sub-classes or

species included in it, may be itself a species with reference to a more

comprehensive, or, as it is often called, a superior genus. Man is a species

with reference to animal, but a genus with reference to the species

Mathematician. Animal is a genus, divided into two species, man and brute;

but animal is also a species, which, with another species, vegetable, makes up

the genus, organized being. Biped is a genus with reference to man and bird,

but a species with respect to the superior genus, animal. Taste is a genus

divided into species, but also a species of the genus sensation. Virtue, a genus

with reference to justice, temperance, etc., is one of the species of the genus,mental quality.

              In this popular sense the words Genus and Species have passed into

common discourse. And it should be observed that in ordinary parlance, not

the name of the class, but the class itself, is said to be the genus or species;

not, of course, the class in the sense of each individual of the class, but the

individuals collectively, considered as an aggregate whole; the name by

which the class is designated being then called not the genus or species, but

the generic or specific name. And this is an admissible form of expression;

nor is it of any importance which of the two modes of speaking we adopt,

provided the rest of our language is consistent with it; but, if we call the class

itself the genus, we must not talk of predicating the genus. We predicate of

man the name mortal; and by predicating the name, we may be said, in an

intelligible sense, to predicate what the name expresses, the attribute

mortality; but in no allowable sense of the word predication do we predicate

of man the class mortal. We predicate of him the fact of belonging to the

class.

              By the Aristotelian logicians, the terms genus and species were used

in a more restricted sense. They did not admit every class which could be

divided into other classes to be a genus, or every class which could be

included in a larger class to be a species. Animal was by them considered a

genus; man and brute co-ordinate species under that genus: biped , however,

would not have been admitted to be a genus with reference to man, but a

proprium or accidens only. It was requisite, according to their theory, that

genus and species should be of the essence of the subject. Animal was of the

essence of man; biped was not. And in every classification they considered

some one class as the lowest or infima species. Man, for instance, was a

lowest species. Any further divisions into which the class might be capable of

being broken down, as man into white, black, and red man, or into priest and

layman, they did not admit to be species.

              It has been seen, however, in the preceding chapter, that the

distinction between the essence of a class, and the attributes or properties

which are not of its essence — a distinction which has given occasion to so

much abstruse speculation, and to which so mysterious a character was

formerly, and by many writers is still, attached — amounts to nothing more

than the difference between those attributes of the class which are, and those

which are not, involved in the signification of the class-name. As applied toindividuals, the word Essence, we found, has no meaning, except in

connection with the exploded tenets of the Realists; and what the schoolmen

chose to call the essence of an individual, was simply the essence of the class

to which that individual was most familiarly referred.

              Is there no difference, then, save this merely verbal one, between the

classes which the schoolmen admitted to be genera or species, and those to

which they refused the title? Is it an error to regard some of the differences

which exist among objects as differences in kind (genere or specie ), and

others only as differences in the accidents? Were the schoolmen right or

wrong in giving to some of the classes into which things may be divided, the

name of kinds , and considering others as secondary divisions, grounded on

differences of a comparatively superficial nature? Examination will show that

the Aristotelians did mean something by this distinction, and something

important; but which, being but indistinctly conceived, was inadequately

expressed by the phraseology of essences, and the various other modes of

speech to which they had recourse.

              § 4. It is a fundamental principle in logic, that the power of framing

classes is unlimited, as long as there is any (even the smallest) difference to

found a distinction upon. Take any attribute whatever, and if some things

have it, and others have not, we may ground on the attribute a division of all

things into two classes; and we actually do so, the moment we create a name

which connotes the attribute. The number of possible classes, therefore, is

boundless; and there are as many actual classes (either of real or of imaginary

things) as there are general names, positive and negative together.

              But if we contemplate any one of the classes so formed, such as the

class animal or plant, or the class sulphur or phosphorus, or the class white or

red, and consider in what particulars the individuals included in the class

differ from those which do not come within it, we find a very remarkable

diversity in this respect between some classes and others. There are some

classes, the things contained in which differ from other things only in certain

particulars which may be numbered, while others differ in more than can be

numbered, more even than we need ever expect to know. Some classes have

little or nothing in common to characterize them by, except precisely what is

connoted by the name: white things, for example, are not distinguished by

any common properties except whiteness; or if they are, it is only by such as

are in some way dependent on, or connected with, whiteness. But a hundredgenerations have not exhausted the common properties of animals or of

plants, of sulphur or of phosphorus; nor do we suppose them to be

exhaustible, but proceed to new observations and experiments, in the full

confidence of discovering new properties which were by no means implied in

those we previously knew. While, if any one were to propose for

investigation the common properties of all things which are of the same

color, the same shape, or the same specific gravity, the absurdity would be

palpable. We have no ground to believe that any such common properties

exist, except such as may be shown to be involved in the supposition itself, or

to be derivable from it by some law of causation. It appears, therefore, that

the properties, on which we ground our classes, sometimes exhaust all that

the class has in common, or contain it all by some mode of implication; but in

other instances we make a selection of a few properties from among not only

a greater number, but a number inexhaustible by us, and to which as we know

no bounds, they may, so far as we are concerned, be regarded as infinite.

              There is no impropriety in saying that, of these two classifications,

the one answers to a much more radical distinction in the things themselves,

than the other does. And if any one even chooses to say that the one

classification is made by nature, the other by us for our convenience, he will

be right; provided he means no more than this: Where a certain apparent

difference between things (though perhaps in itself of little moment) answers

to we know not what number of other differences, pervading not only their

known properties, but properties yet undiscovered, it is not optional but

imperative to recognize this difference as the foundation of a specific

distinction; while, on the contrary, differences that are merely finite and

determinate, like those designated by the words white, black, or red, may be

disregarded if the purpose for which the classification is made does not

require attention to those particular properties. The differences, however, are

made by nature, in both cases; while the recognition of those differences as

grounds of classification and of naming, is, equally in both cases, the act of

man: only in the one case, the ends of language and of classification would be

subverted if no notice were taken of the difference, while in the other case,

the necessity of taking notice of it depends on the importance or

unimportance of the particular qualities in which the difference happens to

consist.

              Now, these classes, distinguished by unknown multitudes ofproperties, and not solely by a few determinate ones — which are parted off

from one another by an unfathomable chasm, instead of a mere ordinary ditch

with a visible bottom — are the only classes which, by the Aristotelian

logicians, were considered as genera or species. Differences which extended

only to a certain property or properties, and there terminated, they considered

as differences only in the accidents of things; but where any class differed

from other things by an infinite series of differences, known and unknown,

they considered the distinction as one of kind , and spoke of it as being an

essential difference, which is also one of the current meanings of that vague

expression at the present day.

              Conceiving the schoolmen to have been justified in drawing a broad

line of separation between these two kinds of classes and of class-

distinctions, I shall not only retain the division itself, but continue to express

it in their language. According to that language, the proximate (or lowest)

Kind to which any individual is referrible, is called its species. Conformably

to this, Isaac Newton would be said to be of the species man. There are

indeed numerous sub-classes included in the class man, to which Newton

also belongs; for example, Christian, and Englishman, and Mathematician.

But these, though distinct classes, are not, in our sense of the term, distinct

Kinds of men. A Christian, for example, differs from other human beings; but

he differs only in the attribute which the word expresses, namely, belief in

Christianity, and whatever else that implies, either as involved in the fact

itself, or connected with it through some law of cause and effect. We should

never think of inquiring what properties, unconnected with Christianity,

either as cause or effect, are common to all Christians and peculiar to them;

while in regard to all Men, physiologists are perpetually carrying on such an

inquiry; nor is the answer ever likely to be completed. Man, therefore, we

may call a species; Christian, or Mathematician, we can not.

              Note here, that it is by no means intended to imply that there may

not be different Kinds, or logical species, of man. The various races and

temperaments, the two sexes, and even the various ages, may be differences

of kind, within our meaning of the term. I do not say that they are so. For in

the progress of physiology it may almost be said to be made out, that the

differences which really exist between different races, sexes, etc., follow as

consequences, under laws of nature, from a small number of primary

differences which can be precisely determined, and which, as the phrase is,account for all the rest. If this be so, these are not distinctions in kind; no

more than Christian, Jew, Mussulman, and Pagan, a difference which also

carries many consequences along with it. And in this way classes are often

mistaken for real Kinds, which are afterward proved not to be so. But if it

turned out that the differences were not capable of being thus accounted for,

then Caucasian, Mongolian, Negro, etc., would be really different Kinds of

human beings, and entitled to be ranked as species by the logician; though

not by the naturalist. For (as already noticed) the word species is used in a

different signification in logic and in natural history. By the naturalist,

organized beings are not usually said to be of different species, if it is

supposed that they have descended from the same stock. That, however, is a

sense artificially given to the word, for the technical purposes of a particular

science. To the logician, if a negro and a white man differ in the same manner

(however less in degree) as a horse and a camel do, that is, if their differences

are inexhaustible, and not referrible to any common cause, they are different

species, whether they are descended from common ancestors or not. But if

their differences can all be traced to climate and habits, or to some one or a

few special differences in structure, they are not, in the logician’s view,

specifically distinct.

              When the infima species , or proximate Kind, to which an individual

belongs, has been ascertained, the properties common to that Kind include

necessarily the whole of the common properties of every other real Kind to

which the individual can be referrible. Let the individual, for example, be

Socrates, and the proximate Kind, man. Animal, or living creature, is also a

real kind, and includes Socrates; but, since it likewise includes man, or in

other words, since all men are animals, the properties common to animals

form a portion of the common properties of the sub-class, man. And if there

be any class which includes Socrates without including man, that class is not

a real Kind. Let the class, for example, be flat-nosed ; that being a class

which includes Socrates, without including all men. To determine whether it

is a real Kind, we must ask ourselves this question: Have all flat-nosed

animals, in addition to whatever is implied in their flat noses, any common

properties, other than those which are common to all animals whatever? If

they had; if a flat nose were a mark or index to an indefinite number of other

peculiarities, not deducible from the former by an ascertainable law, then out

of the class man we might cut another class, flat-nosed man, which,

according to our definition, would be a Kind. But if we could do this, manwould not be, as it was assumed to be, the proximate Kind. Therefore, the

properties of the proximate Kind do comprehend those (whether known or

unknown) of all other Kinds to which the individual belongs; which was the

point we undertook to prove. And hence, every other Kind which is

predicable of the individual, will be to the proximate Kind in the relation of a

genus, according to even the popular acceptation of the terms genus and

species; that is, it will be a larger class, including it and more.

              We are now able to fix the logical meaning of these terms. Every

class which is a real Kind, that is, which is distinguished from all other

classes by an indeterminate multitude of properties not derivable from one

another, is either a genus or a species. A Kind which is not divisible into

other Kinds, can not be a genus, because it has no species under it; but it is

itself a species, both with reference to the individuals below and to the genera

above (Species Prædicabilis and Species Subjicibilis). But every Kind which

admits of division into real Kinds (as animal into mammal, bird, fish, etc., or

bird into various species of birds) is a genus to all below it, a species to all

genera in which it is itself included. And here we may close this part of the

discussion, and pass to the three remaining predicables, Differentia,

Proprium, and Accidens.

              § 5. To begin with Differentia. This word is correlative with the

words genus and species, and as all admit, it signifies the attribute which

distinguishes a given species from every other species of the same genus.

This is so far clear: but we may still ask, which of the distinguishing

attributes it signifies. For we have seen that every Kind (and a species must

be a Kind) is distinguished from other Kinds, not by any one attribute, but by

an indefinite number. Man, for instance, is a species of the genus animal:

Rational (or rationality, for it is of no consequence here whether we use the

concrete or the abstract form) is generally assigned by logicians as the

Differentia; and doubtless this attribute serves the purpose of distinction: but

it has also been remarked of man, that he is a cooking animal; the only

animal that dresses its food. This, therefore, is another of the attributes by

which the species man is distinguished from other species of the same genus:

would this attribute serve equally well for a differentia? The Aristotelians say

No; having laid it down that the differentia must, like the genus and species,

be of the essence of the subject.

              And here we lose even that vestige of a meaning grounded in thenature of the things themselves, which may be supposed to be attached to the

word essence when it is said that genus and species must be of the essence of

the thing. There can be no doubt that when the schoolmen talked of the

essences of things as opposed to their accidents, they had confusedly in view

the distinction between differences of kind, and the differences which are not

of kind; they meant to intimate that genera and species must be Kinds. Their

notion of the essence of a thing was a vague notion of a something which

makes it what it is, i.e. , which makes it the Kind of thing that it is — which

causes it to have all that variety of properties which distinguish its Kind. But

when the matter came to be looked at more closely, nobody could discover

what caused the thing to have all those properties, nor even that there was any

thing which caused it to have them. Logicians, however, not liking to admit

this, and being unable to detect what made the thing to be what it was,

satisfied themselves with what made it to be what it was called. Of the

innumerable properties, known and unknown, that are common to the class

man, a portion only, and of course a very small portion, are connoted by its

name; these few, however, will naturally have been thus distinguished from

the rest either for their greater obviousness, or for greater supposed

importance. These properties, then, which were connoted by the name,

logicians seized upon, and called them the essence of the species; and not

stopping there, they affirmed them, in the case of the infima species , to be

the essence of the individual too; for it was their maxim, that the species

contained the “whole essence” of the thing. Metaphysics, that fertile field of

delusion propagated by language, does not afford a more signal instance of

such delusion. On this account it was that rationality, being connoted by the

name man, was allowed to be a differentia of the class; but the peculiarity of

cooking their food, not being connoted, was relegated to the class of

accidental properties.

              The distinction, therefore, between Differentia, Proprium, and

Accidens, is not grounded in the nature of things, but in the connotation of

names; and we must seek it there, if we wish to find what it is.

              From the fact that the genus includes the species, in other words de

notes more than the species, or is predicable of a greater number of

individuals, it follows that the species must connote more than the genus. It

must connote all the attributes which the genus connotes, or there would be

nothing to prevent it from denoting individuals not included in the genus.And it must connote something besides, otherwise it would include the whole

genus. Animal denotes all the individuals denoted by man, and many more.

Man, therefore, must connote all that animal connotes, otherwise there might

be men who are not animals; and it must connote something more than

animal connotes, otherwise all animals would be men. This surplus of

connotation — this which the species connotes over and above the

connotation of the genus — is the Differentia, or specific difference; or, to

state the same proposition in other words, the Differentia is that which must

be added to the connotation of the genus, to complete the connotation of the

species.

              The word man, for instance, exclusively of what it connotes in

common with animal, also connotes rationality, and at least some

approximation to that external form which we all know, but which as we

have no name for it considered in itself, we are content to call the human. The

Differentia, or specific difference, therefore, of man, as referred to the genus

animal, is that outward form and the possession of reason. The Aristotelians

said, the possession of reason, without the outward form. But if they adhered

to this, they would have been obliged to call the Houyhnhnms men. The

question never arose, and they were never called upon to decide how such a

case would have affected their notion of essentiality. However this may be,

they were satisfied with taking such a portion of the differentia as sufficed to

distinguish the species from all other existing things, though by so doing they

might not exhaust the connotation of the name.

              § 6. And here, to prevent the notion of differentia from being

restricted within too narrow limits, it is necessary to remark, that a species,

even as referred to the same genus, will not always have the same differentia,

but a different one, according to the principle and purpose which preside over

the particular classification. For example, a naturalist surveys the various

kinds of animals, and looks out for the classification of them most in

accordance with the order in which, for zoological purposes, he considers it

desirable that we should think of them. With this view he finds it advisable

that one of his fundamental divisions should be into warm-blooded and cold-

blooded animals; or into animals which breathe with lungs and those which

breathe with gills; or into carnivorous, and frugivorous or graminivorous; or

into those which walk on the flat part and those which walk on the extremity

of the foot, a distinction on which two of Cuvier’s families are founded. Indoing this, the naturalist creates as many new classes; which are by no means

those to which the individual animal is familiarly and spontaneously referred;

nor should we ever think of assigning to them so prominent a position in our

arrangement of the animal kingdom, unless for a preconceived purpose of

scientific convenience. And to the liberty of doing this there is no limit. In the

examples we have given, most of the classes are real Kinds, since each of the

peculiarities is an index to a multitude of properties belonging to the class

which it characterizes: but even if the case were otherwise — if the other

properties of those classes could all be derived, by any process known to us,

from the one peculiarity on which the class is founded — even then, if these

derivative properties were of primary importance for the purposes of the

naturalist, he would be warranted in founding his primary divisions on them.

              If, however, practical convenience is a sufficient warrant for making

the main demarcations in our arrangement of objects run in lines not

coinciding with any distinction of Kind, and so creating genera and species in

the popular sense which are not genera or species in the rigorous sense at all;

à fortiori must we be warranted, when our genera and species are real genera

and species, in marking the distinction between them by those of their

properties which considerations of practical convenience most strongly

recommend. If we cut a species out of a given genus — the species man, for

instance, out of the genus animal — with an intention on our part that the

peculiarity by which we are to be guided in the application of the name man

should be rationality, then rationality is the differentia of the species man.

Suppose, however, that being naturalists, we, for the purposes of our

particular study, cut out of the genus animal the same species man, but with

an intention that the distinction between man and all other species of animal

should be, not rationality, but the possession of “four incisors in each jaw,

tusks solitary, and erect posture.” It is evident that the word man, when used

by us as naturalists, no longer connotes rationality, but connotes the three

other properties specified; for that which we have expressly in view when we

impose a name, assuredly forms part of the meaning of that name. We may,

therefore, lay it down as a maxim, that wherever there is a Genus, and a

Species marked out from that genus by an assignable differentia, the name of

the species must be connotative, and must connote the differentia; but the

connotation may be special — not involved in the signification of the term as

ordinarily used, but given to it when employed as a term of art or science.

The word Man in common use, connotes rationality and a certain form, butdoes not connote the number or character of the teeth; in the Linnæan system

it connotes the number of incisor and canine teeth, but does not connote

rationality nor any particular form. The word man has, therefore, two

different meanings; though not commonly considered as ambiguous, because

it happens in both cases to de note the same individual objects. But a case is

conceivable in which the ambiguity would become evident: we have only to

imagine that some new kind of animal were discovered, having Linnæus’s

three characteristics of humanity, but not rational, or not of the human form.

In ordinary parlance, these animals would not be called men; but in natural

history they must still be called so by those, if any there should be, who

adhere to the Linnæan classification; and the question would arise, whether

the word should continue to be used in two senses, or the classification be

given up, and the technical sense of the term be abandoned along with it.

              Words not otherwise connotative may, in the mode just adverted to,

acquire a special or technical connotation. Thus the word whiteness, as we

have so often remarked, connotes nothing; it merely denotes the attribute

corresponding to a certain sensation: but if we are making a classification of

colors, and desire to justify, or even merely to point out, the particular place

assigned to whiteness in our arrangement, we may define it “the color

produced by the mixture of all the simple rays;” and this fact, though by no

means implied in the meaning of the word whiteness as ordinarily used, but

only known by subsequent scientific investigation, is part of its meaning in
                                                                                      42
the particular essay or treatise, and becomes the differentia of the species.

              The differentia, therefore, of a species may be defined to be, that part

of the connotation of the specific name, whether ordinary or special and

technical, which distinguishes the species in question from all other species

of the genus to which on the particular occasion we are referring it.

              § 7. Having disposed of Genus, Species, and Differentia, we shall

not find much difficulty in attaining a clear conception of the distinction

between the other two predicables, as well as between them and the first

three.

              In the Aristotelian phraseology, Genus and Differentia are of the

essence of the subject; by which, as we have seen, is really meant that the

properties signified by the genus and those signified by the differentia, form

part of the connotation of the name denoting the species. Proprium andAccidens, on the other hand, form no part of the essence, but are predicated

of the species only accidentally . Both are Accidents, in the wider sense in

which the accidents of a thing are opposed to its essence; though, in the

doctrine of the Predicables, Accidens is used for one sort of accident only,

Proprium being another sort. Proprium, continue the schoolmen, is predicated

accidentally , indeed, but necessarily ; or, as they further explain it, signifies

an attribute which is not indeed part of the essence, but which flows from, or

is a consequence of, the essence, and is, therefore, inseparably attached to the

species; e.g. , the various properties of a triangle, which, though no part of its

definition, must necessarily be possessed by whatever comes under that

definition. Accidens, on the contrary, has no connection whatever with the

essence, but may come and go, and the species still remain what it was

before. If a species could exist without its Propria, it must be capable of

existing without that on which its Propria are necessarily consequent, and

therefore without its essence, without that which constitutes it a species. But

an Accidens, whether separable or inseparable from the species in actual

experience, may be supposed separated, without the necessity of supposing

any other alteration; or at least, without supposing any of the essential

properties of the species to be altered, since with them an Accidens has no

connection.

              A Proprium, therefore, of the species, may be defined, any attribute

which belongs to all the individuals included in the species, and which,

though not connoted by the specific name (either ordinarily if the

classification we are considering be for ordinary purposes, or specially if it be

for a special purpose), yet follows from some attribute which the name either

ordinarily or specially connotes.

              One attribute may follow from another in two ways; and there are

consequently two kinds of Proprium. It may follow as a conclusion follows

premises, or it may follow as an effect follows a cause. Thus, the attribute of

having the opposite sides equal, which is not one of those connoted by the

word Parallelogram, nevertheless follows from those connoted by it, namely,

from having the opposite sides straight lines and parallel, and the number of

sides four. The attribute, therefore, of having the opposite sides equal, is a

Proprium of the class parallelogram; and a Proprium of the first kind, which

follows from the connoted attributes by way of demonstration . The attribute

of being capable of understanding language, is a Proprium of the speciesman, since without being connoted by the word, it follows from an attribute

which the word does connote, viz., from the attribute of rationality. But this is

a Proprium of the second kind, which follows by way of causation . How it is

that one property of a thing follows, or can be inferred, from another; under

what conditions this is possible, and what is the exact meaning of the phrase;

are among the questions which will occupy us in the two succeeding Books.

At present it needs only be said, that whether a Proprium follows by

demonstration or by causation, it follows necessarily ; that is to say, its not

following would be inconsistent with some law which we regard as a part of

the constitution either of our thinking faculty or of the universe.

              § 8. Under the remaining predicable, Accidens, are included all

attributes of a thing which are neither involved in the signification of the

name (whether ordinarily or as a term of art), nor have, so far as we know,

any necessary connection with attributes which are so involved. They are

commonly divided into Separable and Inseparable Accidents. Inseparable

accidents are those which — although we know of no connection between

them and the attributes constitutive of the species, and although, therefore, so

far as we are aware, they might be absent without making the name

inapplicable and the species a different species — are yet never in fact known

to be absent. A concise mode of expressing the same meaning is, that

inseparable accidents are properties which are universal to the species, but

not necessary to it. Thus, blackness is an attribute of a crow, and, as far as we

know, a universal one. But if we were to discover a race of white birds, in

other respects resembling crows, we should not say, These are not crows; we

should say, These are white crows. Crow, therefore, does not connote

blackness; nor, from any of the attributes which it does connote, whether as a

word in popular use or as a term of art, could blackness be inferred. Not only,

therefore, can we conceive a white crow, but we know of no reason why such

an animal should not exist. Since, however, none but black crows are known

to exist, blackness, in the present state of our knowledge, ranks as an

accident, but an inseparable accident, of the species crow.

              Separable Accidents are those which are found, in point of fact, to be

sometimes absent from the species; which are not only not necessary, but not

even universal. They are such as do not belong to every individual of the

species, but only to some individuals; or if to all, not at all times. Thus the

color of a European is one of the separable accidents of the species man,because it is not an attribute of all human creatures. Being born, is also

(speaking in the logical sense) a separable accident of the species man,

because, though an attribute of all human beings, it is so only at one

particular time. A fortiori those attributes which are not constant even in the

same individual, as, to be in one or in another place, to be hot or cold, sitting

or walking, must be ranked as separable accidents.

 

 

                           Chapter VIII. – Of Definition.

 

 

              § 1. One necessary part of the theory of Names and of Propositions

remains to be treated of in this place: the theory of Definitions. As being the

most important of the class of propositions which we have characterized as

purely verbal, they have already received some notice in the chapter

preceding the last. But their fuller treatment was at that time postponed,

because definition is so closely connected with classification, that, until the

nature of the latter process is in some measure understood, the former can not

be discussed to much purpose.

              The simplest and most correct notion of a Definition is, a proposition

declaratory of the meaning of a word; namely, either the meaning which it

bears in common acceptation, or that which the speaker or writer, for the

particular purposes of his discourse, intends to annex to it.

              The definition of a word being the proposition which enunciates its

meaning, words which have no meaning are unsusceptible of definition.

Proper names, therefore, can not be defined. A proper name being a mere

mark put upon an individual, and of which it is the characteristic property to

be destitute of meaning, its meaning can not of course be declared; though we

may indicate by language, as we might indicate still more conveniently by

pointing with the finger, upon what individual that particular mark has been,

or is intended to be, put. It is no definition of “John Thomson” to say he is

“the son of General Thomson;” for the name John Thomson does not express

this. Neither is it any definition of “John Thomson” to say he is “the man

now crossing the street.” These propositions may serve to make known who

is the particular man to whom the name belongs, but that may be done still

more unambiguously by pointing to him, which, however, has not been

esteemed one of the modes of definition.

              In the case of connotative names, the meaning, as has been so often

observed, is the connotation; and the definition of a connotative name, is the

proposition which declares its connotation. This might be done either directly

or indirectly. The direct mode would be by a proposition in this form: “Man”

(or whatsoever the word may be) “is a name connoting such and suchattributes,” or “is a name which, when predicated of any thing, signifies the

possession of such and such attributes by that thing.” Or thus: Man is every

thing which possesses such and such attributes: Man is every thing which

possesses corporeity, organization, life, rationality, and certain peculiarities

of external form.

              This form of definition is the most precise and least equivocal of

any; but it is not brief enough, and is besides too technical for common

discourse. The more usual mode of declaring the connotation of a name, is to

predicate of it another name or names of known signification, which connote

the same aggregation of attributes. This may be done either by predicating of

the name intended to be defined, another connotative name exactly

synonymous, as, “Man is a human being,” which is not commonly accounted

a definition at all; or by predicating two or more connotative names, which

make up among them the whole connotation of the name to be defined. In

this last case, again, we may either compose our definition of as many

connotative names as there are attributes, each attribute being connoted by

one, as, Man is a corporeal, organized, animated, rational being, shaped so

and so; or we employ names which connote several of the attributes at once,

as, Man is a rational animal , shaped so and so.

              The definition of a name, according to this view of it, is the sum

total of all the essential propositions which can be framed with that name for

their subject. All propositions the truth of which is implied in the name, all

those which we are made aware of by merely hearing the name, are included

in the definition, if complete, and may be evolved from it without the aid of

any other premises; whether the definition expresses them in two or three

words, or in a larger number. It is, therefore, not without reason that

Condillac and other writers have affirmed a definition to be an analysis . To

resolve any complex whole into the elements of which it is compounded, is

the meaning of analysis: and this we do when we replace one word which

connotes a set of attributes collectively, by two or more which connote the

same attributes singly, or in smaller groups.

              § 2. From this, however, the question naturally arises, in what

manner are we to define a name which connotes only a single attribute: for

instance, “white,” which connotes nothing but whiteness; “rational,” which

connotes nothing but the possession of reason. It might seem that the

meaning of such names could only be declared in two ways; by asynonymous term, if any such can be found; or in the direct way already

alluded to: “White is a name connoting the attribute whiteness.” Let us see,

however, whether the analysis of the meaning of the name, that is, the

breaking down of that meaning into several parts, admits of being carried

farther. Without at present deciding this question as to the word white , it is

obvious that in the case of rational some further explanation may be given of

its meaning than is contained in the proposition, “Rational is that which

possesses the attribute of reason;” since the attribute reason itself admits of

being defined. And here we must turn our attention to the definitions of

attributes, or rather of the names of attributes, that is, of abstract names.

              In regard to such names of attributes as are connotative, and express

attributes of those attributes, there is no difficulty: like other connotative

names, they are defined by declaring their connotation. Thus the word fault

may be defined, “a quality productive of evil or inconvenience.” Sometimes,

again, the attribute to be defined is not one attribute, but a union of several:

we have only, therefore, to put together the names of all the attributes taken

separately, and we obtain the definition of the name which belongs to them

all taken together; a definition which will correspond exactly to that of the

corresponding concrete name. For, as we define a concrete name by

enumerating the attributes which it connotes, and as the attributes connoted

by a concrete name form the entire signification of the corresponding abstract

name, the same enumeration will serve for the definition of both. Thus, if the

definition of a human being be this, “a being, corporeal, animated, rational,

shaped so and so,” the definition of humanity will be corporeity and animal

life, combined with rationality, and with such and such a shape.

              When, on the other hand, the abstract name does not express a

complication of attributes, but a single attribute, we must remember that

every attribute is grounded on some fact or phenomenon, from which, and

which alone, it derives its meaning. To that fact or phenomenon, called in a

former chapter the foundation of the attribute, we must, therefore, have

recourse for its definition. Now, the foundation of the attribute may be a

phenomenon of any degree of complexity, consisting of many different parts,

either co-existent or in succession. To obtain a definition of the attribute, we

must analyze the phenomenon into these parts. Eloquence, for example, is the

name of one attribute only; but this attribute is grounded on external effects

of a complicated nature, flowing from acts of the person to whom we ascribethe attribute; and by resolving this phenomenon of causation into its two

parts, the cause and the effect, we obtain a definition of eloquence, viz. the

power of influencing the feelings by speech or writing.

              A name, therefore, whether concrete or abstract, admits of definition,

provided we are able to analyze, that is, to distinguish into parts, the attribute

or set of attributes which constitute the meaning both of the concrete name

and of the corresponding abstract: if a set of attributes, by enumerating them;

if a single attribute, by dissecting the fact or phenomenon (whether of

perception or of internal consciousness) which is the foundation of the

attribute. But, further, even when the fact is one of our simple feelings or

states of consciousness, and therefore unsusceptible of analysis, the names

both of the object and of the attribute still admit of definition; or rather,

would do so if all our simple feelings had names. Whiteness may be defined,

the property or power of exciting the sensation of white. A white object may

be defined, an object which excites the sensation of white. The only names

which are unsusceptible of definition, because their meaning is unsusceptible

of analysis, are the names of the simple feelings themselves. These are in the

same condition as proper names. They are not indeed, like proper names,

unmeaning; for the words sensation of white signify, that the sensation which

I so denominate resembles other sensations which I remember to have had

before, and to have called by that name. But as we have no words by which

to recall those former sensations, except the very word which we seek to

define, or some other which, being exactly synonymous with it, requires

definition as much, words can not unfold the signification of this class of

names; and we are obliged to make a direct appeal to the personal experience

of the individual whom we address.

              § 3. Having stated what seems to be the true idea of a Definition, I

proceed to examine some opinions of philosophers, and some popular

conceptions on the subject, which conflict more or less with that idea.

              The only adequate definition of a name is, as already remarked, one

which declares the facts, and the whole of the facts, which the name involves

in its signification. But with most persons the object of a definition does not

embrace so much; they look for nothing more, in a definition, than a guide to

the correct use of the term — a protection against applying it in a manner

inconsistent with custom and convention. Any thing, therefore, is to them a

sufficient definition of a term, which will serve as a correct index to what theterm de notes; though not embracing the whole, and sometimes, perhaps, not

even any part, of what it connotes. This gives rise to two sorts of imperfect,

or unscientific definition; Essential but incomplete Definitions, and

Accidental Definitions, or Descriptions. In the former, a connotative name is

defined by a part only of its connotation; in the latter, by something which

forms no part of the connotation at all.

              An example of the first kind of imperfect definitions is the

following: Man is a rational animal. It is impossible to consider this as a

complete definition of the word Man, since (as before remarked) if we

adhered to it we should be obliged to call the Houyhnhnms men; but as there

happen to be no Houyhnhnms, this imperfect definition is sufficient to mark

out and distinguish from all other things, the objects at present denoted by

“man;” all the beings actually known to exist, of whom the name is

predicable. Though the word is defined by some only among the attributes

which it connotes, not by all, it happens that all known objects which possess

the enumerated attributes, possess also those which are omitted; so that the

field of predication which the word covers, and the employment of it which is

conformable to usage, are as well indicated by the inadequate definition as by

an adequate one. Such definitions, however, are always liable to be

overthrown by the discovery of new objects in nature.

              Definitions of this kind are what logicians have had in view, when

they laid down the rule, that the definition of a species should be per genus et

differentiam . Differentia being seldom taken to mean the whole of the

peculiarities constitutive of the species, but some one of those peculiarities

only, a complete definition would be per genus et differentias , rather than

differentiam . It would include, with the name of the superior genus, not

merely some attribute which distinguishes the species intended to be defined

from all other species of the same genus, but all the attributes implied in the

name of the species, which the name of the superior genus has not already

implied. The assertion, however, that a definition must of necessity consist of

a genus and differentiæ, is not tenable. It was early remarked by logicians,

that the summum genus in any classification, having no genus superior to

itself, could not be defined in this manner. Yet we have seen that all names,

except those of our elementary feelings, are susceptible of definition in the

strictest sense; by setting forth in words the constituent parts of the fact or

phenomenon, of which the connotation of every word is ultimatelycomposed.

              § 4. Although the first kind of imperfect definition (which defines a

connotative term by a part only of what it connotes, but a part sufficient to

mark out correctly the boundaries of its denotation), has been considered by

the ancients, and by logicians in general, as a complete definition; it has

always been deemed necessary that the attributes employed should really

form part of the connotation; for the rule was that the definition must be

drawn from the essence of the class; and this would not have been the case if

it had been in any degree made up of attributes not connoted by the name.

The second kind of imperfect definition, therefore, in which the name of a

class is defined by any of its accidents — that is, by attributes which are not

included in its connotation — has been rejected from the rank of genuine

Definition by all logicians, and has been termed Description.

              This kind of imperfect definition, however, takes its rise from the

same cause as the other, namely, the willingness to accept as a definition any

thing which, whether it expounds the meaning of the name or not, enables us

to discriminate the things denoted by the name from all other things, and

consequently to employ the term in predication without deviating from

established usage. This purpose is duly answered by stating any (no matter

what) of the attributes which are common to the whole of the class, and

peculiar to it; or any combination of attributes which happens to be peculiar

to it, though separately each of those attributes may be common to it with

some other things. It is only necessary that the definition (or description) thus

formed, should be convertible with the name which it professes to define; that

is, should be exactly co-extensive with it, being predicable of every thing of

which it is predicable, and of nothing of which it is not predicable; though the

attributes specified may have no connection with those which mankind had in

view when they formed or recognized the class, and gave it a name. The

following are correct definitions of Man, according to this test: Man is a

mammiferous animal, having (by nature) two hands (for the human species

answers to this description, and no other animal does): Man is an animal who

cooks his food: Man is a featherless biped.

              What would otherwise be a mere description, may be raised to the

rank of a real definition by the peculiar purpose which the speaker or writer

has in view. As was seen in the preceding chapter, it may, for the ends of a

particular art or science, or for the more convenient statement of an author’sparticular doctrines, be advisable to give to some general name, without

altering its denotation, a special connotation, different from its ordinary one.

When this is done, a definition of the name by means of the attributes which

make up the special connotation, though in general a mere accidental

definition or description, becomes on the particular occasion and for the

particular purpose a complete and genuine definition. This actually occurs

with respect to one of the preceding examples, “Man is a mammiferous

animal having two hands,” which is the scientific definition of man,

considered as one of the species in Cuvier’s distribution of the animal

kingdom.

              In cases of this sort, though the definition is still a declaration of the

meaning which in the particular instance the name is appointed to convey, it

can not be said that to state the meaning of the word is the purpose of the

definition. The purpose is not to expound a name, but a classification. The

special meaning which Cuvier assigned to the word Man (quite foreign to its

ordinary meaning, though involving no change in the denotation of the word),

was incidental to a plan of arranging animals into classes on a certain

principle, that is, according to a certain set of distinctions. And since the

definition of Man according to the ordinary connotation of the word, though

it would have answered every other purpose of a definition, would not have

pointed out the place which the species ought to occupy in that particular

classification; he gave the word a special connotation, that he might be able

to define it by the kind of attributes on which, for reasons of scientific

convenience, he had resolved to found his division of animated nature.

              Scientific definitions, whether they are definitions of scientific

terms, or of common terms used in a scientific sense, are almost always of

the kind last spoken of: their main purpose is to serve as the landmarks of

scientific classification. And since the classifications in any science are

continually modified as scientific knowledge advances, the definitions in the

sciences are also constantly varying. A striking instance is afforded by the

words Acid and Alkali, especially the former. As experimental discovery

advanced, the substances classed with acids have been constantly

multiplying, and by a natural consequence the attributes connoted by the

word have receded and become fewer. At first it connoted the attributes, of

combining with an alkali to form a neutral substance (called a salt); being

compounded of a base and oxygen; causticity to the taste and touch; fluidity,etc. The true analysis of muriatic acid, into chlorine and hydrogen, caused the

second property, composition from a base and oxygen, to be excluded from

the connotation. The same discovery fixed the attention of chemists upon

hydrogen as an important element in acids; and more recent discoveries

having led to the recognition of its presence in sulphuric, nitric, and many

other acids, where its existence was not previously suspected, there is now a

tendency to include the presence of this element in the connotation of the

word. But carbonic acid, silica, sulphurous acid, have no hydrogen in their

composition; that property can not, therefore, be connoted by the term, unless

those substances are no longer to be considered acids. Causticity and fluidity

have long since been excluded from the characteristics of the class, by the

inclusion of silica and many other substances in it; and the formation of

neutral bodies by combination with alkalis, together with such electro-

chemical peculiarities as this is supposed to imply, are now the only

differentiæ which form the fixed connotation of the word Acid, as a term of

chemical science.

              What is true of the definition of any term of science, is of course true

of the definition of a science itself; and accordingly (as observed in the

Introductory Chapter of this work), the definition of a science must

necessarily be progressive and provisional. Any extension of knowledge or

alteration in the current opinions respecting the subject-matter, may lead to a

change more or less extensive in the particulars included in the science; and

its composition being thus altered, it may easily happen that a different set of

characteristics will be found better adapted as differentiæ for defining its

name.

              In the same manner in which a special or technical definition has for

its object to expound the artificial classification out of which it grows; the

Aristotelian logicians seem to have imagined that it was also the business of

ordinary definition to expound the ordinary, and what they deemed the

natural, classification of things, namely, the division of them into Kinds; and

to show the place which each Kind occupies, as superior, collateral, or

subordinate, among other Kinds. This notion would account for the rule that

all definition must necessarily be per genus et differentiam , and would also

explain why a single differentia was deemed sufficient. But to expound, or

express in words, a distinction of Kind, has already been shown to be an

impossibility: the very meaning of a Kind is, that the properties whichdistinguish it do not grow out of one another, and can not therefore be set

forth in words, even by implication, otherwise than by enumerating them all:

and all are not known, nor are ever likely to be so. It is idle, therefore, to look

to this as one of the purposes of a definition: while, if it be only required that

the definition of a Kind should indicate what kinds include it or are included

by it, any definitions which expound the connotation of the names will do

this: for the name of each class must necessarily connote enough of its

properties to fix the boundaries of the class. If the definition, therefore, be a

full statement of the connotation, it is all that a definition can be required to
  43
be.

              § 5. Of the two incomplete and popular modes of definition, and in

what they differ from the complete or philosophical mode, enough has now

been said. We shall next examine an ancient doctrine, once generally

prevalent and still by no means exploded, which I regard as the source of a

great part of the obscurity hanging over some of the most important processes

of the understanding in the pursuit of truth. According to this, the definitions

of which we have now treated are only one of two sorts into which

definitions may be divided, viz., definitions of names, and definitions of

things. The former are intended to explain the meaning of a term; the latter,

the nature of a thing; the last being incomparably the most important.

              This opinion was held by the ancient philosophers, and by their

followers, with the exception of the Nominalists; but as the spirit of modern

metaphysics, until a recent period, has been on the whole a Nominalist spirit,

the notion of definitions of things has been to a certain extent in abeyance,

still continuing, however, to breed confusion in logic, by its consequences

indeed rather than by itself. Yet the doctrine in its own proper form now and

then breaks out, and has appeared (among other places) where it was scarcely
                                                                                    44
to be expected, in a justly admired word, Archbishop Whately’s Logic . In a

review of that work published by me in the Westminster Review for January,

1828, and containing some opinions which I no longer entertain, I find the

following observations on the question now before us; observations with

which my present view of that question is still sufficiently in accordance.

              “The distinction between nominal and real definitions, between

definitions of words and what are called definitions of things, though

conformable to the ideas of most of the Aristotelian logicians, can not, as it

appears to us, be maintained. We apprehend that no definition is everintended to ‘explain and unfold the nature of a thing.’ It is some confirmation

of our opinion, that none of those writers who have thought that there were

definitions of things, have ever succeeded in discovering any criterion by

which the definition of a thing can be distinguished from any other

proposition relating to the thing. The definition, they say, unfolds the nature

of the thing: but no definition can unfold its whole nature; and every

proposition in which any quality whatever is predicated of the thing, unfolds

some part of its nature. The true state of the case we take to be this. All

definitions are of names, and of names only; but, in some definitions, it is

clearly apparent, that nothing is intended except to explain the meaning of the

word; while in others, besides explaining the meaning of the word, it is

intended to be implied that there exists a thing, corresponding to the word.

Whether this be or be not implied in any given case, can not be collected

from the mere form of the expression. ‘A centaur is an animal with the upper

parts of a man and the lower parts of a horse,’ and ‘A triangle is a rectilineal

figure with three sides,’ are, in form, expressions precisely similar; although

in the former it is not implied that any thing , conformable to the term, really

exists, while in the latter it is; as may be seen by substituting in both

definitions, the word means for is . In the first expression, ‘A centaur means

an animal,’ etc., the sense would remain unchanged: in the second, ‘A

triangle means,’ etc., the meaning would be altered, since it would be

obviously impossible to deduce any of the truths of geometry from a

proposition expressive only of the manner in which we intend to employ a

particular sign.

              “There are, therefore, expressions, commonly passing for

definitions, which include in themselves more than the mere explanation of

the meaning of a term. But it is not correct to call an expression of this sort a

peculiar kind of definition. Its difference from the other kind consists in this,

that it is not a definition, but a definition and something more. The definition

above given of a triangle, obviously comprises not one, but two propositions,

perfectly distinguishable. The one is, ‘There may exist a figure, bounded by

three straight lines;’ the other, ‘And this figure may be termed a triangle.’

The former of these propositions is not a definition at all: the latter is a mere

nominal definition, or explanation of the use and application of a term. The

first is susceptible of truth or falsehood, and may therefore be made the

foundation of a train of reasoning. The latter can neither be true nor false; the

only character it is susceptible of is that of conformity or disconformity to theordinary usage of language.”

              There is a real distinction, then, between definitions of names, and

what are erroneously called definitions of things; but it is, that the latter,

along with the meaning of a name, covertly asserts a matter of fact. This

covert assertion is not a definition, but a postulate. The definition is a mere

identical proposition, which gives information only about the use of

language, and from which no conclusions affecting matters of fact can

possibly be drawn. The accompanying postulate, on the other hand, affirms a

fact, which may lead to consequences of every degree of importance. It

affirms the actual or possible existence of Things possessing the combination

of attributes set forth in the definition; and this, if true, may be foundation

sufficient on which to build a whole fabric of scientific truth.

              We have already made, and shall often have to repeat, the remark,

that the philosophers who overthrew Realism by no means got rid of the

consequences of Realism, but retained long afterward, in their own

philosophy, numerous propositions which could only have a rational meaning

as part of a Realistic system. It had been handed down from Aristotle, and

probably from earlier times, as an obvious truth, that the science of Geometry

is deduced from definitions. This, so long as a definition was considered to be

a proposition “unfolding the nature of the thing,” did well enough. But

Hobbes followed, and rejected utterly the notion that a definition declares the

nature of the thing, or does any thing but state the meaning of a name; yet he

continued to affirm as broadly as any of his predecessors, that the ἀρχαὶ,

principia , or original premises of mathematics, and even of all science, are

definitions; producing the singular paradox, that systems of scientific truth,

nay, all truths whatever at which we arrive by reasoning, are deduced from

the arbitrary conventions of mankind concerning the signification of words.

              To save the credit of the doctrine that definitions are the premises of

scientific knowledge, the proviso is sometimes added, that they are so only

under a certain condition, namely, that they be framed conformably to the

phenomena of nature; that is, that they ascribe such meanings to terms as

shall suit objects actually existing. But this is only an instance of the attempt

so often made, to escape from the necessity of abandoning old language after

the ideas which it expresses have been exchanged for contrary ones. From the

meaning of a name (we are told) it is possible to infer physical facts, provided

the name has corresponding to it an existing thing. But if this proviso benecessary, from which of the two is the inference really drawn? From the

existence of a thing having the properties, or from the existence of a name

meaning them?

              Take, for instance, any of the definitions laid down as premises in

Euclid’s Elements; the definition, let us say, of a circle. This, being analyzed,

consists of two propositions; the one an assumption with respect to a matter

of fact, the other a genuine definition. “A figure may exist, having all the

points in the line which bounds it equally distant from a single point within

it:” “Any figure possessing this property is called a circle.” Let us look at one

of the demonstrations which are said to depend on this definition, and

observe to which of the two propositions contained in it the demonstration

really appeals. “About the centre A, describe the circle B C D.”

              Here is an assumption that a figure, such as the definition expresses,

may be described; which is no other than the postulate, or covert assumption,

involved in the so-called definition. But whether that figure be called a circle

or not is quite immaterial. The purpose would be as well answered, in all

respects except brevity, were we to say, “Through the point B, draw a line

returning into itself, of which every point shall be at an equal distance from

the point A.” By this the definition of a circle would be got rid of, and

rendered needless; but not the postulate implied in it; without that the

demonstration could not stand. The circle being now described, let us proceed

to the consequence. “Since B C D is a circle, the radius B A is equal to the

radius C A.” B A is equal to C A, not because B C D is a circle, but because

B C D is a figure with the radii equal. Our warrant for assuming that such a

figure about the centre A, with the radius B A, may be made to exist, is the

postulate. Whether the admissibility of these postulates rests on intuition, or

on proof, may be a matter of dispute; but in either case they are the premises

on which the theorems depend; and while these are retained it would make no

difference in the certainty of geometrical truths, though every definition in

Euclid, and every technical term therein defined, were laid aside.

              It is, perhaps, superfluous to dwell at so much length on what is so

nearly self-evident; but when a distinction, obvious as it may appear, has

been confounded, and by powerful intellects, it is better to say too much than

too little for the purpose of rendering such mistakes impossible in future. I

will, therefore detain the reader while I point out one of the absurd

consequences flowing from the supposition that definitions, as such, are thepremises in any of our reasonings, except such as relate to words only. If this

supposition were true, we might argue correctly from true premises, and

arrive at a false conclusion. We should only have to assume as a premise the

definition of a nonentity; or rather of a name which has no entity

corresponding to it. Let this, for instance, be our definition:

              A dragon is a serpent breathing flame.

              This proposition, considered only as a definition, is indisputably

correct. A dragon is a serpent breathing flame: the word means that. The tacit

assumption, indeed (if there were any such understood assertion), of the

existence of an object with properties corresponding to the definition, would,

in the present instance, be false. Out of this definition we may carve the

premises of the following syllogism:

              A dragon is a thing which breathes flame:

A dragon is a serpent:

              From which the conclusion is,

              Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame:

              an unexceptionable syllogism in the first mode of the third figure, in

which both premises are true and yet the conclusion false; which every

logician knows to be an absurdity. The conclusion being false and the

syllogism correct, the premises can not be true. But the premises, considered

as parts of a definition, are true. Therefore, the premises considered as parts

of a definition can not be the real ones. The real premises must be —

              A dragon is a really existing thing which breathes flame:

A dragon is a really existing serpent:

              which implied premises being false, the falsity of the conclusion

presents no absurdity.

              If we would determine what conclusion follows from the same

ostensible premises when the tacit assumption of real existence is left out, let

us, according to the recommendation in a previous page, substitute means for

is . We then have —

              Dragon is a word meaning a thing which breathes flame:

Dragon is a word meaning a serpent:              From which the conclusion is,

              Some word or words which mean a serpent, also mean a thing which

breathes flame:

              where the conclusion (as well as the premises) is true, and is the only

kind of conclusion which can ever follow from a definition, namely, a

proposition relating to the meaning of words.

              There is still another shape into which we may transform this

syllogism. We may suppose the middle term to be the designation neither of a

thing nor of a name, but of an idea. We then have —

              The idea of a dragon is an idea of a thing which breathes flame:

The idea of a dragon is an idea of a serpent:

Therefore, there is an idea of a serpent, which is an idea of a thing breathing

flame.

              Here the conclusion is true, and also the premises; but the premises

are not definitions. They are propositions affirming that an idea existing in

the mind, includes certain ideal elements. The truth of the conclusion follows

from the existence of the psychological phenomenon called the idea of a
                                                                                    45
dragon; and therefore still from the tacit assumption of a matter of fact.

              When, as in this last syllogism, the conclusion is a proposition

respecting an idea, the assumption on which it depends may be merely that of

the existence of an idea. But when the conclusion is a proposition concerning

a Thing, the postulate involved in the definition which stands as the apparent

premise, is the existence of a thing conformable to the definition, and not

merely of an idea conformable to it. This assumption of real existence we

always convey the impression that we intend to make, when we profess to

define any name which is already known to be a name of really existing

objects. On this account it is, that the assumption was not necessarily implied

in the definition of a dragon, while there was no doubt of its being included

in the definition of a circle.

              § 6. One of the circumstances which have contributed to keep up the

notion, that demonstrative truths follow from definitions rather than from the

postulates implied in those definitions, is, that the postulates, even in those

sciences which are considered to surpass all others in demonstrative certainty,

are not always exactly true. It is not true that a circle exists, or can bedescribed, which has all its radii exactly equal. Such accuracy is ideal only; it

is not found in nature, still less can it be realized by art. People had a

difficulty, therefore, in conceiving that the most certain of all conclusions

could rest on premises which, instead of being certainly true, are certainly not

true to the full extent asserted. This apparent paradox will be examined when

we come to treat of Demonstration; where we shall be able to show that as

much of the postulate is true, as is required to support as much as is true of

the conclusion. Philosophers, however, to whom this view had not occurred,

or whom it did not satisfy, have thought it indispensable that there should be

found in definitions something more certain, or at least more accurately true,

than the implied postulate of the real existence of a corresponding object.

And this something they flattered themselves they had found, when they laid

it down that a definition is a statement and analysis not of the mere meaning

of a word, nor yet of the nature of a thing, but of an idea. Thus, the

proposition, “A circle is a plane figure bounded by a line all the points of

which are at an equal distance from a given point within it,” was considered

by them, not as an assertion that any real circle has that property (which

would not be exactly true), but that we conceive a circle as having it; that our

abstract idea of a circle is an idea of a figure with its radii exactly equal.

              Conformably to this it is said, that the subject-matter of

mathematics, and of every other demonstrative science, is not things as they

really exist, but abstractions of the mind. A geometrical line is a line without

breadth; but no such line exists in nature; it is a notion merely suggested to

the mind by its experience of nature. The definition (it is said) is a definition

of this mental line, not of any actual line: and it is only of the mental line, not

of any line existing in nature, that the theorems of geometry are accurately

true.

              Allowing this doctrine respecting the nature of demonstrative truth

to be correct (which, in a subsequent place, I shall endeavor to prove that it is

not); even on that supposition, the conclusions which seem to follow from a

definition, do not follow from the definition as such, but from an implied

postulate. Even if it be true that there is no object in nature answering to the

definition of a line, and that the geometrical properties of lines are not true of

any lines in nature, but only of the idea of a line; the definition, at all events,

postulates the real existence of such an idea: it assumes that the mind can

frame, or rather has framed, the notion of length without breadth, and withoutany other sensible property whatever. To me, indeed, it appears that the mind

can not form any such notion; it can not conceive length without breadth; it

can only, in contemplating objects, attend to their length, exclusively of their

other sensible qualities, and so determine what properties may be predicated

of them in virtue of their length alone. If this be true, the postulate involved

in the geometrical definition of a line, is the real existence, not of length

without breadth, but merely of length, that is, of long objects. This is quite

enough to support all the truths of geometry, since every property of a

geometrical line is really a property of all physical objects in so far as

possessing length. But even what I hold to be the false doctrine on the

subject, leaves the conclusion that our reasonings are grounded on the matters

of fact postulated in definitions, and not on the definitions themselves,

entirely unaffected; and accordingly this conclusion is one which I have in

common with Dr. Whewell, in his Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences :

though, on the nature of demonstrative truth, Dr. Whewell’s opinions are

greatly at variance with mine. And here, as in many other instances, I gladly

acknowledge that his writings are eminently serviceable in clearing from

confusion the initial steps in the analysis of the mental processes, even where

his views respecting the ultimate analysis are such as (though with unfeigned

respect) I can not but regard as fundamentally erroneous.

              § 7. Although, according to the opinion here presented, Definitions

are properly of names only, and not of things, it does not follow from this that

definitions are arbitrary. How to define a name, may not only be an inquiry of

considerable difficulty and intricacy, but may involve considerations going

deep into the nature of the things which are denoted by the name. Such, for

instance, are the inquiries which form the subjects of the most important of

Plato’s Dialogues; as, “What is rhetoric?” the topic of the Gorgias, or, “What

is justice?” that of the Republic. Such, also, is the question scornfully asked

by Pilate, “What is truth?” and the fundamental question with speculative

moralists in all ages, “What is virtue?”

              It would be a mistake to represent these difficult and noble inquiries

as having nothing in view beyond ascertaining the conventional meaning of a

name. They are inquiries not so much to determine what is, as what should

be, the meaning of a name; which, like other practical questions of

terminology, requires for its solution that we should enter, and sometimes

enter very deeply, into the properties not merely of names but of the thingsnamed.

              Although the meaning of every concrete general name resides in the

attributes which it connotes, the objects were named before the attributes; as

appears from the fact that in all languages, abstract names are mostly

compounds or other derivatives of the concrete names which correspond to

them. Connotative names, therefore, were, after proper names, the first which

were used: and in the simpler cases, no doubt, a distinct connotation was

present to the minds of those who first used the name, and was distinctly

intended by them to be conveyed by it. The first person who used the word

white, as applied to snow or to any other object, knew, no doubt, very well

what quality he intended to predicate, and had a perfectly distinct conception

in his mind of the attribute signified by the name.

              But where the resemblances and differences on which our

classifications are founded are not of this palpable and easily determinable

kind; especially where they consist not in any one quality but in a number of

qualities, the effects of which, being blended together, are not very easily

discriminated, and referred each to its true source; it often happens that

names are applied to namable objects, with no distinct connotation present to

the minds of those who apply them. They are only influenced by a general

resemblance between the new object and all or some of the old familiar

objects which they have been accustomed to call by that name. This, as we

have seen, is the law which even the mind of the philosopher must follow, in

giving names to the simple elementary feelings of our nature: but, where the

things to be named are complex wholes, a philosopher is not content with

noticing a general resemblance; he examines what the resemblance consists

in: and he only gives the same name to things which resemble one another in

the same definite particulars. The philosopher, therefore, habitually employs

his general names with a definite connotation. But language was not made,

and can only in some small degree be mended, by philosophers. In the minds

of the real arbiters of language, general names, especially where the classes

they denote can not be brought before the tribunal of the outward senses to be

identified and discriminated, connote little more than a vague gross

resemblance to the things which they were earliest, or have been most,

accustomed to call by those names. When, for instance, ordinary persons

predicate the words just or unjust of any action, noble or mean of any

sentiment, expression, or demeanor, statesman or charlatan of any personagefiguring in politics, do they mean to affirm of those various subjects any

determinate attributes, of whatever kind? No: they merely recognize, as they

think, some likeness, more or less vague and loose, between these and some

other things which they have been accustomed to denominate or to hear

denominated by those appellations.

              Language, as Sir James Mackintosh used to say of governments, “is

not made, but grows.” A name is not imposed at once and by previous

purpose upon a class of objects, but is first applied to one thing, and then

extended by a series of transitions to another and another. By this process (as

has been remarked by several writers, and illustrated with great force and

clearness by Dugald Stewart in his Philosophical Essays) a name not

unfrequently passes by successive links of resemblance from one object to

another, until it becomes applied to things having nothing in common with

the first things to which the name was given; which, however, do not, for that

reason, drop the name; so that it at last denotes a confused huddle of objects,

having nothing whatever in common; and connotes nothing, not even a vague

and general resemblance. When a name has fallen into this state, in which by

predicating it of any object we assert literally nothing about the object, it has

become unfit for the purposes either of thought or of the communication of

thought; and can only be made serviceable by stripping it of some part of its

multifarious denotation, and confining it to objects possessed of some

attributes in common, which it may be made to connote. Such are the

inconveniences of a language which “is not made, but grows.” Like the

governments which are in a similar case, it may be compared to a road which

is not made but has made itself: it requires continual mending in order to be

passable.

              From this it is already evident, why the question respecting the

definition of an abstract name is often one of so much difficulty. The

question, What is justice? is, in other words, What is the attribute which

mankind mean to predicate when they call an action just? To which the first

answer is, that having come to no precise agreement on the point, they do not

mean to predicate distinctly any attribute at all. Nevertheless, all believe that

there is some common attribute belonging to all the actions which they are in

the habit of calling just. The question then must be, whether there is any such

common attribute? and, in the first place, whether mankind agree sufficiently

with one another as to the particular actions which they do or do not call just,to render the inquiry, what quality those actions have in common, a possible

one: if so, whether the actions really have any quality in common; and if they

have, what it is. Of these three, the first alone is an inquiry into usage and

convention; the other two are inquiries into matters of fact. And if the second

question (whether the actions form a class at all) has been answered

negatively, there remains a fourth, often more arduous than all the rest,

namely, how best to form a class artificially, which the name may denote.

              And here it is fitting to remark, that the study of the spontaneous

growth of languages is of the utmost importance to those who would

logically remodel them. The classifications rudely made by established

language, when retouched, as they almost all require to be, by the hands of

the logician, are often themselves excellently suited to his purposes. As

compared with the classifications of a philosopher, they are like the

customary law of a country, which has grown up as it were spontaneously,

compared with laws methodized and digested into a code: the former are a far

less perfect instrument than the latter; but being the result of a long, though

unscientific, course of experience, they contain a mass of materials which

may be made very usefully available in the formation of the systematic body

of written law. In like manner, the established grouping of objects under a

common name, even when founded only on a gross and general resemblance,

is evidence, in the first place, that the resemblance is obvious, and therefore

considerable; and, in the next place, that it is a resemblance which has struck

great numbers of persons during a series of years and ages. Even when a

name, by successive extensions, has come to be applied to things among

which there does not exist this gross resemblance common to them all, still at

every step in its progress we shall find such a resemblance. And these

transitions of the meaning of words are often an index to real connections

between the things denoted by them, which might otherwise escape the notice

of thinkers; of those at least who, from using a different language, or from

any difference in their habitual associations, have fixed their attention in

preference on some other aspect of the things. The history of philosophy

abounds in examples of such oversights, committed for want of perceiving

the hidden link that connected together the seemingly disparate meanings of
                          46
some ambiguous word.

              Whenever the inquiry into the definition of the name of any real

object consists of any thing else than a mere comparison of authorities, wetacitly assume that a meaning must be found for the name, compatible with

its continuing to denote, if possible all, but at any rate the greater or the more

important part, of the things of which it is commonly predicated. The inquiry,

therefore, into the definition, is an inquiry into the resemblances and

differences among those things: whether there be any resemblance running

through them all; if not, through what portion of them such a general

resemblance can be traced: and finally, what are the common attributes, the

possession of which gives to them all, or to that portion of them, the character

of resemblance which has led to their being classed together. When these

common attributes have been ascertained and specified, the name which

belongs in common to the resembling objects acquires a distinct instead of a

vague connotation; and by possessing this distinct connotation, becomes

susceptible of definition.

              In giving a distinct connotation to the general name, the philosopher

will endeavor to fix upon such attributes as, while they are common to all the

things usually denoted by the name, are also of greatest importance in

themselves; either directly, or from the number, the conspicuousness, or the

interesting character, of the consequences to which they lead. He will select,

as far as possible, such differentiæ as lead to the greatest number of

interesting propria . For these, rather than the more obscure and recondite

qualities on which they often depend, give that general character and aspect

to a set of objects, which determine the groups into which they naturally fall.

But to penetrate to the more hidden agreement on which these obvious and

superficial agreements depend, is often one of the most difficult of scientific

problems. As it is among the most difficult, so it seldom fails to be among the

most important. And since upon the result of this inquiry respecting the

causes of the properties of a class of things, there incidentally depends the

question what shall be the meaning of a word; some of the most profound and

most valuable investigations which philosophy presents to us, have been

introduced by, and have offered themselves under the guise of, inquiries into

the definition of a name.

 

 

                             Book II: Of reasoning.

 

 

              Διωρισμένων δε τούτων λέγωμεν ἤδη, διά τίνων, καὶ πότε, καὶ πῶς

γίνεται πᾶς συλλογισμός ὕστερον δὲ λεκτέον περὶ ἀποδείξεως. Πρότερον γὰρ

περὶ συλλογισμοῦ λεκτέον, ἥ περὶ ἀποδείξεως, διὰ τὸ καθόλου μᾶλλον εἰναὶ

τὸν συλλογισμόν. Ἡ μέν γὰρ ἀπόδειξις, συλλογισμός τις; ὁ συλλογισμός δὲ

ού πᾶς, ἀπόδειξις. — ARIST., Analyt. Prior. , l. i., cap. 4.

 

 

             Chapter I. – Of Inference, Or Reasoning, In General.

 

 

              § 1. In the preceding Book, we have been occupied not with the

nature of Proof, but with the nature of Assertion: the import conveyed by a

Proposition, whether that Proposition be true or false; not the means by which

to discriminate true from false Propositions. The proper subject, however, of

Logic is Proof. Before we could understand what Proof is, it was necessary to

understand what that is to which proof is applicable; what that is which can

be a subject of belief or disbelief, of affirmation or denial; what, in short, the

different kinds of Propositions assert.

              This preliminary inquiry we have prosecuted to a definite result.

Assertion, in the first place, relates either to the meaning of words, or to some

property of the things which words signify. Assertions respecting the

meaning of words, among which definitions are the most important, hold a

place, and an indispensable one, in philosophy; but as the meaning of words

is essentially arbitrary, this class of assertions are not susceptible of truth or

falsity, nor therefore of proof or disproof. Assertions respecting Things, or

what may be called Real Propositions, in contradistinction to verbal ones, are

of various sorts. We have analyzed the import of each sort, and have

ascertained the nature of the things they relate to, and the nature of what they

severally assert respecting those things. We found that whatever be the form

of the proposition, and whatever its nominal subject or predicate, the real

subject of every proposition is some one or more facts or phenomena of

consciousness, or some one or more of the hidden causes or powers to which

we ascribe those facts; and that what is predicated or asserted, either in the

affirmative or negative, of those phenomena or those powers, is always either

Existence, Order in Place, Order in Time, Causation, or Resemblance. This,

then, is the theory of the Import of Propositions, reduced to its ultimate

elements: but there is another and a less abstruse expression for it, which,

though stopping short in an earlier stage of the analysis, is sufficiently

scientific for many of the purposes for which such a general expression is

required. This expression recognizes the commonly received distinction

between Subject and Attribute, and gives the following as the analysis of the

meaning of propositions:— Every Proposition asserts, that some givensubject does or does not possess some attribute; or that some attribute is or is

not (either in all or in some portion of the subjects in which it is met with)

conjoined with some other attribute.

              We shall now for the present take our leave of this portion of our

inquiry, and proceed to the peculiar problem of the Science of Logic, namely,

how the assertions, of which we have analyzed the import, are proved or

disproved; such of them, at least, as, not being amenable to direct

consciousness or intuition, are appropriate subjects of proof.

              We say of a fact or statement, that it is proved, when we believe its

truth by reason of some other fact or statement from which it is said to follow

. Most of the propositions, whether affirmative or negative, universal,

particular, or singular, which we believe, are not believed on their own

evidence, but on the ground of something previously assented to, from which

they are said to be inferred . To infer a proposition from a previous

proposition or propositions; to give credence to it, or claim credence for it, as

a conclusion from something else; is to reason , in the most extensive sense

of the term. There is a narrower sense, in which the name reasoning is

confined to the form of inference which is termed ratiocination, and of which

the syllogism is the general type. The reasons for not conforming to this

restricted use of the term were stated in an earlier stage of our inquiry, and

additional motives will be suggested by the considerations on which we are

now about to enter.

              § 2. In proceeding to take into consideration the cases in which

inferences can legitimately be drawn, we shall first mention some cases in

which the inference is apparent, not real; and which require notice chiefly

that they may not be confounded with cases of inference properly so called.

This occurs when the proposition ostensibly inferred from another, appears

on analysis to be merely a repetition of the same, or part of the same,

assertion, which was contained in the first. All the cases mentioned in books

of Logic as examples of equipollency or equivalence of propositions, are of

this nature. Thus, if we were to argue, No man is incapable of reason, for

every man is rational; or, All men are mortal, for no man is exempt from

death; it would be plain that we were not proving the proposition, but only

appealing to another mode of wording it, which may or may not be more

readily comprehensible by the hearer, or better adapted to suggest the real

proof, but which contains in itself no shadow of proof.              Another case is where, from a universal proposition, we affect to

infer another which differs from it only in being particular: as All A is B,

therefore Some A is B: No A is B, therefore Some A is not B. This, too, is

not to conclude one proposition from another, but to repeat a second time

something which had been asserted at first; with the difference, that we do

not here repeat the whole of the previous assertion, but only an indefinite part

of it.

              A third case is where, the antecedent having affirmed a predicate of

a given subject, the consequent affirms of the same subject something already

connoted by the former predicate: as, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is

a living creature; where all that is connoted by living creature was affirmed of

Socrates when he was asserted to be a man. If the propositions are negative,

we must invert their order, thus: Socrates is not a living creature, therefore he

is not a man; for if we deny the less, the greater, which includes it, is already

denied by implication. These, therefore, are not really cases of inference; and

yet the trivial examples by which, in manuals of Logic, the rules of the

syllogism are illustrated, are often of this ill-chosen kind; formal

demonstrations of conclusions to which whoever understands the terms used
                                                                              47
in the statement of the data, has already, and consciously, assented.

              The most complex case of this sort of apparent inference is what is

called the Conversion of propositions; which consists in turning the predicate

into a subject, and the subject into a predicate, and framing out of the same

terms thus reversed, another proposition, which must be true if the former is

true. Thus, from the particular affirmative proposition, Some A is B, we may

infer that Some B is A. From the universal negative, No A is B, we may

conclude that No B is A. From the universal affirmative proposition, All A is

B, it can not be inferred that all B is A; though all water is liquid, it is not

implied that all liquid is water; but it is implied that some liquid is so; and

hence the proposition, All A is B, is legitimately convertible into Some B is

A. This process, which converts a universal proposition into a particular, is

termed conversion per accidens . From the proposition, Some A is not B, we

can not even infer that some B is not A; though some men are not

Englishmen, it does not follow that some Englishmen are not men. The only

mode usually recognized of converting a particular negative proposition, is in

the form, Some A is not B, therefore something which is not B is A; and this

is termed conversion by contraposition. In this case, however, the predicateand subject are not merely reversed, but one of them is changed. Instead of

[A] and [B], the terms of the new proposition are [a thing which is not B],

and [A]. The original proposition, Some A is not B, is first changed into a

proposition equipollent with it, Some A is “a thing which is not B;” and the

proposition, being now no longer a particular negative, but a particular

affirmative, admits of conversion in the first mode, or as it is called, simple
            48
conversion.

              In all these cases there is not really any inference; there is in the

conclusion no new truth, nothing but what was already asserted in the

premises, and obvious to whoever apprehends them. The fact asserted in the

conclusion is either the very same fact, or part of the fact, asserted in the

original proposition. This follows from our previous analysis of the Import of

Propositions. When we say, for example, that some lawful sovereigns are

tyrants, what is the meaning of the assertion? That the attributes connoted by

the term “lawful sovereign,” and the attributes connoted by the term “tyrant,”

sometimes co-exist in the same individual. Now this is also precisely what we

mean, when we say that some tyrants are lawful sovereigns; which, therefore,

is not a second proposition inferred from the first, any more than the English

translation of Euclid’s Elements is a collection of theorems different from

and consequences of, those contained in the Greek original. Again, if we

assert that no great general is a rash man, we mean that the attributes

connoted by “great general,” and those connoted by “rash,” never co-exist in

the same subject; which is also the exact meaning which would be expressed

by saying, that no rash man is a great general. When we say that all

quadrupeds are warm-blooded, we assert, not only that the attributes

connoted by “quadruped” and those connoted by “warm-blooded” sometimes

co-exist, but that the former never exist without the latter: now the

proposition, Some warm-blooded creatures are quadrupeds, expresses the

first half of this meaning, dropping the latter half; and therefore has been

already affirmed in the antecedent proposition, All quadrupeds are warm-

blooded. But that all warm-blooded creatures are quadrupeds, or, in other

words, that the attributes connoted by “warm-blooded” never exist without

those connoted by “quadruped,” has not been asserted, and can not be

inferred. In order to re-assert, in an inverted form, the whole of what was

affirmed in the proposition, All quadrupeds are warm-blooded, we must

convert it by contraposition, thus, Nothing which is not warm-blooded is a

quadruped. This proposition, and the one from which it is derived, are exactlyequivalent, and either of them may be substituted for the other; for, to say

that when the attributes of a quadruped are present, those of a warm-blooded

creature are present, is to say that when the latter are absent the former are

absent.

              In a manual for young students, it would be proper to dwell at

greater length on the conversion and equipollency of propositions. For though

that can not be called reasoning or inference which is a mere re-assertion in

different words of what had been asserted before, there is no more important

intellectual habit, nor any the cultivation of which falls more strictly within

the province of the art of logic, than that of discerning rapidly and surely the

identity of an assertion when disguised under diversity of language. That

important chapter in logical treatises which relates to the Opposition of

Propositions, and the excellent technical language which logic provides for

distinguishing the different kinds or modes of opposition, are of use chiefly

for this purpose. Such considerations as these, that contrary propositions may

both be false, but can not both be true; that subcontrary propositions may

both be true, but can not both be false; that of two contradictory propositions

one must be true and the other false; that of two subalternate propositions the

truth of the universal proves the truth of the particular, and the falsity of the
                                                                          49
particular proves the falsity of the universal, but not vicè versa ; are apt to

appear, at first sight, very technical and mysterious, but when explained,

seem almost too obvious to require so formal a statement, since the same

amount of explanation which is necessary to make the principles intelligible,

would enable the truths which they convey to be apprehended in any

particular case which can occur. In this respect, however, these axioms of

logic are on a level with those of mathematics. That things which are equal to

the same thing are equal to one another, is as obvious in any particular case

as it is in the general statement: and if no such general maxim had ever been

laid down, the demonstrations in Euclid would never have halted for any

difficulty in stepping across the gap which this axiom at present serves to

bridge over. Yet no one has ever censured writers on geometry, for placing a

list of these elementary generalizations at the head of their treatises, as a first

exercise to the learner of the faculty which will be required in him at every

step, that of apprehending a general truth. And the student of logic, in the

discussion even of such truths as we have cited above, acquires habits of

circumspect interpretation of words, and of exactly measuring the length and

breadth of his assertions, which are among the most indispensable conditionsof any considerable mental attainment, and which it is one of the primary

objects of logical discipline to cultivate.

              § 3. Having noticed, in order to exclude from the province of

Reasoning or Inference properly so called, the cases in which the progression

from one truth to another is only apparent, the logical consequent being a

mere repetition of the logical antecedent; we now pass to those which are

cases of inference in the proper acceptation of the term, those in which we set

out from known truths, to arrive at others really distinct from them.

              Reasoning, in the extended sense in which I use the term, and in

which it is synonymous with Inference, is popularly said to be of two kinds:

reasoning from particulars to generals, and reasoning from generals to

particulars; the former being called Induction, the latter Ratiocination or

Syllogism. It will presently be shown that there is a third species of

reasoning, which falls under neither of these descriptions, and which,

nevertheless, is not only valid, but is the foundation of both the others.

              It is necessary to observe, that the expressions, reasoning from

particulars to generals, and reasoning from generals to particulars, are

recommended by brevity rather than by precision, and do not adequately

mark, without the aid of a commentary, the distinction between Induction (in

the sense now adverted to) and Ratiocination. The meaning intended by these

expressions is, that Induction is inferring a proposition from propositions less

general than itself, and Ratiocination is inferring a proposition from

propositions equally or more general. When, from the observation of a

number of individual instances, we ascend to a general proposition, or when,

by combining a number of general propositions, we conclude from them

another proposition still more general, the process, which is substantially the

same in both instances, is called Induction. When from a general proposition,

not alone (for from a single proposition nothing can be concluded which is

not involved in the terms), but by combining it with other propositions, we

infer a proposition of the same degree of generality with itself, or a less

general proposition, or a proposition merely individual, the process is

Ratiocination. When, in short, the conclusion is more general than the largest

of the premises, the argument is commonly called Induction; when less

general, or equally general, it is Ratiocination.

              As all experience begins with individual cases, and proceeds fromthem to generals, it might seem most conformable to the natural order of

thought that Induction should be treated of before we touch upon

Ratiocination. It will, however, be advantageous, in a science which aims at

tracing our acquired knowledge to its sources, that the inquirer should

commence with the latter rather than with the earlier stages of the process of

constructing our knowledge; and should trace derivative truths backward to

the truths from which they are deduced, and on which they depend for their

evidence, before attempting to point out the original spring from which both

ultimately take their rise. The advantages of this order of proceeding in the

present instance will manifest themselves as we advance, in a manner

superseding the necessity of any further justification or explanation.

              Of Induction, therefore, we shall say no more at present, than that it

at least is, without doubt, a process of real inference. The conclusion in an

induction embraces more than is contained in the premises. The principle or

law collected from particular instances, the general proposition in which we

embody the result of our experience, covers a much larger extent of ground

than the individual experiments which form its basis. A principle ascertained

by experience, is more than a mere summing up of what has been specifically

observed in the individual cases which have been examined; it is a

generalization grounded on those cases, and expressive of our belief, that

what we there found true is true in an indefinite number of cases which we

have not examined, and are never likely to examine. The nature and grounds

of this inference, and the conditions necessary to make it legitimate, will be

the subject of discussion in the Third Book: but that such inference really

takes place is not susceptible of question. In every induction we proceed from

truths which we knew, to truths which we did not know; from facts certified

by observation, to facts which we have not observed, and even to facts not

capable of being now observed; future facts, for example; but which we do

not hesitate to believe on the sole evidence of the induction itself.

              Induction, then, is a real process of Reasoning or Inference.

Whether, and in what sense, as much can be said of the Syllogism, remains to

be determined by the examination into which we are about to enter.

 

 

                 Chapter II. – Of Ratiocination, Or Syllogism.

 

 

              § 1. The analysis of the Syllogism has been so accurately and fully

performed in the common manuals of Logic, that in the present work, which

is not designed as a manual, it is sufficient to recapitulate, memoriæ causâ ,

the leading results of that analysis, as a foundation for the remarks to be

afterward made on the functions of the Syllogism, and the place which it

holds in science.

              To a legitimate syllogism it is essential that there should be three,

and no more than three, propositions, namely, the conclusion, or proposition

to be proved, and two other propositions which together prove it, and which

are called the premises. It is essential that there should be three, and no more

than three, terms, namely, the subject and predicate of the conclusion, and

another called the middle term, which must be found in both premises, since

it is by means of it that the other two terms are to be connected together. The

predicate of the conclusion is called the major term of the syllogism; the

subject of the conclusion is called the minor term. As there can be but three

terms, the major and minor terms must each be found in one, and only one, of

the premises, together with the middle term which is in them both. The

premise which contains the middle term and the major term is called the

major premise; that which contains the middle term and the minor term is

called the minor premise.

              Syllogisms are divided by some logicians into three figures , by

others into four, according to the position of the middle term, which may

either be the subject in both premises, the predicate in both, or the subject in

one and the predicate in the other. The most common case is that in which the

middle term is the subject of the major premise and the predicate of the

minor. This is reckoned as the first figure. When the middle term is the

predicate in both premises, the syllogism belongs to the second figure; when

it is the subject in both, to the third. In the fourth figure the middle term is the

subject of the minor premise and the predicate of the major. Those writers

who reckon no more than three figures, include this case in the first.

              Each figure is divided into moods , according to what are called thequantity and quality of the propositions, that is, according as they are

universal or particular, affirmative or negative. The following are examples

of all the legitimate moods, that is, all those in which the conclusion correctly

follows from the premises. A is the minor term, C the major, B the middle

term.

              FIRST FIGURE.

              All B is C No B is C All B is C No B is C All A is B All A is B

Some A is B Some A is B therefore therefore therefore therefore All A is C

No A is C Some A is C Some A is not C

              SECOND FIGURE.

              No C is B All C is B No C is B All C is B All A is B No A is B

Some A is B Some A is not B therefore therefore therefore therefore No A is

C No A is C Some A is not C Some A is not C

              THIRD FIGURE.

              All B is No B is C Some B is All B is Some B is No B is C C C C

not C All B is All B is All B is Some B is All B is Some B is A A A A A A

therefore therefore therefore therefore therefore therefore Some A is Some A

is Some A is Some A is Some A is Some A is C not C C C not C not C

              FOURTH FIGURE.

              All C is B All C is B Some C is B No C is B No C is B All B is A

No B is A All B is A All B is A Some B is A therefore therefore therefore

therefore therefore Some A is C Some A is Some A is C Some A is Some A

is

                        not C not C not C

              In these exemplars, or blank forms for making syllogisms, no place

is assigned to singular propositions; not, of course, because such propositions

are not used in ratiocination, but because, their predicate being affirmed or

denied of the whole of the subject, they are ranked, for the purposes of the

syllogism, with universal propositions. Thus, these two syllogisms —

              All men are mortal, All men are mortal, All kings are men, Socrates

is a man, therefore therefore All kings are mortal, Socrates is mortal,

              are arguments precisely similar, and are both ranked in the first                          50
mood of the first figure.

              The reasons why syllogisms in any of the above forms are

legitimate, that is, why, if the premises are true, the conclusion must

inevitably be so, and why this is not the case in any other possible mood (that

is, in any other combination of universal and particular, affirmative and

negative propositions), any person taking interest in these inquiries may be

presumed to have either learned from the common-school books of the

syllogistic logic, or to be capable of discovering for himself. The reader may,

however, be referred, for every needful explanation, to Archbishop Whately’s

Elements of Logic , where he will find stated with philosophical precision,

and explained with remarkable perspicuity, the whole of the common

doctrine of the syllogism.

              All valid ratiocination; all reasoning by which, from general

propositions previously admitted, other propositions equally or less general

are inferred; may be exhibited in some of the above forms. The whole of

Euclid, for example, might be thrown without difficulty into a series of

syllogisms, regular in mood and figure.

              Though a syllogism framed according to any of these formulæ is a

valid argument, all correct ratiocination admits of being stated in syllogisms

of the first figure alone. The rules for throwing an argument in any of the

other figures into the first figure, are called rules for the reduction of

syllogisms. It is done by the conversion of one or other, or both, of the

premises. Thus an argument in the first mood of the second figure, as —

              No C is B All A is B therefore No A is C,

              may be reduced as follows. The proposition, No C is B, being a

universal negative, admits of simple conversion, and may be changed into No

B is C, which, as we showed, is the very same assertion in other words — the

same fact differently expressed. This transformation having been effected, the

argument assumes the following form:

              No B is C All A is B therefore No A is C,

              which is a good syllogism in the second mood of the first figure.

Again, an argument in the first mood of the third figure must resemble the

following:

              All B is C All B is A therefore Some A is C,              where the minor premise, All B is A, conformably to what was laid

down in the last chapter respecting universal affirmatives, does not admit of

simple conversion, but may be converted per accidens , thus, Some A is B;

which, though it does not express the whole of what is asserted in the

proposition All B is A, expresses, as was formerly shown, part of it, and must

therefore be true if the whole is true. We have, then, as the result of the

reduction, the following syllogism in the third mood of the first figure:

              All B is C Some A is B,

              from which it obviously follows, that

              Some A is C.

              In the same manner, or in a manner on which after these examples it

is not necessary to enlarge, every mood of the second, third, and fourth

figures may be reduced to some one of the four moods of the first. In other

words, every conclusion which can be proved in any of the last three figures,

may be proved in the first figure from the same premises, with a slight

alteration in the mere manner of expressing them. Every valid ratiocination,

therefore, may be stated in the first figure, that is, in one of the following

forms:

              Every B is C No B is C All A is B, All A is B, Some A is B, Some A

is B, therefore therefore All A is C. No A is C. Some A is C. Some A is not

C.

              Or, if more significant symbols are preferred:

              To prove an affirmative, the argument must admit of being stated in

this form:

              All animals are mortal; All men/Some men/Socrates are animals;

therefore All men/Some men/Socrates are mortal.

              To prove a negative, the argument must be capable of being

expressed in this form:

              No one who is capable of self-control is necessarily vicious;

              No one who is capable of self-control is necessarily vicious; All

negroes/Some negroes/Mr. A’s negro are capable of self-control; therefore

No negroes are/Some negroes are not/Mr. A’s negro is not necessarilyvicious.

              Though all ratiocination admits of being thrown into one or the other

of these forms, and sometimes gains considerably by the transformation, both

in clearness and in the obviousness of its consequence; there are, no doubt,

cases in which the argument falls more naturally into one of the other three

figures, and in which its conclusiveness is more apparent at the first glance in

those figures, than when reduced to the first. Thus, if the proposition were

that pagans may be virtuous, and the evidence to prove it were the example of

Aristides; a syllogism in the third figure,

              Aristides was virtuous, Aristides was a pagan, therefore Some pagan

was virtuous,

              would be a more natural mode of stating the argument, and would

carry conviction more instantly home, than the same ratiocination strained

into the first figure, thus —

              Aristides was virtuous, Some pagan was Aristides, therefore Some

pagan was virtuous.

              A German philosopher, Lambert, whose Neues Organon (published

in the year 1764) contains among other things one of the most elaborate and

complete expositions which had ever been made of the syllogistic doctrine,

has expressly examined what sort of arguments fall most naturally and

suitably into each of the four figures; and his investigation is characterized by
                                              51
great ingenuity and clearness of thought. The argument, however, is one and

the same, in whichever figure it is expressed; since, as we have already seen,

the premises of a syllogism in the second, third, or fourth figure, and those of

the syllogism in the first figure to which it may be reduced, are the same

premises in every thing except language, or, at least, as much of them as

contributes to the proof of the conclusion is the same. We are therefore at

liberty, in conformity with the general opinion of logicians, to consider the

two elementary forms of the first figure as the universal types of all correct

ratiocination; the one, when the conclusion to be proved is affirmative, the

other, when it is negative; even though certain arguments may have a

tendency to clothe themselves in the forms of the second, third, and fourth

figures; which, however, can not possibly happen with the only class of

arguments which are of first-rate scientific importance, those in which the

conclusion is a universal affirmative, such conclusions being susceptible of                                  52
proof in the first figure alone.

              § 2. On examining, then, these two general formulæ, we find that in

both of them, one premise, the major, is a universal proposition; and

according as this is affirmative or negative, the conclusion is so too. All

ratiocination, therefore, starts from a general proposition, principle, or

assumption: a proposition in which a predicate is affirmed or denied of an

entire class; that is, in which some attribute, or the negation of some attribute,

is asserted of an indefinite number of objects distinguished by a common

characteristic, and designated, in consequence, by a common name.

              The other premise is always affirmative, and asserts that something

(which may be either an individual, a class, or part of a class) belongs to, or is

included in, the class respecting which something was affirmed or denied in

the major premise. It follows that the attribute affirmed or denied of the entire

class may (if that affirmation or denial was correct) be affirmed or denied of

the object or objects alleged to be included in the class: and this is precisely

the assertion made in the conclusion.

              Whether or not the foregoing is an adequate account of the

constituent parts of the syllogism, will be presently considered; but as far as it

goes it is a true account. It has accordingly been generalized, and erected into

a logical maxim, on which all ratiocination is said to be founded, insomuch

that to reason, and to apply the maxim, are supposed to be one and the same

thing. The maxim is, That whatever can be affirmed (or denied) of a class,

may be affirmed (or denied) of every thing included in the class. This axiom,

supposed to be the basis of the syllogistic theory, is termed by logicians the

dictum de omni et nullo .

              This maxim, however, when considered as a principle of reasoning,

appears suited to a system of metaphysics once indeed generally received, but

which for the last two centuries has been considered as finally abandoned,

though there have not been wanting in our own day attempts at its revival. So

long as what are termed Universals were regarded as a peculiar kind of

substances, having an objective existence distinct from the individual objects

classed under them, the dictum de omni conveyed an important meaning;

because it expressed the intercommunity of nature, which it was necessary on

that theory that we should suppose to exist between those general substances

and the particular substances which were subordinated to them. That everything predicable of the universal was predicable of the various individuals

contained under it, was then no identical proposition, but a statement of what

was conceived as a fundamental law of the universe. The assertion that the

entire nature and properties of the substantia secunda formed part of the

nature and properties of each of the individual substances called by the same

name; that the properties of Man, for example, were properties of all men;

was a proposition of real significance when man did not mean all men, but

something inherent in men, and vastly superior to them in dignity. Now,

however, when it is known that a class, a universal, a genus or species, is not

an entity per se , but neither more nor less than the individual substances

themselves which are placed in the class, and that there is nothing real in the

matter except those objects, a common name given to them, and common

attributes indicated by the name; what, I should be glad to know, do we learn

by being told, that whatever can be affirmed of a class, may be affirmed of

every object contained in the class? The class is nothing but the objects

contained in it: and the dictum de omni merely amounts to the identical

proposition, that whatever is true of certain objects, is true of each of those

objects. If all ratiocination were no more than the application of this maxim

to particular cases, the syllogism would indeed be, what it has so often been

declared to be, solemn trifling. The dictum de omni is on a par with another

truth, which in its time was also reckoned of great importance, “Whatever is,

is.” To give any real meaning to the dictum de omni , we must consider it not

as an axiom, but as a definition; we must look upon it as intended to explain,

in a circuitous and paraphrastic manner, the meaning of the word class .

              An error which seemed finally refuted and dislodged from thought,

often needs only put on a new suit of phrases, to be welcomed back to its old

quarters, and allowed to repose unquestioned for another cycle of ages.

Modern philosophers have not been sparing in their contempt for the

scholastic dogma that genera and species are a peculiar kind of substances,

which general substances being the only permanent things, while the

individual substances comprehended under them are in a perpetual flux,

knowledge, which necessarily imports stability, can only have relation to

those general substances or universals, and not to the facts or particulars

included under them. Yet, though nominally rejected, this very doctrine,

whether disguised under the Abstract Ideas of Locke (whose speculations,

however, it has less vitiated than those of perhaps any other writer who has

been infected with it), under the ultra-nominalism of Hobbes and Condillac,or the ontology of the later German schools, has never ceased to poison

philosophy. Once accustomed to consider scientific investigation as

essentially consisting in the study of universals, men did not drop this habit

of thought when they ceased to regard universals as possessing an

independent existence: and even those who went the length of considering

them as mere names, could not free themselves from the notion that the

investigation of truth consisted entirely or partly in some kind of conjuration

or juggle with those names. When a philosopher adopted fully the Nominalist

view of the signification of general language, retaining along with it the

dictum de omni as the foundation of all reasoning, two such premises fairly

put together were likely, if he was a consistent thinker, to land him in rather

startling conclusions. Accordingly it has been seriously held, by writers of

deserved celebrity, that the process of arriving at new truths by reasoning

consists in the mere substitution of one set of arbitrary signs for another; a

doctrine which they suppose to derive irresistible confirmation from the

example of algebra. If there were any process in sorcery or necromancy more

preternatural than this, I should be much surprised. The culminating point of

this philosophy is the noted aphorism of Condillac, that a science is nothing,

or scarcely any thing, but une langue bien faite ; in other words, that the one

sufficient rule for discovering the nature and properties of objects is to name

them properly: as if the reverse were not the truth, that it is impossible to

name them properly except in proportion as we are already acquainted with

their nature and properties. Can it be necessary to say, that none, not even the

most trivial knowledge with respect to Things, ever was or could be

originally got at by any conceivable manipulation of mere names, as such;

and that what can be learned from names, is only what somebody who used

the names knew before? Philosophical analysis confirms the indication of

common sense, that the function of names is but that of enabling us to

remember and to communicate our thoughts. That they also strengthen, even

to an incalculable extent, the power of thought itself, is most true: but they do

this by no intrinsic and peculiar virtue; they do it by the power inherent in an

artificial memory, an instrument of which few have adequately considered

the immense potency. As an artificial memory, language truly is, what it has

so often been called, an instrument of thought; but it is one thing to be the

instrument, and another to be the exclusive subject upon which the

instrument is exercised. We think, indeed, to a considerable extent, by means

of names, but what we think of, are the things called by those names; andthere can not be a greater error than to imagine that thought can be carried on

with nothing in our mind but names, or that we can make the names think for

us.

              § 3. Those who considered the dictum de omni as the foundation of

the syllogism, looked upon arguments in a manner corresponding to the

erroneous view which Hobbes took of propositions. Because there are some

propositions which are merely verbal, Hobbes, in order apparently that his

definition might be rigorously universal, defined a proposition as if no

propositions declared any thing except the meaning of words. If Hobbes was

right; if no further account than this could be given of the import of

propositions; no theory could be given but the commonly received one, of the

combination of propositions in a syllogism. If the minor premise asserted

nothing more than that something belongs to a class, and if the major premise

asserted nothing of that class except that it is included in another class, the

conclusion would only be that what was included in the lower class is

included in the higher, and the result, therefore, nothing except that the

classification is consistent with itself. But we have seen that it is no sufficient

account of the meaning of a proposition, to say that it refers something to, or

excludes something from, a class. Every proposition which conveys real

information asserts a matter of fact, dependent on the laws of nature, and not

on classification. It asserts that a given object does or does not possess a

given attribute; or it asserts that two attributes, or sets of attributes, do or do

not (constantly or occasionally) co-exist. Since such is the purport of all

propositions which convey any real knowledge, and since ratiocination is a

mode of acquiring real knowledge, any theory of ratiocination which does not

recognize this import of propositions, can not, we may be sure, be the true

one.

              Applying this view of propositions to the two premises of a

syllogism, we obtain the following results. The major premise, which, as

already remarked, is always universal, asserts, that all things which have a

certain attribute (or attributes) have or have not along with it, a certain other

attribute (or attributes). The minor premise asserts that the thing or set of

things which are the subject of that premise, have the first-mentioned

attribute; and the conclusion is, that they have (or that they have not), the

second. Thus in our former example,

              All men are mortal, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal,              the subject and predicate of the major premise are connotative terms,

denoting objects and connoting attributes. The assertion in the major premise

is, that along with one of the two sets of attributes, we always find the other:

that the attributes connoted by “man” never exist unless conjoined with the

attribute called mortality. The assertion in the minor premise is that the

individual named Socrates possesses the former attributes; and it is concluded

that he possesses also the attribute mortality. Or, if both the premises are

general propositions, as

              All men are mortal, All kings are men, therefore All kings are

mortal,

              the minor premise asserts that the attributes denoted by kingship

only exist in conjunction with those signified by the word man. The major

asserts as before, that the last-mentioned attributes are never found without

the attribute of mortality. The conclusion is, that wherever the attributes of

kingship are found, that of mortality is found also.

              If the major premise were negative, as, No men are omnipotent, it

would assert, not that the attributes connoted by “man” never exist without,

but that they never exist with, those connoted by “omnipotent:” from which,

together with the minor premise, it is concluded, that the same

incompatibility exists between the attribute omnipotence and those

constituting a king. In a similar manner we might analyze any other example

of the syllogism.

              If we generalize this process, and look out for the principle or law

involved in every such inference, and presupposed in every syllogism, the

propositions of which are any thing more than merely verbal; we find, not the

unmeaning dictum de omni et nullo , but a fundamental principle, or rather

two principles, strikingly resembling the axioms of mathematics. The first,

which is the principle of affirmative syllogisms, is, that things which co-exist

with the same thing, co-exist with one another: or (still more precisely) a

thing which co-exists with another thing, which other co-exists with a third

thing, also co-exists with that third thing. The second is the principle of

negative syllogisms, and is to this effect: that a thing which co-exists with

another thing, with which other a third thing does not co-exist, is not co-

existent with that third thing. These axioms manifestly relate to facts, and not

to conventions; and one or other of them is the ground of the legitimacy of                                                                                          53
every argument in which facts and not conventions are the matter treated of.

              § 4. It remains to translate this exposition of the syllogism from the
                                                                                    54
one into the other of the two languages in which we formerly remarked that

all propositions, and of course therefore all combinations of propositions,

might be expressed. We observed that a proposition might be considered in

two different lights; as a portion of our knowledge of nature, or as a

memorandum for our guidance. Under the former, or speculative aspect, an

affirmative general proposition is an assertion of a speculative truth, viz., that

whatever has a certain attribute has a certain other attribute. Under the other

aspect, it is to be regarded not as a part of our knowledge, but as an aid for

our practical exigencies, by enabling us, when we see or learn that an object

possesses one of the two attributes, to infer that it possesses the other; thus

employing the first attribute as a mark or evidence of the second. Thus

regarded, every syllogism comes within the following general formula:

              Attribute A is a mark of attribute B, The given object has the mark

A, therefore The given object has the attribute B.

              Referred to this type, the arguments which we have lately cited as

specimens of the syllogism, will express themselves in the following manner:

              The attributes of man are a mark of the attribute mortality, Socrates

has the attributes of man, therefore Socrates has the attribute mortality.

              And again,

              The attributes of man are a mark of the attribute mortality, The

attributes of a king are a mark of the attributes of man, therefore The

attributes of a king are a mark of the attribute mortality.

              And, lastly,

              The attributes of man are a mark of the absence of the attribute

omnipotence, The attributes of a king are a mark of the attributes of man,

therefore The attributes of a king are a mark of the absence of the attribute

signified by the word omnipotent (or, are evidence of the absence of that

attribute).

              To correspond with this alteration in the form of the syllogisms, the

axioms on which the syllogistic process is founded must undergo a

corresponding transformation. In this altered phraseology, both those axiomsmay be brought under one general expression; namely, that whatever has any

mark, has that which it is a mark of. Or, when the minor premise as well as

the major is universal, we may state it thus: Whatever is a mark of any mark,

is a mark of that which this last is a mark of. To trace the identity of these

axioms with those previously laid down, may be left to the intelligent reader.

We shall find, as we proceed, the great convenience of the phraseology into

which we have last thrown them, and which is better adapted than any I am

acquainted with, to express with precision and force what is aimed at, and

actually accomplished, in every case of the ascertainment of a truth by
              55
ratiocination.

 

 

 Chapter III. – Of The Functions And Logical Value Of The Syllogism.

 

 

              § 1. We have shown what is the real nature of the truths with which

the Syllogism is conversant, in contradistinction to the more superficial

manner in which their import is conceived in the common theory; and what

are the fundamental axioms on which its probative force or conclusiveness

depends. We have now to inquire, whether the syllogistic process, that of

reasoning from generals to particulars, is, or is not, a process of inference; a

progress from the known to the unknown: a means of coming to a knowledge

of something which we did not know before.

              Logicians have been remarkably unanimous in their mode of

answering this question. It is universally allowed that a syllogism is vicious if

there be any thing more in the conclusion than was assumed in the premises.

But this is, in fact, to say, that nothing ever was, or can be, proved by

syllogism, which was not known, or assumed to be known, before. Is

ratiocination, then, not a process of inference? And is the syllogism, to which

the word reasoning has so often been represented to be exclusively

appropriate, not really entitled to be called reasoning at all? This seems an

inevitable consequence of the doctrine, admitted by all writers on the subject,

that a syllogism can prove no more than is involved in the premises. Yet the

acknowledgment so explicitly made, has not prevented one set of writers

from continuing to represent the syllogism as the correct analysis of what the

mind actually performs in discovering and proving the larger half of the

truths, whether of science or of daily life, which we believe; while those who

have avoided this inconsistency, and followed out the general theorem

respecting the logical value of the syllogism to its legitimate corollary, have

been led to impute uselessness and frivolity to the syllogistic theory itself, on

the ground of the petitio principii which they allege to be inherent in every

syllogism. As I believe both these opinions to be fundamentally erroneous, I

must request the attention of the reader to certain considerations, without

which any just appreciation of the true character of the syllogism, and the

functions it performs in philosophy, appears to me impossible; but which

seem to have been either overlooked, or insufficiently adverted to, both by

the defenders of the syllogistic theory and by its assailants.              § 2. It must be granted that in every syllogism, considered as an

argument to prove the conclusion, there is a petitio principii . When we say,

              All men are mortal, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal;

              it is unanswerably urged by the adversaries of the syllogistic theory,

that the proposition, Socrates is mortal, is presupposed in the more general

assumption, All men are mortal: that we can not be assured of the mortality

of all men, unless we are already certain of the mortality of every individual

man: that if it be still doubtful whether Socrates, or any other individual we

choose to name, be mortal or not, the same degree of uncertainty must hang

over the assertion, All men are mortal: that the general principle, instead of

being given as evidence of the particular case, can not itself be taken for true

without exception, until every shadow of doubt which could affect any case

comprised with it, is dispelled by evidence aliundè ; and then what remains

for the syllogism to prove? That, in short, no reasoning from generals to

particulars can, as such, prove any thing: since from a general principle we

can not infer any particulars, but those which the principle itself assumes as

known.

              This doctrine appears to me irrefragable; and if logicians, though

unable to dispute it, have usually exhibited a strong disposition to explain it

away, this was not because they could discover any flaw in the argument

itself, but because the contrary opinion seemed to rest on arguments equally

indisputable. In the syllogism last referred to, for example, or in any of those

which we previously constructed, is it not evident that the conclusion may, to

the person to whom the syllogism is presented, be actually and bona fide a

new truth? Is it not matter of daily experience that truths previously

unthought of, facts which have not been, and can not be, directly observed,

are arrived at by way of general reasoning? We believe that the Duke of

Wellington is mortal. We do not know this by direct observation, so long as

he is not yet dead. If we were asked how, this being the case, we know the

duke to be mortal, we should probably answer, Because all men are so. Here,

therefore, we arrive at the knowledge of a truth not (as yet) susceptible of

observation, by a reasoning which admits of being exhibited in the following

syllogism:

              All men are mortal, The Duke of Wellington is a man, therefore The

Duke of Wellington is mortal.              And since a large portion of our knowledge is thus acquired,

logicians have persisted in representing the syllogism as a process of

inference or proof; though none of them has cleared up the difficulty which

arises from the inconsistency between that assertion, and the principle, that if

there be any thing in the conclusion which was not already asserted in the

premises, the argument is vicious. For it is impossible to attach any serious

scientific value to such a mere salvo, as the distinction drawn between being

involved by implication in the premises, and being directly asserted in them.
                                    56
When Archbishop Whately says that the object of reasoning is “merely to

expand and unfold the assertions wrapped up, as it were, and implied in those

with which we set out, and to bring a person to perceive and acknowledge the

full force of that which he has admitted,” he does not, I think, meet the real

difficulty requiring to be explained, namely, how it happens that a science,

like geometry, can be all “wrapped up” in a few definitions and axioms. Nor

does this defense of the syllogism differ much from what its assailants urge

against it as an accusation, when they charge it with being of no use except to

those who seek to press the consequences of an admission into which a

person has been entrapped without having considered and understood its full

force. When you admitted the major premise, you asserted the conclusion;

but, says Archbishop Whately, you asserted it by implication merely: this,

however, can here only mean that you asserted it unconsciously; that you did

not know you were asserting it; but, if so, the difficulty revives in this shape

— Ought you not to have known? Were you warranted in asserting the

general proposition without having satisfied yourself of the truth of every

thing which it fairly includes? And if not, is not the syllogistic art prima facie

what its assailants affirm it to be, a contrivance for catching you in a trap, and
                        57
holding you fast in it?

              § 3. From this difficulty there appears to be but one issue. The

proposition that the Duke of Wellington is mortal, is evidently an inference; it

is got at as a conclusion from something else; but do we, in reality, conclude

it from the proposition, All men are mortal? I answer, no.

              The error committed is, I conceive, that of overlooking the

distinction between two parts of the process of philosophizing, the inferring

part, and the registering part; and ascribing to the latter the functions of the

former. The mistake is that of referring a person to his own notes for the

origin of his knowledge. If a person is asked a question, and is at the momentunable to answer it, he may refresh his memory by turning to a memorandum

which he carries about with him. But if he were asked, how the fact came to

his knowledge, he would scarcely answer, because it was set down in his

note-book: unless the book was written, like the Koran, with a quill from the

wing of the angel Gabriel.

              Assuming that the proposition, The Duke of Wellington is mortal, is

immediately an inference from the proposition, All men are mortal; whence

do we derive our knowledge of that general truth? Of course from

observation. Now, all which man can observe are individual cases. From

these all general truths must be drawn, and into these they may be again

resolved; for a general truth is but an aggregate of particular truths; a

comprehensive expression, by which an indefinite number of individual facts

are affirmed or denied at once. But a general proposition is not merely a

compendious form for recording and preserving in the memory a number of

particular facts, all of which have been observed. Generalization is not a

process of mere naming, it is also a process of inference. From instances

which we have observed, we feel warranted in concluding, that what we

found true in those instances, holds in all similar ones, past, present, and

future, however numerous they may be. We then, by that valuable

contrivance of language which enables us to speak of many as if they were

one, record all that we have observed, together with all that we infer from our

observations, in one concise expression; and have thus only one proposition,

instead of an endless number, to remember or to communicate. The results of

many observations and inferences, and instructions for making innumerable

inferences in unforeseen cases, are compressed into one short sentence.

              When, therefore, we conclude from the death of John and Thomas,

and every other person we ever heard of in whose case the experiment had

been fairly tried, that the Duke of Wellington is mortal like the rest; we may,

indeed, pass through the generalization, All men are mortal, as an

intermediate stage; but it is not in the latter half of the process, the descent

from all men to the Duke of Wellington, that the inference resides. The

inference is finished when we have asserted that all men are mortal. What

remains to be performed afterward is merely deciphering our own notes.

              Archbishop Whately has contended that syllogizing, or reasoning

from generals to particulars, is not, agreeably to the vulgar idea, a peculiar

mode of reasoning, but the philosophical analysis of the mode in which allmen reason, and must do so if they reason at all. With the deference due to so

high an authority, I can not help thinking that the vulgar notion is, in this

case, the more correct. If, from our experience of John, Thomas, etc., who

once were living, but are now dead, we are entitled to conclude that all

human beings are mortal, we might surely without any logical inconsequence

have concluded at once from those instances, that the Duke of Wellington is

mortal. The mortality of John, Thomas, and others is, after all, the whole

evidence we have for the mortality of the Duke of Wellington. Not one iota is

added to the proof by interpolating a general proposition. Since the individual

cases are all the evidence we can possess, evidence which no logical form

into which we choose to throw it can make greater than it is; and since that

evidence is either sufficient in itself, or, if insufficient for the one purpose,

can not be sufficient for the other; I am unable to see why we should be

forbidden to take the shortest cut from these sufficient premises to the

conclusion, and constrained to travel the “high priori road,” by the arbitrary

fiat of logicians. I can not perceive why it should be impossible to journey

from one place to another unless we “march up a hill, and then march down

again.” It may be the safest road, and there may be a resting-place at the top

of the hill, affording a commanding view of the surrounding country; but for

the mere purpose of arriving at our journey’s end, our taking that road is

perfectly optional; it is a question of time, trouble, and danger.

              Not only may we reason from particulars to particulars without

passing through generals, but we perpetually do so reason. All our earliest

inferences are of this nature. From the first dawn of intelligence we draw

inferences, but years elapse before we learn the use of general language. The

child, who, having burned his fingers, avoids to thrust them again into the

fire, has reasoned or inferred, though he has never thought of the general

maxim, Fire burns. He knows from memory that he has been burned, and on

this evidence believes, when he sees a candle, that if he puts his finger into

the flame of it, he will be burned again. He believes this in every case which

happens to arise; but without looking, in each instance, beyond the present

case. He is not generalizing; he is inferring a particular from particulars. In

the same way, also, brutes reason. There is no ground for attributing to any of

the lower animals the use of signs, of such a nature as to render general

propositions possible. But those animals profit by experience, and avoid what

they have found to cause them pain, in the same manner, though not always

with the same skill, as a human creature. Not only the burned child, but theburned dog, dreads the fire.

              I believe that, in point of fact, when drawing inferences from our

personal experience, and not from maxims handed down to us by books or

tradition, we much oftener conclude from particulars to particulars directly,

than through the intermediate agency of any general proposition. We are

constantly reasoning from ourselves to other people, or from one person to

another, without giving ourselves the trouble to erect our observations into

general maxims of human or external nature. When we conclude that some

person will, on some given occasion, feel or act so and so, we sometimes

judge from an enlarged consideration of the manner in which human beings

in general, or persons of some particular character, are accustomed to feel and

act; but much oftener from merely recollecting the feelings and conduct of

the same person in some previous instance, or from considering how we

should feel or act ourselves. It is not only the village matron, who, when

called to a consultation upon the case of a neighbor’s child, pronounces on

the evil and its remedy simply on the recollection and authority of what she

accounts the similar case of her Lucy. We all, where we have no definite

maxims to steer by, guide ourselves in the same way: and if we have an

extensive experience, and retain its impressions strongly, we may acquire in

this manner a very considerable power of accurate judgment, which we may

be utterly incapable of justifying or of communicating to others. Among the

higher order of practical intellects there have been many of whom it was

remarked how admirably they suited their means to their ends, without being

able to give any sufficient reasons for what they did; and applied, or seemed

to apply, recondite principles which they were wholly unable to state. This is

a natural consequence of having a mind stored with appropriate particulars,

and having been long accustomed to reason at once from these to fresh

particulars, without practicing the habit of stating to one’s self or to others the

corresponding general propositions. An old warrior, on a rapid glance at the

outlines of the ground, is able at once to give the necessary orders for a

skillful arrangement of his troops; though if he has received little theoretical

instruction, and has seldom been called upon to answer to other people for his

conduct, he may never have had in his mind a single general theorem

respecting the relation between ground and array. But his experience of

encampments, in circumstances more or less similar, has left a number of

vivid, unexpressed, ungeneralized analogies in his mind, the most appropriate

of which, instantly suggesting itself, determines him to a judiciousarrangement.

              The skill of an uneducated person in the use of weapons, or of tools,

is of a precisely similar nature. The savage who executes unerringly the exact

throw which brings down his game, or his enemy, in the manner most suited

to his purpose, under the operation of all the conditions necessarily involved,

the weight and form of the weapon, the direction and distance of the object,

the action of the wind, etc., owes this power to a long series of previous

experiments, the results of which he certainly never framed into any verbal

theorems or rules. The same thing may generally be said of any other

extraordinary manual dexterity. Not long ago a Scotch manufacturer procured

from England, at a high rate of wages, a working dyer, famous for producing

very fine colors, with the view of teaching to his other workmen the same

skill. The workman came; but his mode of proportioning the ingredients, in

which lay the secret of the effects he produced, was by taking them up in

handfuls, while the common method was to weigh them. The manufacturer

sought to make him turn his handling system into an equivalent weighing

system, that the general principle of his peculiar mode of proceeding might

be ascertained. This, however, the man found himself quite unable to do, and

therefore could impart his skill to nobody. He had, from the individual cases

of his own experience, established a connection in his mind between fine

effects of color, and tactual perceptions in handling his dyeing materials; and

from these perceptions he could, in any particular case, infer the means to be

employed, and the effects which would be produced, but could not put others

in possession of the grounds on which he proceeded, from having never

generalized them in his own mind, or expressed them in language.

              Almost every one knows Lord Mansfield’s advice to a man of

practical good sense, who, being appointed governor of a colony, had to

preside in its courts of justice, without previous judicial practice or legal

education. The advice was to give his decision boldly, for it would probably

be right; but never to venture on assigning reasons, for they would almost

infallibly be wrong. In cases like this, which are of no uncommon occurrence,

it would be absurd to suppose that the bad reason was the source of the good

decision. Lord Mansfield knew that if any reason were assigned it would be

necessarily an afterthought, the judge being in fact guided by impressions

from past experience, without the circuitous process of framing general

principles from them, and that if he attempted to frame any such he wouldassuredly fail. Lord Mansfield, however, would not have doubted that a man

of equal experience who had also a mind stored with general propositions

derived by legitimate induction from that experience, would have been

greatly preferable as a judge, to one, however sagacious, who could not be

trusted with the explanation and justification of his own judgments. The cases

of men of talent performing wonderful things they know not how, are

examples of the rudest and most spontaneous form of the operations of

superior minds. It is a defect in them, and often a source of errors, not to have

generalized as they went on; but generalization, though a help, the most

important indeed of all helps, is not an essential.

              Even the scientifically instructed, who possess, in the form of

general propositions, a systematic record of the results of the experience of

mankind, need not always revert to those general propositions in order to

apply that experience to a new case. It is justly remarked by Dugald Stewart,

that though the reasonings in mathematics depend entirely on the axioms, it is

by no means necessary to our seeing the conclusiveness of the proof, that the

axioms should be expressly adverted to. When it is inferred that AB is equal

to CD because each of them is equal to EF, the most uncultivated

understanding, as soon as the propositions were understood, would assent to

the inference, without having ever heard of the general truth that “things

which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another.” This remark of

Stewart, consistently followed out, goes to the root, as I conceive, of the

philosophy of ratiocination; and it is to be regretted that he himself stopped

short at a much more limited application of it. He saw that the general

propositions on which a reasoning is said to depend, may, in certain cases, be

altogether omitted, without impairing its probative force. But he imagined

this to be a peculiarity belonging to axioms; and argued from it, that axioms

are not the foundations or first principles of geometry, from which all the

other truths of the science are synthetically deduced (as the laws of motion

and of the composition of forces in dynamics, the equal mobility of fluids in

hydrostatics, the laws of reflection and refraction in optics, are the first

principles of those sciences); but are merely necessary assumptions, self-

evident indeed, and the denial of which would annihilate all demonstration,

but from which, as premises, nothing can be demonstrated. In the present, as

in many other instances, this thoughtful and elegant writer has perceived an

important truth, but only by halves. Finding, in the case of geometrical

axioms, that general names have not any talismanic virtue for conjuring newtruths out of the well where they lie hid, and not seeing that this is equally

true in every other case of generalization, he contended that axioms are in

their nature barren of consequences, and that the really fruitful truths, the real

first principles of geometry, are the definitions; that the definition, for

example, of the circle is to the properties of the circle, what the laws of

equilibrium and of the pressure of the atmosphere are to the rise of the

mercury in the Torricellian tube. Yet all that he had asserted respecting the

function to which the axioms are confined in the demonstrations of geometry,

holds equally true of the definitions. Every demonstration in Euclid might be

carried on without them. This is apparent from the ordinary process of

proving a proposition of geometry by means of a diagram. What assumption,

in fact, do we set out from, to demonstrate by a diagram any of the properties

of the circle? Not that in all circles the radii are equal, but only that they are

so in the circle ABC. As our warrant for assuming this, we appeal, it is true,

to the definition of a circle in general; but it is only necessary that the

assumption be granted in the case of the particular circle supposed. From this,

which is not a general but a singular proposition, combined with other

propositions of a similar kind, some of which when generalized are called

definitions, and other axioms, we prove that a certain conclusion is true, not

of all circles, but of the particular circle ABC; or at least would be so, if the

facts precisely accorded with our assumptions. The enunciation, as it is

called, that is, the general theorem which stands at the head of the

demonstration, is not the proposition actually demonstrated. One instance

only is demonstrated: but the process by which this is done, is a process

which, when we consider its nature, we perceive might be exactly copied in

an indefinite number of other instances; in every instance which conforms to

certain conditions. The contrivance of general language furnishing us with

terms which connote these conditions, we are able to assert this indefinite

multitude of truths in a single expression, and this expression is the general

theorem. By dropping the use of diagrams, and substituting, in the

demonstrations, general phrases for the letters of the alphabet, we might

prove the general theorem directly, that is, we might demonstrate all the cases

at once; and to do this we must, of course, employ as our premises, the

axioms and definitions in their general form. But this only means, that if we

can prove an individual conclusion by assuming an individual fact, then in

whatever case we are warranted in making an exactly similar assumption, we

may draw an exactly similar conclusion. The definition is a sort of notice toourselves and others, what assumptions we think ourselves entitled to make.

And so in all cases, the general propositions, whether called definitions,

axioms, or laws of nature, which we lay down at the beginning of our

reasonings, are merely abridged statements, in a kind of short-hand, of the

particular facts, which, as occasion arises, we either think we may proceed on

as proved, or intend to assume. In any one demonstration it is enough if we

assume for a particular case suitably selected, what by the statement of the

definition or principle we announce that we intend to assume in all cases

which may arise. The definition of the circle, therefore, is to one of Euclid’s

demonstrations, exactly what, according to Stewart, the axioms are; that is,

the demonstration does not depend on it, but yet if we deny it the

demonstration fails. The proof does not rest on the general assumption, but

on a similar assumption confined to the particular case: that case, however,

being chosen as a specimen or paradigm of the whole class of cases included

in the theorem, there can be no ground for making the assumption in that case

which does not exist in every other; and to deny the assumption as a general

truth, is to deny the right of making it in the particular instance.

              There are, undoubtedly, the most ample reasons for stating both the

principles and the theorems in their general form, and these will be explained

presently, so far as explanation is requisite. But, that unpracticed learners,

even in making use of one theorem to demonstrate another, reason rather

from particular to particular than from the general proposition, is manifest

from the difficulty they find in applying a theorem to a case in which the

configuration of the diagram is extremely unlike that of the diagram by which

the original theorem was demonstrated. A difficulty which, except in cases of

unusual mental power, long practice can alone remove, and removes chiefly

by rendering us familiar with all the configurations consistent with the

general conditions of the theorem.

              § 4. From the considerations now adduced, the following

conclusions seem to be established. All inference is from particulars to

particulars: General propositions are merely registers of such inferences

already made, and short formulæ for making more: The major premise of a

syllogism, consequently, is a formula of this description: and the conclusion

is not an inference drawn from the formula, but an inference drawn according

to the formula: the real logical antecedent, or premise, being the particular

facts from which the general proposition was collected by induction. Thosefacts, and the individual instances which supplied them, may have been

forgotten: but a record remains, not indeed descriptive of the facts

themselves, but showing how those cases may be distinguished, respecting

which, the facts, when known, were considered to warrant a given inference.

According to the indications of this record we draw our conclusion: which is,

to all intents and purposes, a conclusion from the forgotten facts. For this it is

essential that we should read the record correctly: and the rules of the

syllogism are a set of precautions to insure our doing so.

              This view of the functions of the syllogism is confirmed by the

consideration of precisely those cases which might be expected to be least

favorable to it, namely, those in which ratiocination is independent of any

previous induction. We have already observed that the syllogism, in the

ordinary course of our reasoning, is only the latter half of the process of

traveling from premises to a conclusion. There are, however, some peculiar

cases in which it is the whole process. Particulars alone are capable of being

subjected to observation; and all knowledge which is derived from

observation, begins, therefore, of necessity, in particulars; but our knowledge

may, in cases of certain descriptions, be conceived as coming to us from

other sources than observation. It may present itself as coming from

testimony, which, on the occasion and for the purpose in hand, is accepted as

of an authoritative character: and the information thus communicated, may be

conceived to comprise not only particular facts but general propositions, as

when a scientific doctrine is accepted without examination on the authority of

writers, or a theological doctrine on that of Scripture. Or the generalization

may not be, in the ordinary sense, an assertion at all, but a command; a law,

not in the philosophical, but in the moral and political sense of the term: an

expression of the desire of a superior, that we, or any number of other

persons, shall conform our conduct to certain general instructions. So far as

this asserts a fact, namely, a volition of the legislator, that fact is an

individual fact, and the proposition, therefore, is not a general proposition.

But the description therein contained of the conduct which it is the will of the

legislator that his subjects should observe, is general. The proposition asserts,

not that all men are any thing, but that all men shall do something.

              In both these cases the generalities are the original data, and the

particulars are elicited from them by a process which correctly resolves itself

into a series of syllogisms. The real nature, however, of the supposeddeductive process, is evident enough. The only point to be determined is,

whether the authority which declared the general proposition, intended to

include this case in it; and whether the legislator intended his command to

apply to the present case among others, or not. This is ascertained by

examining whether the case possesses the marks by which, as those

authorities have signified, the cases which they meant to certify or to

influence may be known. The object of the inquiry is to make out the

witness’s or the legislator’s intention, through the indication given by their

words. This is a question, as the Germans express it, of hermeneutics. The

operation is not a process of inference, but a process of interpretation.

              In this last phrase we have obtained an expression which appears to

me to characterize, more aptly than any other, the functions of the syllogism

in all cases. When the premises are given by authority, the function of

Reasoning is to ascertain the testimony of a witness, or the will of a

legislator, by interpreting the signs in which the one has intimated his

assertion and the other his command. In like manner, when the premises are

derived from observation, the function of Reasoning is to ascertain what we

(or our predecessors) formerly thought might be inferred from the observed

facts, and to do this by interpreting a memorandum of ours, or of theirs. The

memorandum reminds us, that from evidence, more or less carefully

weighed, it formerly appeared that a certain attribute might be inferred

wherever we perceive a certain mark. The proposition, All men are mortal

(for instance) shows that we have had experience from which we thought it

followed that the attributes connoted by the term man, are a mark of

mortality. But when we conclude that the Duke of Wellington is mortal, we

do not infer this from the memorandum, but from the former experience. All

that we infer from the memorandum is our own previous belief, (or that of

those who transmitted to us the proposition), concerning the inferences which

that former experience would warrant.

              This view of the nature of the syllogism renders consistent and

intelligible what otherwise remains obscure and confused in the theory of

Archbishop Whately and other enlightened defenders of the syllogistic

doctrine, respecting the limits to which its functions are confined. They

affirm in as explicit terms as can be used, that the sole office of general

reasoning is to prevent inconsistency in our opinions; to prevent us from

assenting to any thing, the truth of which would contradict something towhich we had previously on good grounds given our assent. And they tell us,

that the sole ground which a syllogism affords for assenting to the

conclusion, is that the supposition of its being false, combined with the

supposition that the premises are true, would lead to a contradiction in terms.

Now this would be but a lame account of the real grounds which we have for

believing the facts which we learn from reasoning, in contradistinction to

observation. The true reason why we believe that the Duke of Wellington will

die, is that his fathers, and our fathers, and all other persons who were

contemporary with them, have died. Those facts are the real premises of the

reasoning. But we are not led to infer the conclusion from those premises, by

the necessity of avoiding any verbal inconsistency. There is no contradiction

in supposing that all those persons have died, and that the Duke of

Wellington may, notwithstanding, live forever. But there would be a

contradiction if we first, on the ground of those same premises, made a

general assertion including and covering the case of the Duke of Wellington,

and then refused to stand to it in the individual case. There is an

inconsistency to be avoided between the memorandum we make of the

inferences which may be justly drawn in future cases, and the inferences we

actually draw in those cases when they arise. With this view we interpret our

own formula, precisely as a judge interprets a law: in order that we may avoid

drawing any inferences not conformable to our former intention, as a judge

avoids giving any decision not conformable to the legislator’s intention. The

rules for this interpretation are the rules of the syllogism: and its sole purpose

is to maintain consistency between the conclusions we draw in every

particular case, and the previous general directions for drawing them;

whether those general directions were framed by ourselves as the result of

induction, or were received by us from an authority competent to give them.

              § 5. In the above observations it has, I think, been shown, that,

though there is always a process of reasoning or inference where a syllogism

is used, the syllogism is not a correct analysis of that process of reasoning or

inference; which is, on the contrary (when not a mere inference from

testimony), an inference from particulars to particulars; authorized by a

previous inference from particulars to generals, and substantially the same

with it; of the nature, therefore, of Induction. But while these conclusions

appear to me undeniable, I must yet enter a protest, as strong as that of

Archbishop Whately himself, against the doctrine that the syllogistic art is

useless for the purposes of reasoning. The reasoning lies in the act ofgeneralization, not in interpreting the record of that act; but the syllogistic

form is an indispensable collateral security for the correctness of the

generalization itself.

              It has already been seen, that if we have a collection of particulars

sufficient for grounding an induction, we need not frame a general

proposition; we may reason at once from those particulars to other

particulars. But it is to be remarked withal, that whenever, from a set of

particular cases, we can legitimately draw any inference, we may legitimately

make our inference a general one. If, from observation and experiment, we

can conclude to one new case, so may we to an indefinite number. If that

which has held true in our past experience will therefore hold in time to

come, it will hold not merely in some individual case, but in all cases of some

given description. Every induction, therefore, which suffices to prove one

fact, proves an indefinite multitude of facts: the experience which justifies a

single prediction must be such as will suffice to bear out a general theorem.

This theorem it is extremely important to ascertain and declare, in its broadest

form of generality; and thus to place before our minds, in its full extent, the

whole of what our evidence must prove if it proves any thing.

              This throwing of the whole body of possible inferences from a given

set of particulars, into one general expression, operates as a security for their

being just inferences, in more ways than one. First, the general principle

presents a larger object to the imagination than any of the singular

propositions which it contains. A process of thought which leads to a

comprehensive generality, is felt as of greater importance than one which

terminates in an insulated fact; and the mind is, even unconsciously, led to

bestow greater attention upon the process, and to weigh more carefully the

sufficiency of the experience appealed to, for supporting the inference

grounded upon it. There is another, and a more important, advantage. In

reasoning from a course of individual observations to some new and

unobserved case, which we are but imperfectly acquainted with (or we should

not be inquiring into it), and in which, since we are inquiring into it, we

probably feel a peculiar interest; there is very little to prevent us from giving

way to negligence, or to any bias which may affect our wishes or our

imagination, and, under that influence, accepting insufficient evidence as

sufficient. But if, instead of concluding straight to the particular case, we

place before ourselves an entire class of facts — the whole contents of ageneral proposition, every tittle of which is legitimately inferable from our

premises, if that one particular conclusion is so; there is then a considerable

likelihood that if the premises are insufficient, and the general inference

therefore, groundless, it will comprise within it some fact or facts the reverse

of which we already know to be true; and we shall thus discover the error in

our generalization by a reductio ad impossibile .

              Thus if, during the reign of Marcus Aurelius, a subject of the Roman

empire, under the bias naturally given to the imagination and expectations by

the lives and characters of the Antonines, had been disposed to expect that

Commodus would be a just ruler; supposing him to stop there, he might only

have been undeceived by sad experience. But if he reflected that this

expectation could not be justifiable unless from the same evidence he was

warranted in concluding some general proposition, as, for instance, that all

Roman emperors are just rulers; he would immediately have thought of Nero,

Domitian, and other instances, which, showing the falsity of the general

conclusion, and therefore the insufficiency of the premises, would have

warned him that those premises could not prove in the instance of

Commodus, what they were inadequate to prove in any collection of cases in

which his was included.

              The advantage, in judging whether any controverted inference is

legitimate, of referring to a parallel case, is universally acknowledged. But by

ascending to the general proposition, we bring under our view not one

parallel case only, but all possible parallel cases at once; all cases to which

the same set of evidentiary considerations are applicable.

              When, therefore, we argue from a number of known cases to another

case supposed to be analogous, it is always possible, and generally

advantageous, to divert our argument into the circuitous channel of an

induction from those known cases to a general proposition, and a subsequent

application of that general proposition to the unknown case. This second part

of the operation, which, as before observed, is essentially a process of

interpretation, will be resolvable into a syllogism or a series of syllogisms,

the majors of which will be general propositions embracing whole classes of

cases; every one of which propositions must be true in all its extent, if the

argument is maintainable. If, therefore, any fact fairly coming within the

range of one of these general propositions, and consequently asserted by it, is

known or suspected to be other than the proposition asserts it to be, this modeof stating the argument causes us to know or to suspect that the original

observations, which are the real grounds of our conclusion, are not sufficient

to support it. And in proportion to the greater chance of our detecting the

inconclusiveness of our evidence, will be the increased reliance we are

entitled to place in it if no such evidence of defect shall appear.

              The value, therefore, of the syllogistic form, and of the rules for

using it correctly, does not consist in their being the form and the rules

according to which our reasonings are necessarily, or even usually, made; but

in their furnishing us with a mode in which those reasonings may always be

represented, and which is admirably calculated, if they are inconclusive, to

bring their inconclusiveness to light. An induction from particulars to

generals, followed by a syllogistic process from those generals to other

particulars, is a form in which we may always state our reasonings if we

please. It is not a form in which we must reason, but it is a form in which we

may reason, and into which it is indispensable to throw our reasoning, when

there is any doubt of its validity: though when the case is familiar and little

complicated, and there is no suspicion of error, we may, and do, reason at
                                                                58
once from the known particular cases to unknown ones.

              These are the uses of syllogism, as a mode of verifying any given

argument. Its ulterior uses, as respects the general course of our intellectual

operations, hardly require illustration, being in fact the acknowledged uses of

general language. They amount substantially to this, that the inductions may

be made once for all: a single careful interrogation of experience may suffice,

and the result may be registered in the form of a general proposition, which is

committed to memory or to writing, and from which afterward we have only

to syllogize. The particulars of our experiments may then be dismissed from

the memory, in which it would be impossible to retain so great a multitude of

details; while the knowledge which those details afforded for future use, and

which would otherwise be lost as soon as the observations were forgotten, or

as their record became too bulky for reference, is retained in a commodious

and immediately available shape by means of general language.

              Against this advantage is to be set the countervailing inconvenience,

that inferences originally made on insufficient evidence become consecrated,

and, as it were, hardened into general maxims; and the mind cleaves to them

from habit, after it has outgrown any liability to be misled by similar

fallacious appearances if they were now for the first time presented; buthaving forgotten the particulars, it does not think of revising its own former

decision. An inevitable drawback, which, however considerable in itself,

forms evidently but a small set-off against the immense benefits of general

language.

              The use of the syllogism is in truth no other than the use of general

propositions in reasoning. We can reason without them; in simple and

obvious cases we habitually do so; minds of great sagacity can do it in cases

not simple and obvious, provided their experience supplies them with

instances essentially similar to every combination of circumstances likely to

arise. But other minds, and the same minds where they have not the same

pre-eminent advantages of personal experience, are quite helpless without the

aid of general propositions, wherever the case presents the smallest

complication; and if we made no general propositions, few persons would get

much beyond those simple inferences which are drawn by the more

intelligent of the brutes. Though not necessary to reasoning, general

propositions are necessary to any considerable progress in reasoning. It is,

therefore, natural and indispensable to separate the process of investigation

into two parts; and obtain general formulæ for determining what inferences

may be drawn, before the occasion arises for drawing the inferences. The

work of drawing them is then that of applying the formulæ; and the rules of

syllogism are a system of securities for the correctness of the application.

              § 6. To complete the series of considerations connected with the

philosophical character of the syllogism, it is requisite to consider, since the

syllogism is not the universal type of the reasoning process, what is the real

type. This resolves itself into the question, what is the nature of the minor

premise, and in what manner it contributes to establish the conclusion: for as

to the major, we now fully understand, that the place which it nominally

occupies in our reasonings, properly belongs to the individual facts or

observations of which it expresses the general result; the major itself being no

real part of the argument, but an intermediate halting-place for the mind,

interposed by an artifice of language between the real premises and the

conclusion, by way of a security, which it is in a most material degree, for the

correctness of the process. The minor, however, being an indispensable part

of the syllogistic expression of an argument, without doubt either is, or

corresponds to, an equally indispensable part of the argument itself, and we

have only to inquire what part.              It is perhaps worth while to notice here a speculation of a

philosopher to whom mental science is much indebted, but who, though a

very penetrating, was a very hasty thinker, and whose want of due

circumspection rendered him fully as remarkable for what he did not see, as

for what he saw. I allude to Dr. Thomas Brown, whose theory of ratiocination

is peculiar. He saw the petitio principii which is inherent in every syllogism,

if we consider the major to be itself the evidence by which the conclusion is

proved, instead of being, what in fact it is, an assertion of the existence of

evidence sufficient to prove any conclusion of a given description. Seeing

this, Dr. Brown not only failed to see the immense advantage, in point of

security for correctness, which is gained by interposing this step between the

real evidence and the conclusion; but he thought it incumbent on him to strike

out the major altogether from the reasoning process, without substituting any

thing else, and maintained that our reasonings consist only of the minor

premise and the conclusion, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is mortal:

thus actually suppressing, as an unnecessary step in the argument, the appeal

to former experience. The absurdity of this was disguised from him by the

opinion he adopted, that reasoning is merely analyzing our own general

notions, or abstract ideas; and that the proposition, Socrates is mortal, is

evolved from the proposition, Socrates is a man, simply by recognizing the

notion of mortality as already contained in the notion we form of a man.

              After the explanations so fully entered into on the subject of

propositions, much further discussion can not be necessary to make the

radical error of this view of ratiocination apparent. If the word man connoted

mortality; if the meaning of “mortal” were involved in the meaning of “man;”

we might, undoubtedly, evolve the conclusion from the minor alone, because

the minor would have already asserted it. But if, as is in fact the case, the

word man does not connote mortality, how does it appear that in the mind of

every person who admits Socrates to be a man, the idea of man must include

the idea of mortality? Dr. Brown could not help seeing this difficulty, and in

order to avoid it, was led, contrary to his intention, to re-establish, under

another name, that step in the argument which corresponds to the major, by

affirming the necessity of previously perceiving the relation between the idea

of man and the idea of mortal. If the reasoner has not previously perceived

this relation, he will not, says Dr. Brown, infer because Socrates is a man,

that Socrates is mortal. But even this admission, though amounting to a

surrender of the doctrine that an argument consists of the minor and theconclusion alone, will not save the remainder of Dr. Brown’s theory. The

failure of assent to the argument does not take place merely because the

reasoner, for want of due analysis, does not perceive that his idea of man

includes the idea of mortality; it takes place, much more commonly, because

in his mind that relation between the two ideas has never existed. And in truth

it never does exist, except as the result of experience. Consenting, for the

sake of the argument, to discuss the question on a supposition of which we

have recognized the radical incorrectness, namely, that the meaning of a

proposition relates to the ideas of the things spoken of, and not to the things

themselves; I must yet observe, that the idea of man, as a universal idea, the

common property of all rational creatures, can not involve any thing but what

is strictly implied in the name. If any one includes in his own private idea of

man, as no doubt is always the case, some other attributes, such for instance

as mortality, he does so only as the consequence of experience, after having

satisfied himself that all men possess that attribute: so that whatever the idea

contains, in any person’s mind, beyond what is included in the conventional

signification of the word, has been added to it as the result of assent to a

proposition; while Dr. Brown’s theory requires us to suppose, on the

contrary, that assent to the proposition is produced by evolving, through an

analytic process, this very element out of the idea. This theory, therefore, may

be considered as sufficiently refuted; and the minor premise must be regarded

as totally insufficient to prove the conclusion, except with the assistance of

the major, or of that which the major represents, namely, the various singular

propositions expressive of the series of observations, of which the

generalization called the major premise is the result.

              In the argument, then, which proves that Socrates is mortal, one

indispensable part of the premises will be as follows: “My father, and my

father’s father, A, B, C, and an indefinite number of other persons, were

mortal;” which is only an expression in different words of the observed fact

that they have died. This is the major premise divested of the petitio principii

, and cut down to as much as is really known by direct evidence.

              In order to connect this proposition with the conclusion Socrates is

mortal, the additional link necessary is such a proposition as the following:

“Socrates resembles my father, and my father’s father, and the other

individuals specified.” This proposition we assert when we say that Socrates

is a man. By saying so we likewise assert in what respect he resembles them,namely, in the attributes connoted by the word man. And we conclude that he

further resembles them in the attribute mortality.

              § 7. We have thus obtained what we were seeking, a universal type

of the reasoning process. We find it resolvable in all cases into the following

elements: Certain individuals have a given attribute; an individual or

individuals resemble the former in certain other attributes; therefore they

resemble them also in the given attribute. This type of ratiocination does not

claim, like the syllogism, to be conclusive from the mere form of the

expression; nor can it possibly be so. That one proposition does or does not

assert the very fact which was already asserted in another, may appear from

the form of the expression, that is, from a comparison of the language; but

when the two propositions assert facts which are bona fide different, whether

the one fact proves the other or not can never appear from the language, but

must depend on other considerations. Whether, from the attributes in which

Socrates resembles those men who have heretofore died, it is allowable to

infer that he resembles them also in being mortal, is a question of Induction;

and is to be decided by the principles or canons which we shall hereafter

recognize as tests of the correct performance of that great mental operation.

              Meanwhile, however, it is certain, as before remarked, that if this

inference can be drawn as to Socrates, it can be drawn as to all others who

resemble the observed individuals in the same attributes in which he

resembles them; that is (to express the thing concisely) of all mankind. If,

therefore, the argument be admissible in the case of Socrates, we are at

liberty, once for all, to treat the possession of the attributes of man as a mark,

or satisfactory evidence, of the attribute of mortality. This we do by laying

down the universal proposition, All men are mortal, and interpreting this, as

occasion arises, in its application to Socrates and others. By this means we

establish a very convenient division of the entire logical operation into two

steps; first, that of ascertaining what attributes are marks of mortality; and,

secondly, whether any given individuals possess those marks. And it will

generally be advisable, in our speculations on the reasoning process, to

consider this double operation as in fact taking place, and all reasoning as

carried on in the form into which it must necessarily be thrown to enable us

to apply to it any test of its correct performance.

              Although, therefore, all processes of thought in which the ultimate

premises are particulars, whether we conclude from particulars to a generalformula, or from particulars to other particulars according to that formula, are

equally Induction; we shall yet, conformably to usage, consider the name

Induction as more peculiarly belonging to the process of establishing the

general proposition, and the remaining operation, which is substantially that

of interpreting the general proposition, we shall call by its usual name,

Deduction. And we shall consider every process by which any thing is

inferred respecting an unobserved case, as consisting of an Induction

followed by a Deduction; because, although the process needs not necessarily

be carried on in this form, it is always susceptible of the form, and must be

thrown into it when assurance of scientific accuracy is needed and desired.

              § 8. The theory of the syllogism laid down in the preceding pages,

has obtained, among other important adhesions, three of peculiar value: those
                        596061
of Sir John Herschel, Dr. Whewell, and Mr. Bailey; Sir John Herschel

considering the doctrine, though not strictly “a discovery,” having been
                            62
anticipated by Berkeley, to be “one of the greatest steps which have yet

been made in the philosophy of Logic.” “When we consider” (to quote the

further words of the same authority) “the inveteracy of the habits and

prejudices which it has cast to the winds,” there is no cause for misgiving in

the fact that other thinkers, no less entitled to consideration, have formed a

very different estimate of it. Their principal objection can not be better or

more succinctly stated than by borrowing a sentence from Archbishop
        63
Whately. “In every case where an inference is drawn from Induction (unless

that name is to be given to a mere random guess without any grounds at all)

we must form a judgment that the instance or instances adduced are sufficient

to authorize the conclusion; that it is allowable to take these instances as a

sample warranting an inference respecting the whole class;” and the

expression of this judgment in words (it has been said by several of my

critics) is the major premise.

              I quite admit that the major is an affirmation of the sufficiency of the

evidence on which the conclusion rests. That it is so, is the very essence of

my own theory. And whoever admits that the major premise is only this,

adopts the theory in its essentials.

              But I can not concede that this recognition of the sufficiency of the

evidence — that is, of the correctness of the induction — is a part of the

induction itself; unless we ought to say that it is a part of every thing we do,

to satisfy ourselves that it has been done rightly. We conclude from knowninstances to unknown by the impulse of the generalizing propensity; and

(until after a considerable amount of practice and mental discipline) the

question of the sufficiency of the evidence is only raised by a retrospective

act, turning back upon our own footsteps, and examining whether we were

warranted in doing what we have provisionally done. To speak of this reflex

operation as part of the original one, requiring to be expressed in words in

order that the verbal formula may correctly represent the psychological
                                              64
process, appears to me false psychology. We review our syllogistic as well

as our inductive processes, and recognize that they have been correctly

performed; but logicians do not add a third premise to the syllogism, to

express this act of recognition. A careful copyist verifies his transcript by

collating it with the original; and if no error appears, he recognizes that the

transcript has been correctly made. But we do not call the examination of the

copy a part of the act of copying.

              The conclusion in an induction is inferred from the evidence itself,

and not from a recognition of the sufficiency of the evidence; as I infer that

my friend is walking toward me because I see him, and not because I

recognize that my eyes are open, and that eyesight is a means of knowledge.

In all operations which require care, it is good to assure ourselves that the

process has been performed accurately; but the testing of the process is not

the process itself; and, besides, may have been omitted altogether, and yet the

process be correct. It is precisely because that operation is omitted in ordinary

unscientific reasoning, that there is any thing gained in certainty by throwing

reasoning into the syllogistic form. To make sure, as far as possible, that it

shall not be omitted, we make the testing operation a part of the reasoning

process itself. We insist that the inference from particulars to particulars shall

pass through a general proposition. But this is a security for good reasoning,

not a condition of all reasoning; and in some cases not even a security. Our

most familiar inferences are all made before we learn the use of general

propositions; and a person of untutored sagacity will skillfully apply his

acquired experience to adjacent cases, though he would bungle grievously in

fixing the limits of the appropriate general theorem. But though he may

conclude rightly, he never, properly speaking, knows whether he has done so

or not; he has not tested his reasoning. Now, this is precisely what forms of

reasoning do for us. We do not need them to enable us to reason, but to

enable us to know whether we reason correctly.              In still further answer to the objection, it may be added that — even

when the test has been applied, and the sufficiency of the evidence

recognized — if it is sufficient to support the general proposition, it is

sufficient also to support an inference from particulars to particulars without

passing through the general proposition. The inquirer who has logically

satisfied himself that the conditions of legitimate induction were realized in

the cases A, B, C, would be as much justified in concluding directly to the

Duke of Wellington as in concluding to all men. The general conclusion is

never legitimate, unless the particular one would be so too; and in no sense,

intelligible to me, can the particular conclusion be said to be drawn from the

general one. Whenever there is ground for drawing any conclusion at all from

particular instances, there is ground for a general conclusion; but that this

general conclusion should be actually drawn, however useful, can not be an

indispensable condition of the validity of the inference in the particular case.

A man gives away sixpence by the same power by which he disposes of his

whole fortune; but it is not necessary to the legality of the smaller act, that he

should make a formal assertion of his right to the greater one.

              Some additional remarks, in reply to minor objections, are
          65
appended.

              § 9. The preceding considerations enable us to understand the true

nature of what is termed, by recent writers, Formal Logic, and the relation

between it and Logic in the widest sense. Logic, as I conceive it, is the entire

theory of the ascertainment of reasoned or inferred truth. Formal Logic,

therefore, which Sir William Hamilton from his own point of view, and

Archbishop Whately from his, have represented as the whole of Logic

properly so called, is really a very subordinate part of it, not being directly

concerned with the process of Reasoning or Inference in the sense in which

that process is a part of the Investigation of Truth. What, then, is Formal

Logic? The name seems to be properly applied to all that portion of doctrine

which relates to the equivalence of different modes of expression; the rules

for determining when assertions in a given form imply or suppose the truth or

falsity of other assertions. This includes the theory of the Import of

Propositions, and of their Conversion, Æquipollence, and Opposition; of
                                                                  66
those falsely called Inductions (to be hereafter spoken of) , in which the

apparent generalization is a mere abridged statement of cases known

individually; and finally, of the syllogism: while the theory of Naming, andof (what is inseparably connected with it) Definition, though belonging still

more to the other and larger kind of logic than to this, is a necessary

preliminary to this. The end aimed at by Formal Logic, and attained by the

observance of its precepts, is not truth, but consistency. It has been seen that

this is the only direct purpose of the rules of the syllogism; the intention and

effect of which is simply to keep our inferences or conclusions in complete

consistency with our general formulæ or directions for drawing them. The

Logic of Consistency is a necessary auxiliary to the logic of truth, not only

because what is inconsistent with itself or with other truths can not be true,

but also because truth can only be successfully pursued by drawing

inferences from experience, which, if warrantable at all, admit of being

generalized, and, to test their warrantableness, require to be exhibited in a

generalized form; after which the correctness of their application to particular

cases is a question which specially concerns the Logic of Consistency. This

Logic, not requiring any preliminary knowledge of the processes or

conclusions of the various sciences, may be studied with benefit in a much

earlier stage of education than the Logic of Truth: and the practice which has

empirically obtained of teaching it apart, through elementary treatises which

do not attempt to include any thing else, though the reasons assigned for the

practice are in general very far from philosophical, admits of philosophical

justification.

 

 

     Chapter IV. – Of Trains Of Reasoning, And Deductive Sciences.

 

 

              § 1. In our analysis of the syllogism, it appeared that the minor

premise always affirms a resemblance between a new case and some cases

previously known; while the major premise asserts something which, having

been found true of those known cases, we consider ourselves warranted in

holding true of any other case resembling the former in certain given

particulars.

              If all ratiocinations resembled, as to the minor premise, the examples

which were exclusively employed in the preceding chapter; if the

resemblance, which that premise asserts, were obvious to the senses, as in the

proposition “Socrates is a man,” or were at once ascertainable by direct

observation; there would be no necessity for trains of reasoning, and

Deductive or Ratiocinative Sciences would not exist. Trains of reasoning

exist only for the sake of extending an induction founded, as all inductions

must be, on observed cases, to other cases in which we not only can not

directly observe the fact which is to be proved, but can not directly observe

even the mark which is to prove it.

              § 2. Suppose the syllogism to be, All cows ruminate, the animal

which is before me is a cow, therefore it ruminates. The minor, if true at all,

is obviously so: the only premise the establishment of which requires any

anterior process of inquiry, is the major; and provided the induction of which

that premise is the expression was correctly performed, the conclusion

respecting the animal now present will be instantly drawn; because, as soon

as she is compared with the formula, she will be identified as being included

in it. But suppose the syllogism to be the following: All arsenic is poisonous,

the substance which is before me is arsenic, therefore it is poisonous. The

truth of the minor may not here be obvious at first sight; it may not be

intuitively evident, but may itself be known only by inference. It may be the

conclusion of another argument, which, thrown into the syllogistic form,

would stand thus: Whatever when lighted produces a dark spot on a piece of

white porcelain held in the flame, which spot is soluble in hypochloride of

calcium, is arsenic; the substance before me conforms to this condition;

therefore it is arsenic. To establish, therefore, the ultimate conclusion, Thesubstance before me is poisonous, requires a process, which, in order to be

syllogistically expressed, stands in need of two syllogisms; and we have a

Train of Reasoning.

              When, however, we thus add syllogism to syllogism, we are really

adding induction to induction. Two separate inductions must have taken place

to render this chain of inference possible; inductions founded, probably, on

different sets of individual instances, but which converge in their results, so

that the instance which is the subject of inquiry comes within the range of

them both. The record of these inductions is contained in the majors of the

two syllogisms. First, we, or others for us, have examined various objects

which yielded under the given circumstances a dark spot with the given

property, and found that they possessed the properties connoted by the word

arsenic; they were metallic, volatile, their vapor had a smell of garlic, and so

forth. Next, we, or others for us, have examined various specimens which

possessed this metallic and volatile character, whose vapor had this smell,

etc., and have invariably found that they were poisonous. The first

observation we judge that we may extend to all substances whatever which

yield that particular kind of dark spot; the second, to all metallic and volatile

substances resembling those we examined; and consequently, not to those

only which are seen to be such, but to those which are concluded to be such

by the prior induction. The substance before us is only seen to come within

one of these inductions; but by means of this one, it is brought within the

other. We are still, as before, concluding from particulars to particulars; but

we are now concluding from particulars observed, to other particulars which

are not, as in the simple case, seen to resemble them in material points, but

inferred to do so, because resembling them in something else, which we have

been led by quite a different set of instances to consider as a mark of the

former resemblance.

              This first example of a train of reasoning is still extremely simple,

the series consisting of only two syllogisms. The following is somewhat more

complicated: No government, which earnestly seeks the good of its subjects,

is likely to be overthrown; some particular government earnestly seeks the

good of its subjects, therefore it is not likely to be overthrown. The major

premise in this argument we shall suppose not to be derived from

considerations a priori , but to be a generalization from history, which,

whether correct or erroneous, must have been founded on observation ofgovernments concerning whose desire of the good of their subjects there was

no doubt. It has been found, or thought to be found, that these were not easily

overthrown, and it has been deemed that those instances warranted an

extension of the same predicate to any and every government which

resembles them in the attribute of desiring earnestly the good of its subjects.

But does the government in question thus resemble them? This may be

debated pro and con by many arguments, and must, in any case, be proved by

another induction; for we can not directly observe the sentiments and desires

of the persons who carry on the government. To prove the minor, therefore,

we require an argument in this form: Every government which acts in a

certain manner, desires the good of its subjects; the supposed government

acts in that particular manner, therefore it desires the good of its subjects. But

is it true that the government acts in the manner supposed? This minor also

may require proof; still another induction, as thus: What is asserted by

intelligent and disinterested witnesses, may be believed to be true; that the

government acts in this manner, is asserted by such witnesses, therefore it

may be believed to be true. The argument hence consists of three steps.

Having the evidence of our senses that the case of the government under

consideration resembles a number of former cases, in the circumstance of

having something asserted respecting it by intelligent and disinterested

witnesses, we infer, first, that, as in those former instances, so in this

instance, the assertion is true. Secondly, what was asserted of the government

being that it acts in a particular manner, and other governments or persons

having been observed to act in the same manner, the government in question

is brought into known resemblance with those other governments or persons;

and since they were known to desire the good of the people, it is thereupon,

by a second induction, inferred that the particular government spoken of,

desires the good of the people. This brings that government into known

resemblance with the other governments which were thought likely to escape

revolution, and thence, by a third induction, it is concluded that this particular

government is also likely to escape. This is still reasoning from particulars to

particulars, but we now reason to the new instance from three distinct sets of

former instances: to one only of those sets of instances do we directly

perceive the new one to be similar; but from that similarity we inductively

infer that it has the attribute by which it is assimilated to the next set, and

brought within the corresponding induction; after which by a repetition of the

same operation we infer it to be similar to the third set, and hence a thirdinduction conducts us to the ultimate conclusion.

              § 3. Notwithstanding the superior complication of these examples,

compared with those by which in the preceding chapter we illustrated the

general theory of reasoning, every doctrine which we then laid down holds

equally true in these more intricate cases. The successive general propositions

are not steps in the reasoning, are not intermediate links in the chain of

inference, between the particulars observed and those to which we apply the

observation. If we had sufficiently capacious memories, and a sufficient

power of maintaining order among a huge mass of details, the reasoning

could go on without any general propositions; they are mere formulæ for

inferring particulars from particulars. The principle of general reasoning is

(as before explained), that if, from observation of certain known particulars,

what was seen to be true of them can be inferred to be true of any others, it

may be inferred of all others which are of a certain description. And in order

that we may never fail to draw this conclusion in a new case when it can be

drawn correctly, and may avoid drawing it when it can not, we determine

once for all what are the distinguishing marks by which such cases may be

recognized. The subsequent process is merely that of identifying an object,

and ascertaining it to have those marks; whether we identify it by the very

marks themselves, or by others which we have ascertained (through another

and a similar process) to be marks of those marks. The real inference is

always from particulars to particulars, from the observed instances to an

unobserved one: but in drawing this inference, we conform to a formula

which we have adopted for our guidance in such operations, and which is a

record of the criteria by which we thought we had ascertained that we might

distinguish when the inference could, and when it could not, be drawn. The

real premises are the individual observations, even though they may have

been forgotten, or, being the observations of others and not of ourselves,

may, to us, never have been known: but we have before us proof that we or

others once thought them sufficient for an induction, and we have marks to

show whether any new case is one of those to which, if then known, the

induction would have been deemed to extend. These marks we either

recognize at once, or by the aid of other marks, which by another previous

induction we collected to be marks of the first. Even these marks of marks

may only be recognized through a third set of marks; and we may have a train

of reasoning, of any length, to bring a new case within the scope of an

induction grounded on particulars its similarity to which is only ascertainedin this indirect manner.

              Thus, in the preceding example, the ultimate inductive inference

was, that a certain government was not likely to be overthrown; this inference

was drawn according to a formula in which desire of the public good was set

down as a mark of not being likely to be overthrown; a mark of this mark

was, acting in a particular manner; and a mark of acting in that manner was,

being asserted to do so by intelligent and disinterested witnesses: this mark,

the government under discussion was recognized by the senses as possessing.

Hence that government fell within the last induction, and by it was brought

within all the others. The perceived resemblance of the case to one set of

observed particular cases, brought it into known resemblance with another

set, and that with a third.

              In the more complex branches of knowledge, the deductions seldom

consist, as in the examples hitherto exhibited, of a single chain, a a mark of b,

b of c, c of d , therefore a a mark of d . They consist (to carry on the same

metaphor) of several chains united at the extremity, as thus: a a mark of d, b

of e, c of f, d e f of n , therefore a b c a mark of n . Suppose, for example, the

following combination of circumstances: 1st, rays of light impinging on a

reflecting surface; 2d, that surface parabolic; 3d, those rays parallel to each

other and to the axis of the surface. It is to be proved that the concourse of

these three circumstances is a mark that the reflected rays will pass through

the focus of the parabolic surface. Now, each of the three circumstances is

singly a mark of something material to the case. Rays of light impinging on a

reflecting surface are a mark that those rays will be reflected at an angle equal

to the angle of incidence. The parabolic form of the surface, is a mark that,

from any point of it, a line drawn to the focus and a line parallel to the axis

will make equal angles with the surface. And finally, the parallelism of the

rays to the axis is a mark that their angle of incidence coincides with one of

these equal angles. The three marks taken together are therefore a mark of all

these three things united. But the three united are evidently a mark that the

angle of reflection must coincide with the other of the two equal angles, that

formed by a line drawn to the focus; and this again, by the fundamental

axiom concerning straight lines, is a mark that the reflected rays pass through

the focus. Most chains of physical deduction are of this more complicated

type; and even in mathematics such are abundant, as in all propositions where

the hypothesis includes numerous conditions: “If a circle be taken, and ifwithin that circle a point be taken, not the centre, and if straight lines be

drawn from that point to the circumference, then,” etc.

              § 4. The considerations now stated remove a serious difficulty from

the view we have taken of reasoning; which view might otherwise have

seemed not easily reconcilable with the fact that there are Deductive or

Ratiocinative Sciences. It might seem to follow, if all reasoning be induction,

that the difficulties of philosophical investigation must lie in the inductions

exclusively, and that when these were easy, and susceptible of no doubt or

hesitation, there could be no science, or, at least, no difficulties in science.

The existence, for example, of an extensive Science of Mathematics,

requiring the highest scientific genius in those who contributed to its creation,

and calling for a most continued and vigorous exertion of intellect in order to

appropriate it when created, may seem hard to be accounted for on the

foregoing theory. But the considerations more recently adduced remove the

mystery, by showing, that even when the inductions themselves are obvious,

there may be much difficulty in finding whether the particular case which is

the subject of inquiry comes within them; and ample room for scientific

ingenuity in so combining various inductions, as, by means of one within

which the case evidently falls, to bring it within others in which it can not be

directly seen to be included.

              When the more obvious of the inductions which can be made in any

science from direct observations, have been made, and general formulas have

been framed, determining the limits within which these inductions are

applicable; as often as a new case can be at once seen to come within one of

the formulas, the induction is applied to the new case, and the business is

ended. But new cases are continually arising, which do not obviously come

within any formula whereby the question we want solved in respect of them

could be answered. Let us take an instance from geometry: and as it is taken

only for illustration, let the reader concede to us for the present, what we shall

endeavor to prove in the next chapter, that the first principles of geometry are

results of induction. Our example shall be the fifth proposition of the first

book of Euclid. The inquiry is, Are the angles at the base of an isosceles

triangle equal or unequal? The first thing to be considered is, what inductions

we have, from which we can infer equality or inequality. For inferring

equality we have the following formulæ: Things which being applied to each

other coincide, are equals. Things which are equal to the same thing are