return to the labour and capital employed on it gives only the ordinary profit

of capital, without leaving anything for rent; a standard is afforded for

estimating the amount of rent which will be yielded by all other land. Any

land yields just as much more than the ordinary profits of stock, as it yields

more than what is returned by the worst land in cultivation. The surplus is

what the farmer can afford to pay as rent to the landlord; and since, if he did

not so pay it, he would receive more than the ordinary rate of profit, the

competition of other capitalists, that competition which equalizes the profits

of different capitals, will enable the landlord to appropriate it. The rent,

therefore, which any land will yield, is the excess of its produce, beyond what

would be returned to the same capital if employed on the worst land in

cultivation. This is not, and never was pretended to be, the limit of metayer

rents, or of cottier rents; but it is the limit of farmers’ rents. No land rented to

a capitalist farmer will permanently yield more than this; and when it yields

less, it is because the landlord foregoes a part of what, if he chose, he could

obtain.

              This is the theory of rent, first propounded at the end of the last

century by Dr. Anderson, and which, neglected at the time, was almost

simultaneously rediscovered, twenty years later, by Sir Edward West, Mr.

Malthus, and Mr. Ricardo. It is one of the cardinal doctrines of political

economy; and until it was understood, no consistent explanation could be

given of many of the more complicated industrial phenomena. The evidence

of its truth will be manifested with a great increase of clearness, when we

come to trace the laws of the phenomena of Value and Price. Until that is

done, it is not possible to free the doctrine from every difficulty which may

present itself, nor perhaps to convey, to those previously unacquainted with

the subject, more than a general apprehension of the reasoning by which the

theorem is arrived at. Some, however, of the objections commonly made to it,

admit of a complete answer even in the present stage of our inquiries.

              It has been denied that there can be any land in cultivation which

pays no rent; because landlords (it is contended) would not allow their land to

be occupied without payment. Those who lay any stress on this as an

objection, must think that land of the quality which can but just pay for its

cultivation, lies together in large masses, detached from any land of better

quality. If an estate consisted wholly of this land, or of this and still worse, it

is likely enough that the owner would not give the use of it for nothing; hewould probably (if a rich man) prefer keeping it for other purposes, as for

exercise, or ornament, or perhaps as a game preserve. No farmer could afford

to offer him anything for it, for purposes of culture; though something would

probably be obtained for the use of its natural pasture, or other spontaneous

produce. Even such land, however, would not necessarily remain

uncultivated. It might be farmed by the proprietor; no unfrequent case even in

England. Portions of it might be granted as temporary allotments to labouring

families, either from philanthropic motives, or to save the poor-rate; or

occupation might be allowed to squatters, free of rent, in the hope that their

labour might give it value at some future period. Both these cases are of quite

ordinary occurrence. So that even if an estate were wholly composed of the

worst land capable of profitable cultivation, it would not necessarily lie

uncultivated because it could pay no rent. Inferior land, however, does not

usually occupy, without interruption, many square miles of ground; it is

dispersed here and there, with patches of better land intermixed, and the same

person who rents the better land, obtains along with it inferior soils which

alternate with it. He pays a rent, nominally for the whole farm, but calculated

on the produce of these parts alone (however small a portion of the whole)

which are capable of returning more than the common rate of profit. It is thus

scientifically true, that the remaining parts pay no rent.

              4. Let us, however, suppose that there were a validity in this

objection, which can by no means be conceded to it; that when the demand of

the community had forced up food to such a price as would remunerate the

expense of producing it from a certain quantity of soil, it happened

nevertheless that all the soil of that quality was withheld from cultivation, by

the obstinacy of the owners in demanding a rent for it, not nominal, nor

trifling, but sufficiently onerous to be a material item in the calculations of a

farmer. What would then happen? Merely that the increase of produce, which

the wants of society required, would for the time be obtained wholly (as it

always is partially), not by an extension of cultivation, but by an increased

application of labour and capital to land already cultivated.

              Now we have already seen that this increased application of capital,

other things being unaltered, is always attended with a smaller proportional

return. We are not to suppose some new agricultural invention made

precisely at this juncture; nor a sudden extension of agricultural skill and

knowledge, bringing into more general practice, just then, inventions alreadyin partial use. We are to suppose no change, except a demand for more corn,

and a consequent rise of its price. The rise of price enables measures to be

taken for increasing the produce, which could not have been taken with profit

at the previous price. The farmer uses more expensive manures; or manures

land which he formerly left to nature; or procures lime or marl from a

distance, as a dressing for the soil; or pulverizes or weeds it more thoroughly;

or drains, irrigates, or subsoils portions of it, which at former prices would

not have paid the cost of the operation; and so forth. These things, or some of

them, are done, when, more food being wanted, cultivation has no means of

expanding itself upon new lands. And when the impulse is given to extract an

increased amount of produce from the soil, the farmer or improver will only

consider whether the outlay he makes for the purpose will be returned to him

with the ordinary profit, and not whether any surplus will remain for rent.

Even, therefore, if it were the fact, that there is never any land taken into

cultivation, for which rent, and that too of an amount worth taking into

consideration, was not paid; it would be true, nevertheless, that there is

always some agricultural capital which pays no rent, because it returns

nothing beyond the ordinary rate of profit: this capital being the portion of

capital last applied-that to which the last addition to the produce was due: or

(to express the essentials of the case in one phrase), that which is applied in

the least favourable circumstances. But the same amount of demand, and the

same price, which enable this least productive portion of capital barely to

replace itself with the ordinary profit, enable every other portion to yield a

surplus proportioned to the advantage it possesses. And this surplus it is,

which competition enables the landlord to appropriate. The rent of all land is

measured by the excess of the return to the whole capital employed on it,

above what is necessary to replace the capital with the ordinary rate of profit,

or in other words, above what the same capital would yield if it were all

employed in as disadvantageous circumstances as the least productive portion

of it; whether that least productive portion of capital is rendered so by being

employed on the worst soil, or by being expended in extorting more produce

from land which already yielded as much as it could be made to part with on

easier terms.

              It is not pretended that the facts of any concrete case conform with

absolute precision to this or any other scientific principle. We must never

forget that the truths of political economy are truths only in the rough: they

have the certainty, but not the precision, of exact science. It is not, forexample, strictly true that a farmer will cultivate no land, and apply no

capital, which returns less than the ordinary profit. He will expect the

ordinary profit on the bulk of his capital. But when he has cast in his lot with

his farm, and bartered his skill and exertions, once for all, against what the

farm will yield to him, he will probably be willing to expend capital on it (for

an immediate return) in any manner which will afford him a surplus profit,

however small, beyond the value of the risk, and the interest which he must

pay for the capital if borrowed, or can get for it elsewhere if it is his own. But

a new farmer, entering on the land, would make his calculations differently,

and would not commence unless he could expect the full rate of ordinary

profit on all the capital which he intended embarking in the enterprise. Again,

prices may range higher or lower during the currency of a lease, than was

expected when the contract was made, and the land, therefore, may be over or

under-rented: and even when the lease expires, the landlord may be unwilling

to grant a necessary diminution of rent, and the farmer, rather than relinquish

his occupation, or seek a farm elsewhere when all are occupied, may consent

to go on paying too high a rent. Irregularities like these we must always

expect; it is impossible in political economy to obtain general theorems

embracing the complications of circumstances which may affect the result in

an individual case. When, too, the farmer class, having but little capital,

cultivate for subsistence rather than for profit, and do not think of quitting

their farm while they are able to live by it, their rents approximate to the

character of cottier rents, and may be forced up by competition (if the number

of competitors exceeds the number of farms) beyond the amount which will

leave to the farmer the ordinary rate of profit. The laws which we are enabled

to lay down respecting rents, profits, wages, prices, are only true in so far as

the persons concerned are free from the influence of any other motives than

those arising from the general circumstances of the case, and are guided, as to

those, by the ordinary mercantile estimate of profit and loss. Applying this

twofold supposition to the case of farmers and landlords, it will be true that

the farmer requires the ordinary rate of profit on the whole of his capital; that

whatever it returns to him beyond this he is obliged to pay to the landlord, but

will not consent to pay more; that there is a portion of capital applied to

agriculture in such circumstances of productiveness as to yield only the

ordinary profits; and that the difference between the produce of this, and any

other capital of similar amount, is the measure of the tribute which that other

capital can and will pay, under the name of rent, to the landlord. Thisconstitutes a law of rent, as near the truth as such a law can possibly be:

though of course modified or disturbed in individual cases, by pending

contracts, individual miscalculations, the influence of habit, and even the

particular feelings and dispositions of the persons concerned.

              5. A remark is often made, which must not here be omitted, though, I

think, more importance has been attached to it than it merits. Under the name

of rent, many payments are commonly included, which are not a

remuneration for the original powers of the land itself, but for capital

expended on it. The additional rent which land yields in consequence of this

outlay of capital, should, in the opinion of some writers, be regarded as profit,

not rent. But before this can be admitted, a distinction must be made. The

annual payment by a tenant almost always includes a consideration for the

use of the buildings on the farm; not only barns, stables, and other outhouses,

but a house to live in, not to speak of fences and the like. The landlord will

ask, and the tenant give, for these, whatever is considered sufficient to yield

the ordinary profit, or rather (risk and trouble being here out of the question)

the ordinary interest, on the value of the buildings: that is, not on what it has

cost to erect them, but on what it would now cost to erect others as good: the

tenant being bound, in addition, to leave them in as good repair as he found

them, for otherwise a much larger payment than simple interest would of

course be required from him. These buildings are as distinct a thing from the

farm as the stock or the timber on it; and what is paid for them can no more

be called rent of land, than a payment for cattle would be, if it were the

custom that the landlord should stock the farm for the tenant. The buildings,

like the cattle, are not land, but capital, regularly consumed and reproduced;

and all payments made in consideration for them are properly interest.

              But with regard to capital actually sunk in improvements, and not

requiring periodical renewal, but spent once for all in giving the land a

permanent increase of productiveness, it appears to me that the return made

to such capital loses altogether the character of profits, and is governed by the

principles of rent. It is true that a landlord will not expend capital in

improving his estate, unless he expects from the improvement an increase of

income surpassing the interest of his outlay. Prospectively, this increase of

income may be regarded as profit; but when the expense has been incurred,

and the improvement made, the rent of the improved land is governed by the

same rules as that of the unimproved. Equally fertile land commands an equalrent, whether its fertility is natural or acquired; and I cannot think that the

incomes of those who own the Bedford Level or the Lincolnshire Wolds

ought to be called profit and not rent because those lands would have been

worth next to nothing unless capital had been expended on them. The owners

are not capitalists, but landlords; they have parted with their capital; it is

consumed, destroyed; and neither is, nor is to be, returned to them, like the

capital of a farmer or manufacturer, from what it produces. In lieu of it they

now have land of a certain richness, which yields the same rent, and by the

operation of the same causes, as if it had possessed from the beginning the

degree of fertility which has been artificially given to it.

              Some writers, in particular Mr. H.C. Carey, take away, still more

completely than I have attempted to do, the distinction between these two

sources of rent, by rejecting one of them altogether, and considering all rent

as the effect of capital expended. In proof of this, Mr. Carey contends that the

whole pecuniary value of all the land in any country, in England for instance,

or in the United States, does not amount to anything approaching to the sum

which has been laid out, or which it would even now be necessary to lay out,

in order to bring the country to its present condition from a state of primaeval

forest. This startling statement has been seized on by M. Bastiat and others,

as a means of making out a stronger case than could otherwise be made in

defence of property in land. Mr. Carey’s proposition, in its most obvious

meaning, is equivalent to saying, that if there were suddenly added to the

lands of England an unreclaimed territory of equal natural fertility, it would

not be worth the while of the inhabitants of England to reclaim it: because the

profits of the operation would not be equal to the ordinary interest on the

capital expended. To which assertion if any answer could be supposed to be

required, it would suffice to remark, that land not of equal but of greatly

inferior quality to that previously cultivated, is continually reclaimed in

England, at an expense which the subsequently accruing rent is sufficient to

replace completely in a small number of years. The doctrine, moreover, is

totally opposed to Mr. Carey’s own economical opinions. No one maintains

more strenuously than Mr. Carey the undoubted truth, that as society

advances in population, wealth, and combination of labour, land constantly

rises in value and price. This, however, could not possibly be true, if the

present value of land were less than the expense of clearing it and making it

fit for cultivation; for it must have been worth this immediately after it was

cleared; and according to Mr. Carey it has been rising in value ever since.              When, however, Mr. Carey asserts that the whole land of any

country is not now worth the capital which has been expended on it, he does

not mean that each particular estate is worth less than what has been laid out

in improving it, and that, to the proprietors, the improvement of the land has

been, in the final result, a miscalculation. He means, not that the land of Great

Britain would not now sell for what has been laid out upon it, but that it

would not sell for that amount plus the expense of making all the roads,

canals, and railways. This is probably true, but is no more to the purpose, and

no more important in political economy, than if the statement had been, that it

would not sell for the sums laid out on it plus the national debt, or plus the

cost of the French Revolutionary war, or any other expense incurred for a real

or imaginary public advantage. The roads, railways, and canals were not

constructed to give value to land: on the contrary, their natural effect was to

lower its value, by rendering other and rival lands accessible: and the

landholders of the southern counties actually petitioned Parliament against

the turnpike roads on this very account.

              The tendency of improved communications is to lower existing

rents, by trenching on the monopoly of the land nearest to the places where

large numbers of consumers are assembled. Roads and canals are not

intended to raise the value of the land which already supplies the markets, but

(among other purposes) to cheapen the supply, by letting in the produce of

other and more distant lands; and the more effectually this purpose is

attained, the lower rent will be. If we could imagine that the railways and

canals of the United States, instead of only cheapening communication, did

their business so effectually as to annihilate cost of carriage altogether, and

enable the produce of Michigan to reach the market of New York as quickly

and as cheaply as the produce of Long Island-the whole value of all the land

of the United States (except such as lies convenient for building) would be

annihilated; or rather, the best would only sell for the expense of clearing,

and the government tax of a dollar and a quarter per acre; since land in

Michigan, equal to the best in the United States, may be had in unlimited

abundance by that amount of outlay. But it is strange that Mr. Carey should

think this fact inconsistent with the Ricardo theory of rent. Admitting all that

he asserts, it is still true that as long as there is land which yields no rent, the

land which does yield rent, does so in consequence of some advantage which

it enjoys, in fertility or vicinity to markets, over the other; and the measure of

its advantage is also the measure of its rent. And the cause of its yielding rent,is that it possesses a natural monopoly; the quantity of land, as favourably

circumstanced as itself, not being sufficient to supply the market. These

propositions constitute the theory of rent, laid down by Ricardo; and if they

are true, I cannot see that it signifies much whether the rent which the land

yields at the present time, is greater or less than the interest of the capital

which has been laid out to raise its value, together with the interest of the

capital which has been laid out to lower its value.

              Mr. Carey’s objection, however, has somewhat more of ingenuity

than the arguments commonly met with against the theory of rent; a theorem

which may he called the pons asinorum of political economy, for there are, I

am inclined to think, few persons who have refused their assent to it except

from not having thoroughly understood it. The loose and inaccurate way in

which it is often apprehended by those who affect to refute it, is very

remarkable. Many, for instance, have imputed absurdity to Mr. Ricardo’s

theory, because it is absurd to say that the cultivation of inferior land is the

cause of rent on the superior. Mr. Ricardo does not say that it is the

cultivation of inferior land, but the necessity of cultivating it, from the

insufficiency of the superior land to feed a growing population: between

which and the proposition imputed to him there is no less a difference than

that between demand and supply. Others again allege as an objection against

Ricardo, that if all land were of equal fertility, it might still yield a rent. But

Ricardo says precisely the same. He says that if all lands were equally fertile,

those which are nearer to their market than others, and are therefore less

burthened with cost of carriage, would yield a rent equivalent to the

advantage; and that the land yielding no rent would then be, not the least

fertile, but the least advantageously situated, which the wants of the

community required to be brought into cultivation. It is also distinctly a

portion of Ricardo’s doctrine, that even apart from differences of situation,

the land of a country supposed to be of uniform fertility would, all of it, on a

certain supposition, pay rent: namely, if the demand of the community

required that it should all be cultivated, and cultivated beyond the point at

which a further application of capital begins to be attended with a smaller

proportional return. It would be impossible to show that, except by forcible

exaction, the whole land of a country can yield a rent on any other

supposition.

              6. After this view of the nature and causes of rent, let us turn back tothe subject of profits, and bring up for reconsideration one of the propositions

laid down in the last chapter. We there stated, that the advances of the

capitalist, or in other words, the expenses of production, consist solely in

wages of labour; that whatever portion of the outlay is not wages, is previous

profit, and whatever is not previous profit, is wages. Rent, however, being an

element which it is impossible to resolve into either profits or wages, we

were obliged, for the moment, to assume that the capitalist is not required to

pay rent-to give an equivalent for the use of an appropriated natural agent:

and I undertook to show in the proper place, that this is an allowable

supposition, and that rent does not really form any part of the expenses of

production, or of the advances of the capitalist. The grounds on which this

assertion was made are now apparent. It is true that all tenant farmers, and

many other classes of producers, pay rent. But we have now seen, that

whoever cultivates land, paying a rent for it, gets in return for his rent an

instrument of superior power to other instruments of the same kind for which

no rent is paid. The superiority of the instrument is in exact proportion to the

rent paid for it. If a few persons had steam-engines of superior power to all

others in existence, but limited by physical laws to a number short of the

demand, the rent which a manufacturer would be willing to pay for one of

these steam-engines could not he looked upon as an addition to his outlay,

because by the use of it he would save in his other expenses the equivalent of

what it cost him: without it he could not do the same quantity of work, unless

at an additional expense equal to the rent. The same thing is true of land. The

real expenses of production are those incurred on the worst land, or by the

capital employed in the least favourable circumstances. This land or capital

pays, as we have seen, no rent; but the expenses to which it is subject, cause

all other land or agricultural capital to be subjected to an equivalent expense

in the form of rent. Whoever does pay rent gets back its full value in extra

advantages, and the rent which he pays does not place him in a worse

position than, but only in the same position as, his fellow-producer who pays

no rent, but whose instrument is one of inferior efficiency.

              We have now completed the exposition of the laws which regulate

the distribution of the produce of land, labour, and capital, as far as it is

possible to discuss those laws independently of the instrumentality by which

in a civilized society the distribution is effected; the machinery of Exchange

and Price. The more complete elucidation and final confirmation of the laws

which we have laid down, and the deduction of their most importantconsequences, must be preceded by an explanation of the nature and working

of that machinery-a subject so extensive and complicated as to require a

separate Book.

 

 

                                 Book 3: Exchange

 

 

 

 

                                 Chapter 1 – Of Value

 

 

              1. The subject on which we are now about to enter fills so important

and conspicuous a position in political economy, that in the apprehension of

some thinkers its boundaries confound themselves with those of the science

itself. One eminent writer has proposed as a name for Political Economy,

“Catallactics,” or the science of exchanges: by others it has been called the

Science of Values. If these denominations had appeared to me logically

correct, I must have placed the discussion of the elementary laws of value at

the commencement of our inquiry, instead of postponing it to the Third Part;

and the possibility of so long deferring it is alone a sufficient proof that this

view of the nature of Political Economy is too confined. It is true that in the

preceding Books we have not escaped the necessity of anticipating some

small portion of the theory of Value, especially as to the value of labour and

of land. It is nevertheless evident, that of the two great departments of

Political Economy, the production of wealth and its distribution, the

consideration of Value has to do with the latter alone; and with that, only so

far as competition, and not usage or custom, is the distributing agency. The

conditions and laws of Production would be the same as they are, if the

arrangements of society did not depend on Exchange, or did not admit of it.

Even in the present system of industrial life, in which employments are

minutely subdivided, and all concerned in production depend for their

remuneration on the price of a particular commodity, exchange is not the

fundamental law of the distribution of the produce, no more than roads and

carriages are the essential laws of motion, but merely a part of the machinery

for effecting it. To confound these ideas, seems to me, not only a logical, but

a practical blunder. It is a case of the error too common in political economy,

of not distinguishing between necessities arising from the nature of things,

and those created by social arrangements: an error, which appears to me to be

at all times producing two opposite mischiefs; on the one hand, causing

political economists to class the merely temporary truths of their subject

among its permanent and universal laws; and on the other, leading many

persons to mistake the permanent laws of Production (such as those on which

the necessity is grounded of restraining population) for temporary accidentsarising from the existing constitution of society-which those who would

frame a new system of social arrangements, are at liberty to disregard.

              In a state of society, however, in which the industrial system is

entirely founded on purchase and sale, each individual, for the most part,

living not on things in the production of which he himself hears a part, but on

things obtained by a double exchange, a sale followed by a purchase-the

question of Value is fundamental. Almost every speculation respecting the

economical interests of a society thus constituted, implies some theory of

Value: the smallest error on that subject infects with corresponding error all

our other conclusions; and anything vague or misty in our conception of it,

creates confusion and uncertainty in everything else. Happily, there is

nothing in the laws of Value which remains for the present or any future

writer to clear up; the theory of the subject is complete: the only difficulty to

be overcome is that of so stating it as to solve by anticipation the chief

perplexities which occur in applying it: and to do this, some minuteness of

exposition, and considerable demands on the patience of the reader, are

unavoidable. He will be amply repaid, however (if a stranger to these

inquiries), by the ease and rapidity with which a thorough understanding of

this subject will enable him to fathom most of the remaining questions of

political economy.

              2. We must begin by settling our phraseology. Adam Smith, in a

passage often quoted, has touched upon the most obvious ambiguity of the

word value; which, in one of its senses, signifies usefulness, in another,

power of purchasing; in his own language, value in use and value in

exchange. But (as Mr. De Quincey has remarked) in illustrating this double

meaning, Adam Smith has himself fallen into another ambiguity. Things (he

says) which have the greatest value in use have often little or no value in

exchange; which is true, since that which can be obtained without labour or

sacrifice will command no price, however useful or needful it may be. But he

proceeds to add, that things which have the greatest value in exchange, as a

diamond for example, may have little or no value in use. This is employing

the word use, not in the sense in which political economy is concerned with

it, but in that other sense in which use is opposed to pleasure. Political

economy has nothing to do with the comparative estimation of different uses

in the judgment of a philosopher or a moralist. The use of a thing, in political

economy, means its capacity to satisfy a desire, or serve a purpose. Diamondshave this capacity in a high degree, and unless they had it, would not bear any

price. Value in use, or as Mr. De Quincey calls it, teleologic value, is the

extreme limit of value in exchange. The exchange value of a thing may fall

short, to any amount, of its value in use; but that it can ever exceed the value

in use, implies a contradiction; it supposes that persons will give, to possess a

thing, more than the utmost value which they themselves put upon it as a

means of gratifying their inclinations.

              The word Value, when used without adjunct, always means, in

political economy, value in exchange; or as it has been called by Adam Smith

and his successors, exchangeable value, a phrase which no amount of

authority that can be quoted for it can make other than bad English. Mr. De

Quincey substitutes the term Exchange Value, which is unexceptionable.

              Exchange value requires to be distinguished from Price. The words

Value and Price were used as synonymous by the early political economists,

and are not always discriminated even by Ricardo. But the most accurate

modern writers, to avoid the wasteful expenditure of two good scientific

terms on a single idea, have employed Price to express the value of a thing in

relation to money; the quantity of money for which it will exchange. By the

price of a thing, therefore, we shall henceforth understand its value in money;

by the value, or exchange value of a thing, its general power of purchasing;

the command which its possession gives over purchaseable commodities in

general.

              3. But here a fresh demand for explanation presents itself. What is

meant by command over commodities in general? The same thing exchanges

for a great quantity of some commodities, and for a very small quantity of

others. A suit of clothes exchanges for a great quantity of bread, and for a

very small quantity of precious stones. The value of a thing in exchange for

some commodities may be rising, for others falling. A coat may exchange for

less bread this year than last, if the harvest has been bad, but for more glass

or iron, if a tax has been taken off those commodities, or an improvement

made in their manufacture. Has the value of the coat, under these

circumstances, fallen or risen? It is impossible to say. all that can be said is,

that it has fallen in relation to one thing, and risen in respect to another. But

there is another case, in which no one would have any hesitation in saying

what sort of change had taken place in the value of the coat: namely, if the

cause in which the disturbance of exchange values originated, was somethingdirectly affecting the coat itself, and not the bread or the glass. Suppose, for

example, that an invention had been made in machinery, by which broadcloth

could be woven at half the former cost. The effect of this would be to lower

the value of a coat, and if lowered by this cause, it would he lowered not in

relation to bread only or to glass only, but to all purchaseable things, except

such as happened to be affected at the very time by a similar depressing

cause. We should therefore say, that there had been a fall in the exchange

value or general purchasing power of a coat. The idea of general exchange

value originates in the fact, that there really are causes which tend to alter the

value of a thing in exchange for things generally, that is, for all things which

are not themselves acted upon by causes of similar tendency.

              In considering exchange value scientifically, it is expedient to

abstract from it all causes except those which originate in the very

commodity under consideration. Those which originate in the commodities

with which we compare it, affect its value in relation to those commodities;

but those which originate in itself, affect its value in relation to all

commodities. In order the more completely to confine our attention to these

last, it is convenient to assume that all commodities but the one in question

remain invariable in their relative values. When we are considering the causes

which raise or lower the value of corn, we suppose that woollens, silks,

cutlery, sugar, timber, &c., while varying in their power of purchasing corn,

remain constant in the proportions in which they exchange for one another.

On this assumption, any one of them may be taken as a representative of all

the rest; since in whatever manner corn varies in value with respect to any

one commodity, it varies in the same manner and degree with respect to

every other; and the upward or downward movement of its value estimated in

some one thing, is all that need be considered. Its money value, therefore, or

price, will represent as well as anything else its general exchange value, or

purchasing power; and from an obvious convenience, will often be employed

by us in that representative character; with the proviso that money itself do

not vary in its general purchasing power, but that the prices of all things,

other than that which we happen to be considering, remain unaltered.

              4. The distinction between Value and Price, as we have now refined

them, is so obvious, as scarcely to seem in need of any illustration. But in

political economy the greatest errors arise from overlooking the most obvious

truths. Simple as this distinction is, it has consequences with which a readerunacquainted with the subject would do well to begin early by making

himself thoroughly familiar. The following is one of the principal. There is

such a thing as a general rise of prices. All commodities may rise in their

money price. But there cannot be a general rise of values. It is a contradiction

in terms. A can only rise in value by exchanging for a greater quantity of B

and C; in which case these must exchange for a smaller quantity of A. All

things cannot rise relatively to one another. If one-half of the commodities in

the market rise in exchange value, the very terms imply a fall of the other

half; and reciprocally, the fall implies a rise. Things which are exchanged for

one another can no more all fall, or all rise, than a dozen runners can each

outrun all the rest, or a hundred trees all overtop one another. Simple as this

truth is, we shall presently see that it is lost sight of in some of the most

accredited doctrines both of theorists and of what are called practical men.

And as a first specimen, we may instance the great importance attached in the

imagination of most people to a rise or fall of general prices. Because when

the price of any one commodity rises, the circumstance usually indicates a

rise of its value, people have an indistinct feeling when all prices rise, as if all

things simultaneously had risen in value, and all the possessors had become

enriched. That the money prices of all things should rise or fall, provided they

all rise or fall equally, is in itself, and apart from existing contracts, of no

consequence. It affects nobody’s wages, profits, or rent. Every one gets more

money in the one case and less in the other; but of all that is to be bought

with money they get neither more nor less than before. It makes no other

difference than that of using more or fewer counters to reckon by. The only

thing which in this case is really altered in value is money; and the only

persons who either gain or lose are the holders of money, or those who have

to receive or to pay fixed sums of it. There is a difference to annuitants and to

creditors the one way, and to those who are burthened with annuities, or with

debts, the contrary way. There is a disturbance, in short, of fixed money

contracts; and this is an evil, whether it takes place in the debtor’s favour or

in the creditor’s. But as to future transactions there is no difference to any

one. Let it therefore be remembered (and occasions will often arise for calling

it to mind) that a general rise or a general fall of values is a contradiction; and

that a general rise or a general fall of prices is merely tantamount to an

alteration in the value of money, and is a matter of complete indifference,

save in so far as it affects existing contracts for receiving and paying fixed

pecuniary amounts, and (it must be added) as it affects the interests of theproducers of money.

              5. Before commencing the inquiry into the laws of value and price, I

have one further observation to make. I must give warning, once for all, that

the cases I contemplate are those in which values and prices are determined

by competition alone. In so far only as they are thus determined, can they be

reduced to any assignable law. The buyers must be supposed as studious to

buy cheap, as the sellers to sell dear. The values and prices, therefore, to

which our conclusions apply, are mercantile values and prices; such prices as

are quoted in price-currents; prices in the wholesale markets, in which buying

as well as selling is a matter of business; in which the buyers take pains to

know, and generally do know, the lowest price at which an article of a given

quality can he obtained; and in which, therefore, the axiom is true, that there

cannot be for the same article, of the same quality, two prices in the same

market. Our propositions will be true in a much more qualified sense, of retail

prices; the prices paid in shops for articles of personal consumption. For such

things there often are not merely two, but many prices, in different shops, or

even in the same shop; habit and accident having as much to do in the mater

as general causes. Purchases for private use, even by people in business, are

not always made on business principles: the feelings which come into play in

the operation of getting, and in that of spending their income, are often

extremely different. Either from indolence, or carelessness, or because people

think it fine to pay and ask no questions, three-fourths of those who can

afford it give much higher prices than necessary for the things they consume;

while the poor often do the same from ignorance and defect of judgment,

want of time for searching and making inquiry, and not unfrequently from

coercion, open or disguised. For these reasons, retail prices do not follow

with all the regularity which might be expected, the action of the causes

which determine wholesale prices. The influence of those causes is ultimately

felt in the retail markets, and is the real source of such variations in retail

prices as are of a general and permanent character. But there is no regular or

exact correspondence. Shoes of equally good quality are sold in different

shops at prices which differ considerably; and the price of leather may fall

without causing the richer class of buyers to pay less for shoes. Nevertheless,

shoes do sometimes fall in price; and when they do, the cause is always some

such general circumstance as the cheapening of leather: and when leather is

cheapened, even if no difference shows itself in shops frequented by rich

people, the artizan and the labourer generally get their shoes cheaper, andthere is a visible diminution in the contract prices at which shoes are

delivered for the supply of a workhouse or of a regiment. In all reasoning

about prices, the proviso must be understood, “supposing all parties to take

care of their own interest.” In attention to these distinctions has led to

improper applications of the abstract principles of political economy, and still

oftener to an undue discrediting of those principles, through their being

compared with a different sort of facts from those which they contemplate, or

which can fairly be expected to accord with them.

 

 

       Chapter 2 – Of Demand and Supply in Their Relation to Value

 

 

              1. That a thing may have any value in exchange, two conditions are

necessary. It must be of some use; that is (as already explained) it must

conduce to some purpose, satisfy some desire. No one will pay a price, or

part with anything which serves some of his purposes, to obtain a thing which

serves none of them. But, secondly, the thing must not only have some utility,

there must also be some difficulty in its attainment. “Any article whatever,”
                        172
says Mr De Quincey, “to obtain that artificial sort of value which is meant

by exchange value, must begin by offering itself as a means to some desirable

purpose; and secondly, even though possessing incontestably this preliminary

advantage, it will never ascend to an exchange value in cases where it can be

obtained gratuitously and without effort; of which last terms both are

necessary as limitations. For often it will happen that some desirable object

may be obtained gratuitously; stoop, and you gather it at your feet; but still,

because the continued iteration of this stooping exacts a laborious effort, very

soon it is found, that to gather for yourself virtually is not gratuitous. In the

vast forests of the Canadas, at intervals, wild strawberries may be

gratuitously gathered by shiploads: yet such is the exhaustion of a stooping

posture, and of a labour so monotonous, that everybody is soon glad to resign

the service into mercenary hands.”

              As was pointed out in the last chapter, the utility of a thing in the

estimation of the purchaser, is the extreme limit of its exchange value: higher

the value cannot ascend; peculiar circumstances are required to raise it so

high. This topic is happily illustrated by Mr. De Quincey. “Walk into almost

any possible shop, buy the first article you see; what will determine its price?

In the ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, simply the element D— difficulty

of attainment. The other element U, or intrinsic utility, will be perfectly

inoperative. Let the thing (measured by its uses) be, for your Purposes, worth

ten guineas, so that you would rather give ten guineas than lose it; yet, if the

difficulty of producing it be only worth one guinea, one guinea is the price

which it will bear. But still not the less, though U is inoperative, can U be

supposed absent? By no possibility; for, if it had been absent, assuredly you

would not have bought the article even at the lowest price. U acts upon you,though it does not act upon the price. On the other hand, in the hundredth

case, we will suppose the circumstances reversed: you are on Lake Superior

in a steam-boat, making your way to an unsettled region 800 miles a-head of

civilization, and consciously with no chance at all of purchasing any luxury

whatsoever, little luxury or big luxury, for the space of ten years to come.

One fellow-passenger, whom you will part with before sunset, has a powerful

musical snuff-box; knowing by experience the power of such a toy over your

own feelings, the magic with which at times it lulls your agitations of mind,

you are vehemently desirous to purchase it. In the hour of leaving London

you had forgot to do so; here is a final chance. But the owner, aware of your

situation not less than yourself, is determined to operate by a strain pushed to

the very uttermost upon U, upon the intrinsic worth of the article in your

individual estimate for your individual purposes. He will not hear of D as any

controlling power or mitigating agency in the case; and finally, although at

six guineas a-piece in London or Paris you might have loaded a waggon with

such boxes, you pay sixty rather than lose it when the last knell of the clock

has sounded, which summons you to buy now or to forfeit for ever. Here, as

before, only one element is operative; before it was D, now it is U. But after

all, D was not absent, though inoperative. The inertness of D allowed U to

put forth its total effect. The practical compression of D being withdrawn, U

springs up like water in a pump when released from the pressure of air. Yet

still that D was present to your thoughts, though the price was otherwise

regulated, is evident; both because U and D must coexist in order to found

any case of exchange value whatever, and because undeniably you take into

very particular consideration this D, the extreme difficulty of attainment

(which here is the greatest possible, viz. an impossibility) before you consent

to have the price racked up to U. The special D has vanished; but it is

replaced in your thoughts by an unlimited D. Undoubtedly you have

submitted to U in extremity as the regulating force of the price; but it was

under a sense of D’s latent presence. Yet D is so far from exerting any

positive force, that the retirement of D from all agency whatever on the price-

this it is which creates as it were a perfect vacuum, and through that vacuum

U rushes up to its highest and ultimate gradation.”

              This case, in which the value is wholly related by the necessities or

desires of the purchaser, is the case of strict and absolute monopoly; in

which, the article desired being only obtainable from one person, he can

exact any equivalent, short of the point at which no purchaser could be found.But it is not a necessary consequence, even of complete monopoly, that the

value should be forced up to this ultimate limit; as will be seen when we have

considered the law of value in so far as depending on the other element,

difficulty of attainment.

              2. The difficulty of attainment which determines value, is not always

the same kind of difficulty. It sometimes consists in an absolute limitation of

the supply. There are things of which it is physically impossible to increase

the quantity beyond certain narrow limits. Such are those wines which can be

grown only in peculiar circumstances of soil, climate, and exposure. Such

also are ancient sculptures; pictures by old masters; rare books or coins, or

other articles of antiquarian curiosity. Among such may also be reckoned

houses and building-ground, in a town of definite extent (such as Venice, or

any fortified town where fortifications are necessary to security); the most

desirable sites in any town whatever; houses and parks peculiarly favoured by

natural beauty, in places where that advantage is uncommon. Potentially, all

land whatever is a commodity of this class; and might be practically so, in

countries fully occupied and cultivated.

              But there is another category (embracing the majority of all things

that are bought and sold), in which the obstacle to attainment consists only in

the labour and expense requisite to produce the commodity. Without a certain

labour and expense it cannot be had: but when any one is willing to incur

these, there needs be no limit to the multiplication of the product. If there

were labourers enough and machinery enough, cottons, woollens, or linens

might be produced by thousands of yards for every single yard now

manufactured. There would be a point, no doubt, where further increase

would be stopped by the incapacity of the earth to afford more of the

material. But there is no need, for any purpose of political economy, to

contemplate a time when this ideal limit could become a practical one.

              There is a third case, intermediate between the two preceding, and

rather more complex, which I shall at present merely indicate, but the

importance of which in political economy is extremely great. There are

commodities which can be multiplied to an indefinite extent by labour and

expenditure, but not by a fixed amount of labour and expenditure. Only a

limited quantity can be produced at a given cost: if more is wanted, it must be

produced at a greater cost. To this class, as has been often repeated,

agricultural produce belongs; and generally all the rude produce of the earth;and this peculiarity is a source of very important consequences; one of which

is the necessity of a limit to population; and another, the payment of rent.

              3. These being the three classes, in one or other of which all things

that are bought and sold must take their place, we shall consider them in their

order. And first, of things absolutely limited in quantity, such as ancient

sculptures or pictures.

              Of such things it is commonly said, that their value depends upon

their scarcity: but the expression is not sufficiently definite to serve our

purpose. Others say, with somewhat greater precision, that the value depends

on the demand and the supply. But even this statement requires much

explanation, to make it a clear exponent of the relation between the value of a

thing, and the causes of which that value is an effect.

              The supply of a commodity is an intelligible expression: it means the

quantity offered for sale; the quantity that is to be had, at a given time and

place, by those who wish to purchase it. But what is meant by the demand?

Not the mere desire for the commodity. A beggar may desire a diamond; but

his desire, however great, will have no influence on the price. Writers have

therefore given a more limited sense to demand, and have defined it, the wish

to possess, combined with the power of purchasing. To distinguish demand in

this technical sense, from the demand which is synonymous with desire, they
                                      173
call the former effectual demand. After this explanation, it is usually

supposed that there remains no further difficulty, and that the value depends

upon the ratio between the effectual demand, as thus defined, and the supply.

              These phrases, however, fail to satisfy any one who requires clear

ideas, and a perfectly precise expression of them. Some confusion must

always attach to a phrase so inappropriate as that of a ratio between two

things not of the same denomination. What ratio can there be between a

quantity and a desire, or even a desire combined with a power? A ratio

between demand and supply is only intelligible if by demand we mean the

quantity demanded, and if the ratio intended is that between the quantity

demanded and the quantity supplied. But again, the quantity demanded is not

a fixed quantity, even at the same time and place; it varies according to the

value; if the thing is cheap, there is usually a demand for more of it than

when it is dear. The demand, therefore, partly depends on the value. But it

was before laid down that the value depends on the demand. From thiscontradiction how shall we extricate ourseLves? How solve the paradox, of

two things, each depending upon the other?

              Though the solution of these difficulties is obvious enough, the

difficulties themselves are not fanciful; and I bring them forward thus

prominently, because I am certain that they obscurely haunt every inquirer

into the subject who has not openly faced and distinctly realized them.

Undoubtedly the true solution must have been frequently given, though I

cannot call to mind any one who had given it before myself, except the

eminently clear thinker and skilful expositor, J.B. Say. I should have

imagined, however, that it must be familiar to all political economists, if the

writings of several did not give evidence of some want of clearness on the

point, and if the instance of Mr. De Quincey did not prove that the complete

non-recognition and implied denial of it are compatible with great intellectual

ingenuity, and close intimacy with the subject matter.

              4. Meaning, by the word demand, the quantity demanded, and

remembering that this is not a fixed quantity, but in general varies according

to the value, let us suppose that the demand at some particular time exceeds

the supply, that is, there are persons ready to buy, at the market value, a

greater quantity than is offered for sale. Competition takes place on the side

of the buyers, and the value rises: but how much? in the ratio (some may

suppose) of the deficiency: if the demand exceeds the supply by one-third,

the value rises one-third. By no means: for when the value has risen one-

third, the demand may still exceed the supply; there may, even at that higher

value, be a greater quantity wanted than is to be had; and the competition of

buyers may still continue. If the article is a necessary of life, which, rather

than resign, people are willing to pay for at any price, a deficiency of one-
                                                                174
third may raise the price to double, triple, or quadruple. Or, on the contrary,

the competition may cease before the value has risen in even the proportion

of the deficiency. A rise, short of one-third, may place the article beyond the

means, or beyond the inclinations, of purchasers to the full amount. At what

point, then, will the rise be arrested? At the point, whatever it be, which

equalizes the demand and the supply: at the price which cuts off the extra

third from the demand, or brings forward additional sellers sufficient to

supply it. When, in either of these ways, or by a combination of both, the

demand becomes equal and no more than equal to the supply, the rise of

value will stop.              The converse case is equally simple. instead of a demand beyond the

supply, let us suppose a supply exceeding the demand. The competition will

now be on the side of the sellers: the extra quantity can only find a market by

calling forth an additional demand equal to itself. This is accomplished by

means of cheapness; the value falls, and brings the article within the reach of

more numerous customers, or induces those who were already consumers to

make increased purchases. The fall of value required to re-establish equality,

is different in different cases. The kinds of things in which it is commonly

greatest are at the two extremities of the scale; absolute necessaries, or those

peculiar luxuries, the taste for which is confined to a small class. In the case

of food, as those who have already enough do not require more on account of

its cheapness, but rather expend in other things what they save in food, the

increased consumption occasioned by cheapness, carries off, as experience
                                                                                        175
shows, only a small part of the extra supply caused by an abundant harvest;

and the fall is practically arrested only when the farmers withdraw their corn,

and hold it back in hopes of a higher price; or by the operations of speculators

who buy corn when it is cheap, and store it up to be brought out when more

urgently wanted. Whether the demand and supply are equalized by an

increased demand, the result of cheapness, or by withdrawing a part of the

supply, equalized they are in either case.

              Thus we see that the idea of a ratio, as between demand and supply,

is out of place, and has no concern in the matter: the proper mathematical

analogy is that of an equation. Demand and supply, the quantity demanded

and the quantity supplied, will be made equal. if unequal at any moment,

competition equalizes them, and the manner in which this is done is by an

adjustment of the value. If the demand increases, the value rises; if the

demand diminishes, the value falls: again, if the supply falls off, the value

rises; and falls if the supply is increased. The rise or the fall continues until

the demand and supply are again equal to one another.. and the value which a

commodity will bring in any market, is no other than the value which, in that

market, gives a demand just sufficient to carry off the existing or expected

supply.

              This, then, is the Law of Value, with respect to all commodities not

susceptible of being multiplied at pleasure. Such commodities, no doubt, are

exceptions. There is another law for that much larger class of things, which

admit of indefinite multiplication. But it is not the less necessary to conceivedistinctly and grasp firmly the theory of this exceptional case. In the first

place, it will be found to be of great assistance in rendering the more common

case intelligible. And in the next place, the principle of the exception

stretches wider, and embraces more cases, than might at first be supposed.

              5. There are but few commodities which are naturally and

necessarily limited in supply. But any commodity whatever may be

artificially so. Any commodity may be the subject of a monopoly: like tea, in

this country, up to 1834; tobacco in France, opium in British India, at present.

The price of a monopolized commodity is commonly supposed to be

arbitrary; depending on the will of the monopolist, and limited only (as in Mr.

De Quincey’s case of the musical box in the wilds of America) by the buyer’s

extreme estimate of its worth to himself. This is in one sense true, but forms

no exception, nevertheless, to the dependence of the value on supply and

demand. The monopolist can fix the value as high as he pleases, short of what

the consumer either could not or would not pay’. but he can only do so by

limiting the supply. The Dutch East India Company obtained a monopoly

price for the produce of the Spice Islands, but to do so they were obliged, in

good seasons, to destroy a portion of the crop. Had they persisted in selling

all that they produced, they must have forced a market by reducing the price,

so low, perhaps, that they would have received for the larger quantity a less

total return than for the smaller: at least they showed that such was their

opinion by destroying the surplus. Even on Lake Superior, Mr. De Quincey’s

huckster could not have sold his box for sixty guineas, if he had possessed

two musical boxes and desired to sell them both. Supposing the cost price of

each to be six guineas, he would have taken seventy for the two in preference

to sixty for one; that is, although his monopoly was the closest possible, he

would have sold the boxes at thirty-five guineas each, notwithstanding that

sixty was not beyond the buyer’s estimate of the article for his purposes.

Monopoly value, therefore, does not depend on any peculiar principle, but is

a mere variety of the ordinary case of demand and supply.

              Again, though there are few commodities which are at all times and

for ever unsusceptible of increase of supply, any commodity whatever may

be temporarily so; and with some commodities this is habitually the case.

Agricultural produce, for example, cannot be increased in quantity before the

next harvest; the quantity of corn already existing in the world, is all that can

be had for sometimes a year to come. During that interval, corn is practicallyassimilated to things Of which the quantity cannot be increased. In the case

of most commodities, it requires a certain time to increase their quantity; and

if the demand increases, then until a corresponding supply can he brought

forward, that is, until the supply can accommodate itself to the demand, the

value will so rise as to accommodate the demand to the supply.

              There is another case, the exact converse of this. There are some

articles of which the supply may be indefinitely increased, but cannot be

rapidly diminished. There are things so durable that the quantity in existence

is at all times very great in comparison with the annual produce. Gold, and

the more durable metals, are things of this sort; and also houses. The supply

of such things might be at once diminished by destroying them; but to do this

could only be the interest of the possessor if he had a monopoly of the article,

and could repay himself for the destruction of a part by the increased value of

the remainder. The value, therefore, of such things may continue for a long

time so low, either from excess of supply or falling off in the demand, as to

put a complete stop to further production; the diminution of supply by

wearing out being so slow a process, that a long time is requisite, even under

a total suspension of production, to restore the original value. During that

interval the value will be regulated solely by supply and demand, and will

rise very gradually as the existing stock wears out, until there is again a

remunerating value, and production resumes its course.

              Finally, there are commodities of which, though capable of being

increased or diminished to a great, and even an unlimited extent, the value

never depends upon anything but demand and supply. This is the case, in

particular, with the commodity Labour; of the value of which we have treated

copiously in the preceding Book: and there are many cases besides, in which

we shall find it necessary to call in this principle to solve difficult questions

of exchange value. This will be particularly exemplified when we treat of

International Values; that is, of the terms of interchange between things

produced in different countries, or, to speak more generally, in distant places.

But into these questions we cannot enter, until we shall have examined the

case of commodities which can be increased in quantity indefinitely and at

pleasure; and shall have determined by what law, other than that of Demand

and Supply, the permanent or average values of such commodities are

regulated. This we shall do in the next chapter.

        165
               Logic of Political Economy, p. 13.        166
               Adam Smith, who introduced the expression “effectual demand”,

employed it to denote the demand of those who are willing and able to give

for the commodity what he calls its natural price, that is, the price which will

enable it to be permanently produced and brought to market. — See his

chapter on Natural and Market Price (book i. ch. 7)

        167
               “The price of corn in this country has risen from 100 to 200 per

cent and upwards, when the utmost computed deficiency of the crops has not

been more than between one-sixth and one-third below an average, and when

that deficiency has been relieved by foreign supplies. If there should be a

deficiency of the crops amounting to one-third, without any surplus from a

former year, and without any chance of relief by importation, the price might

rise five, six, or even tenfold.” — Tooke’s History of Prices, vol. i. pp. 13–5.

        168
               See Tooke, and the Report of the Agricultural Committee of

1821.

 

 

         Chapter 3 – Of Cost of Production in Its Relation to Value

 

 

              1. When the production of a commodity is the effect of labour and

expenditure, whether the commodity is susceptible of unlimited

multiplication or not, there is a minimum value which is the essential

condition of its being permanently produced. The value at any particular time

is the result of supply and demand; and is always that which is necessary to

create a market for the existing supply. But unless that value is sufficient to

repay the Cost of Production, and to afford, besides, the ordinary expectation

of profit, the commodity will not continue to be produced. Capitalists will not

go on permanently producing at a loss. They will not even go on producing at

a profit less than they can live on. Persons whose capital is already embarked,

and cannot be easily extricated, will persevere for a considerable time without

profit, and have been known to persevere even at a loss, in hope of better

times. But they will not do so indefinitely, or when there is nothing to

indicate that times are likely to improve. No new capital will be invested in

an employment, unless there be an expectation not only of some profit, but of

a profit as great (regard being had to the degree of eligibility of the

employment in other respects) as can be hoped for in any other occupation at

that time and place. When such profit is evidently not to be had, if people do

not actually withdraw their capital, they at least abstain from replacing it

when consumed. The cost of production, together with the ordinary profit,

may therefore be called the necessary price, or value, of all things made by

labour and capital. Nobody willingly produces in the prospect of loss.

Whoever does so, does it under a miscalculation, which he corrects as fast as

he is able.

              When a commodity is not only made by labour and capital, but can

be made by them in indefinite quantity, this Necessary Value, the minimum

with which the producers will be content, is also, if competition is free and

active, the maximum which they can expect. If the value of a commodity is

such that it repays the cost of production not only with the customary, but

with a higher rate of profit, capital rushes to share in this extra gain, and by

increasing the supply of the article, reduces its value. This is not a mere

supposition or surmise, but a fact familiar to those conversant withcommercial operations. Whenever a new line of business presents itself,

offering a hope of unusual profits, and whenever any established trade or

manufacture is believed to be yielding a greater profit than customary, there

is sure to be in a short time so large a production or importation of the

commodity, as not only destroys the extra profit, but generally goes beyond

the mark, and sinks the value as much too low as it had before been raised too

high; until the oversupply is corrected by a total or partial suspension of
                                              176
further production. As already intimated, these variations in the quantity

produced do not presuppose or require that any person should change his

employment. Those whose business is thriving, increase their produce by

availing themselves more largely of their credit, while those who are not

making the ordinary profit, restrict their operations, and (in manufacturing

phrase) work short time. In this mode is surely and speedily effected the

equalization, not of profits perhaps, but of the expectations of profit, in

different occupations.

              As a general rule, then, things tend to exchange for one another at

such values as will enable each producer to be repaid the cost of production

with the ordinary profit; in other words, such as will give to all producers the

same rate of profit on their outlay. But in order that the profit may be equal

where the outlay, that is, the cost of production, is equal, things must on the

average exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost of production:

things of which the cost of production is the same, must be of the same value.

For only thus will an equal outlay yield an equal return. If a farmer with a

capital equal to 1 000 quarters of corn, can produce 1 200 quarters, yielding

him a profit of 20 per cent; whatever else can be produced in the same time

by a capital of 1000 quarters, must be worth, that is, must exchange for, 1200

quarters, otherwise the producer would gain either more or less than 20 per

cent.

              Adam Smith and Ricardo have called that value of a thing which is

proportional to its cost of production, its Natural Value (or its Natural Price).

They meant by this, the point about which the value oscillates, and to which

it always tends to return; the centre value, towards which, as Adam Smith

expresses it, the market value of a thing is constantly gravitating; and any

deviation from which is but a temporary irregularity, which, the moment it

exists, sets forces in motion tending to correct it. On an average of years

sufficient to enable the oscillations on one side of the central line to becompensated by those on the other, the market value agrees with the natural

value; but it very seldom coincides exactly with it at any particular time. The

sea everywhere tends to a level; but it never is at an exact level; its surface is

always ruffled by waves, and often agitated by storms. It is enough that no

point, at least in the open sea, is permanently higher than another. Each place

is alternately elevated and depressed; but the ocean preserves its level.

              2. The latent influence by which the values of things are made to

conform in the long run to the cost of production, is the variation that would

otherwise take place in the supply of the commodity. The supply would be

increased if the thing continued to sell above the ratio of its cost of

production, and would be diminished if it fell below that ratio. But we must

not therefore suppose it to be necessary that the supply should actually be

either diminished or increased. Suppose that the cost of production of a thing

is cheapened by some mechanical invention, or increased by a tax. The value

of the thing would in a little time, if not immediately, fall in the one case, and

rise in the other; and it would do so, because if it did not, the supply would in

the one case be increased, until the price fell, in the other diminished, until it

rose. For this reason, and from the erroneous notion that value depends on the

proportion between the demand and the supply, many persons suppose that

this proportion must be altered whenever there is any change in the value of

the commodity; that the value cannot fall through a diminution of the cost of

production, unless the supply is permanently increased; nor rise, unless the

supply is permanently diminished. But this is not the fact: there is no need

that there should be any actual alteration of supply; and when there is, the

alteration, if permanent, is not the cause, but the consequence of the alteration

in value. If, indeed, the supply could not be increased, no diminution in the

cost of production would lower the value: but there is by no means any

necessity that it should. The mere possibility often suffices; the dealers are

aware of what would happen, and their mutual competition makes them

anticipate the result by lowering the price. Whether there will be a greater

permanent supply of the commodity after its production has been cheapened,

depends on quite another question, namely, on whether a greater quantity is

wanted at the reduced value. Most commonly a greater quantity is wanted,
                                                            177
but not necessarily. “A man,” says Mr De Quincey,  “buys an article of

instant applicability to his own purposes the more readily and the more

largely as it happens to be cheaper. Silk handkerchiefs having fallen to half-

price, he will buy, perhaps, in threefold quantity; but he does not buy moresteam-engines because the price is lowered. His demand for steam-engines is

almost always predetermined by the circumstances of his situation. So far as

he considers the cost at all, it is much more the cost of working this engine

than the cost upon its purchase. But there are many articles for which the

market is absolutely and merely limited by a preexisting system, to which

those articles are attached as subordinate parts or members. How could we

force the dials or faces of timepieces by artificial cheapness to sell more

plentifully than the inner works or movements of such timepieces? Could the

sale of wine-vaults be increased without increasing the sale of wine? Or the

tools of shipwrights find an enlarged market whilst shipbuilding was

stationary?.... Offer to a town of 3000 inhabitants a stock of hearses, no

cheapness will tempt that town into buying more than one. Offer a stock of

yachts, the chief cost lies in manning, victualling, repairing; no diminution

upon the mere price to a purchaser will tempt into the market any man whose

habits and propensities had not already disposed him to such a purchase. So

of professional costume for bishops, lawyers, students at Oxford.” Nobody

doubts, however, that the price and value of all these things would be

eventually lowered by any diminution of their cost of production; and

lowered through the apprehension entertained of new competitors, and an

increased, supply. though the great hazard to which a new competitor would

expose himself, in an article not susceptible of any considerable extension of

its market, would enable the established dealers to maintain their original

prices much longer than they could do in an article offering more

encouragement to competition.

              Again, reverse the case, and suppose the cost of production

increased, as for example by laying a tax on the commodity. The value would

rise; and that, probably, immediately. Would the supply be diminished? Only

if the increase of value diminished the demand. Whether this effect followed,

would soon appear, and if it did, the value would recede somewhat, from

excess of supply, until the production was reduced, and would then rise

again. There are many articles for which it requires a very considerable rise

of price, materially to reduce the demand; in particular, articles of necessity,

such as the habitual food of the people; in England, wheaten bread: of which

there is probably almost as much consumed, at the present cost price, as there

would be with the present population at a price considerably lower. Yet it is

especially in such things that dearness or high price is popularly confounded

with scarcity. Food may be dear from scarcity, as after a bad harvest; but thedearness (for example) which is the effect of taxation, or of corn laws, has

nothing whatever to do with insufficient supply: such causes do not much

diminish the quantity of food in a country. it is other things rather than food

that are diminished in quantity by them, since, those who pay more for food

not having so much to expend otherwise, the production of other things

contracts itself to the limits of a smaller demand.

              It is, therefore, strictly correct to say, that the value of things which

can be increased in quantity at pleasure, does not depend (except

accidentally, and during the time necessary for production to adjust itself,)

upon demand and supply; on the contrary, demand and supply depend upon

it. There is a demand for a certain quantity of the commodity at its natural or

cost value, and to that the supply in the long run endeavours to conform.

When at any time it fails of so conforming, it is either from miscalculation, or

from a change in some of the elements of the problem: either in the natural

value, that is, in the cost of production; or in the demand, from an alteration

in public taste or in the number or wealth of the consumers. These causes of

disturbance are very liable to occur, and when any one of them does occur,

the market value of the article ceases to agree with the natural value. The real

law of demand and supply, the equation between them, still holds good: if a

value different from the natural value be necessary to make the demand equal

to the supply, the market value will deviate from the natural value; but only

for a time; for the permanent tendency of supply is to conform itself to the

demand which is found by experience to exist for the commodity when

selling at its natural value. If the supply is either more or less than this, it is so

accidentally, and affords either more or less than the ordinary rate of profit;

which, under free and active competition, cannot long continue to he the case.

              To recapitulate: demand and supply govern the value of all things

which cannot be indefinitely increased; except that even for them, when

produced by industry, there is a minimum value, determined by the cost of

production. But in all things which admit of indefinite multiplication, demand

and supply only determine the perturbations of value, during a period which

cannot exceed the length of time necessary for altering the supply. While thus

ruling the oscillations of value, they themselves obey a superior force, which

makes value gravitate towards Cost of Production, and which would settle it

and keep it there, if fresh disturbing influences were not continuity arising to

make it again deviate. To pursue the same strain of metaphor, demand andsupply always rush to an equilibrium, but the condition of stable equilibrium

is when things exchange for each other according to their cost of production,

or, in the expression we have used, when things are at their Natural Value.

        169
               Supra, p. 407.

        170
               Logic of Political Economy, pp. 230–1.

 

 

            Chapter 4 – Ultimate Analysis of Cost of Production

 

 

              1. The component elements of Cost of Production have been set
                                          178
forth in the First Part of this enquiry. The principal of them, and so much

the principal as to be nearly the sole, we found to be Labour. What the

production of a thing costs to its producer, or its series of producers, is the

labour expended in producing it. If we consider as the producer the capitalist

who makes the advances, the word Labour may be replaced by the word

Wages: what the produce costs to him, is the wages which he has had to pay.

At the first glance indeed this seems to be only a part of his outlay, since he

has not only paid wages to labourers, but has likewise provided them with

tools, materials, and perhaps buildings. These tools, materials, and buildings,

however, were produced by labour and capital; and their value, like that of

the article to the production of which they are subservient, depends on cost of

production, which again is resolvable into labour. The cost of production of

broadcloth does not wholly consist in the wages of weavers; which alone are

directly paid by the cloth manufacturer. It consists also of the wages of

spinners and woolcombers, and, it may be added, of shepherds, all of which

the clothier has paid for in the price of yarn. It consists too of the wages of

builders and brickmakers, which he has reimbursed in the contract price of

erecting his factory. It partly consists of the wages of machine-makers, iron-

founders, and miners. And to these must be added the wages of the carriers

who transported any of the means and appliances of the production to the

place where they were to be used, and the product itself to the place where it

is to be sold.

              The value of commodities, therefore, depends principally (we shallpresently see whether it depends solely) on the quantity of labour required for

their production; including in the idea of production, that of conveyance to
                                                179
the market. “In estimating,” says Ricardo, “the exchangeable value of

stockings, for example, we shall find that their value, comparatively with

other things, depends on the total quantity of labour necessary to manufacture

them and bring them to market. First, there is the labour necessary to

cultivate the land on which the raw cotton is grown; secondly, the labour of

conveying the cotton to the country where the stockings are to be

manufactured, which includes a portion of the labour bestowed in building

the ship in which it is conveyed, and which is charged in the freight of the

goods; thirdly, the labour of the spinner and weaver; fourthly, a portion of the

labour of the engineer, smith, and carpenter, who erected the buildings and

machinery by the help of which they are made; fifthly, the labour of the retail

dealer and of many others, whom it is unnecessary further to particularize.

The aggregate sum of these various kinds of labour, determines the quantity

of other things for which these stockings will exchange, while the same

consideration of the various quantities of labour which have been bestowed

on those other things, will equally govern the portion of them which will be

given for the stockings.

              “To convince ourselves that this is the real foundation of

exchangeable value, let us suppose any improvement to be made in the means

of abridging labour in any one of the various processes through which the

raw cotton must pass before the manufactured stockings come to the market

to be exchanged for other things; and observe the effects which will follow. If

fewer men were required to cultivate the raw cotton, or if fewer sailors were

employed in navigating, or shipwrights in constructing, the ship in which it

was conveyed to us; if fewer hands were employed in raising the buildings

and machinery, or if these, when raised, were rendered more efficient; the

stockings would inevitably fall in value, and command less of other things.

They would fall, because a less quantity of labour was necessary to their

production, and would therefore exchange for a smaller quantity of those

things in which no such abridgement of labour had been made.

              “Economy in the use of labour never fails to reduce the relative

value of a commodity, whether the saving be in the labour necessary to the

manufacture of the commodity itself, or in that necessary to the formation of

the capital, by the aid of which it is produced. In either case the price ofstockings would fall, whether there were fewer men employed as bleachers,

spinners, and weavers, persons immediately necessary to their manufacture;

or as sailors, carriers, engineers, and smiths, persons more indirectly

concerned. In the one case, the whole saving of labour would fall on the

stockings, because that portion of labour was wholly confined to the

stockings; in the other, a portion only would fall on the stockings, the

remainder being applied to all those other commodities, to the production of

which the buildings, machinery, and carriage, were subservient.”

              2. It will have been observed that Ricardo expresses himself as if the

quantity of labour which it costs to produce a commodity and bring it to

market, were the only thing on which its value depended. But since the cost

of production to the capitalist is not labour but wages, and since wages may

be either greater or less, the quantity of labour being the same; it would seem

that the value of the product cannot be determined solely by the quantity of

labour, but by the quantity together with the remuneration; and that values

must partly depend on wages.

              In order to decide this point, it must be considered, that value is a

relative term: that the value of a commodity is not a name for an inherent and

substantive quality of the thing itself, but means the quantity of other things

which can be obtained in exchange for it. The value of one thing, must

always be understood relatively to some other thing, or to things in general.

Now the relation of one thing to another cannot be altered by any cause

which affects them both alike. A rise or fall of general wages is a fact which

affects all commodities in the same manner, and therefore affords no reason

why they should exchange for each other in one rather than in another

proportion. To suppose that high wages make high values, is to suppose that

there can be such a thing as general high values. But this is a contradiction in

terms : the high value of some things is synonymous with the low value of

others. The mistake arises from not attending to values, but only to prices.

Though there is no such thing as a general rise of values, there is such a thing

as a general rise of prices. As soon as we form distinctly the idea of values,

we see that high or low wages can have nothing to do with them; but that

high wages make high prices, is a popular and widely-spread opinion. The

whole amount of error involved in this proposition can only be seen

thoroughly when we come to the theory of money; at present we need only

say that if it be true, there can be no such thing as a real rise of wages; for ifwages could not rise without a proportional rise of the price of everything,

they could not, for any substantial purpose, rise at all. This surely is a

sufficient reductio ad absurdum, and shows the amazing folly of the

propositions which may and do become, and long remain, accredited

doctrines of popular political economy. It must be remembered too that

general high prices, even supposing them to exist, can be of no use to a

producer or dealer, considered as such; for if they increase his money returns,

they increase in the same degree all his expenses. There is no mode in which

capitalists can compensate themselves for a high cost of labour, through any

action on values or prices. It cannot be prevented from taking its effect on

low profits. If the labourers really get more, that is, get the produce of more

labour, a smaller percentage must remain for profit. From this Law of

Distribution, resting as it does on a law of arithmetic, there is no escape. The

mechanism of Exchange and Price may hide it from us, but is quite powerless

to alter it.

              3. Although, however, general wages, whether high or low, do not

affect values, yet if wages are higher in one employment than another, or if

they rise and fall permanently in one employment without doing so in others,

these inequalities do really operate upon values. The causes which make

wages vary from one employment to another, have been considered in a

former chapter. When the wages of an employment permanently exceed the

average rate, the value of the thing produced will, in the same degree, exceed

the standard determined by mere quantity of labour. Things, for example,

which are made by skilled labour, exchange for the produce of a much

greater quantity of unskilled labour; for no reason but because the labour is

more highly paid. If, through the extension of education, the labourers

competent to skilled employment were so increased in number as to diminish

the difference between their wages and those of common labour, all things

produced by labour of the superior kind would fall in value, compared with

things produced by common labour, and these might be said therefore to rise

in value. We have before remarked that the difficulty of passing from one

class of employments to a class greatly superior, has hitherto caused the

wages of all those classes of labourers who are separated from one another by

any very marked barrier, to depend more than might be supposed upon the

increase of the population of each class considered separately; and that the

inequalities in the remuneration of labour are much greater than could exist if

the competition of the labouring people generally could be broughtpractically to bear on each particular employment. It follows from this that

wages in different employments do not rise or fall simultaneously, but are,

for short and sometimes even for long periods, nearly independent of one

another. All such disparities evidently alter the relative costs of production of

different commodities, and will therefore be completely represented in their

natural or average value.

              It thus appears that the maxim laid down by some of the best

political economists, that wages do not enter into value, is expressed with

greater latitude than the truth warrants, or than accords with their own

meaning. Wages do enter into value. The relative wages of the labour

necessary for producing different commodities, affect their value just as

much as the relative quantities of labour. It is true, the absolute wages paid

have no effect upon values; but neither has the absolute quantity of labour. If

that were to vary simultaneously and equally in all commodities, values

would not be affected. If, for instance, the general efficiency of all labour

were increased, so that all things without exception could be produced in the

same quantity as before with a smaller amount of labour, no trace of this

general diminution of cost of production would show itself in the values of

commodities. Any change which might take place in them would only

represent the unequal degrees in which the improvement affected different

things; and would consist in cheapening those in which the saving of labour

had been the greatest, while those in which there had been some, but a less

saving of labour, would actually rise in value. In strictness, therefore, wages

of labour have as much to do with value as quantity of labour: and neither

Ricardo nor any one else has denied the fact. In considering, however, the

causes of variations in value, quantity of labour is the thing of chief

importance; for when that varies, it is generally in one or a few commodities

at a time, but the variations of wages (except passing fluctuations) are usually

general, and have no considerable effect on value.

              4. Thus far of labour, or wages, as an element in cost of production.

But in our analysis, in the First Book, of the requisites of production, we

found that there is another necessary element in it besides labour. There is

also capital; and this being the result of abstinence, the produce, or its value,

must be sufficient to remunerate, not only all the labour required, but the

abstinence of all the persons by whom the remuneration of the different

classes of labourers was advanced. The return for abstinence is Profit. Andprofit, we have also seen, is not exclusively the surplus remaining to the

capitalist after he has been compensated for his outlay, but forms, in most

cases, no unimportant part of the outlay itself. The flax-spinner, part of whose

expenses consists of the purchase of flax and of machinery, has had to pay, in

their price, not only the wages of the labour by which the flax was grown and

the machinery made, but the profits of the grower, the flax-dresser, the miner,

the ironfounder, and the machine-maker. All these profits, together with those

of the spinner himself, were again advanced by the weaver, in the price of his

material, linen yarn: and along with them the profit of a fresh set of machine-

makers, and of the miners and iron-workers who supplied them with their

metallic material. All these advances form part of the cost of production of

linen. Profits, therefore, as well as wages, enter into the cost of production

which determines the value of the produce.

              Value, however, being purely relative, cannot depend upon absolute

profits, no more than upon absolute wages, but upon relative profits only.

High general profits cannot, any more than high general wages, be a cause of

high values, because high general values are an absurdity and a contradiction.

In so far as profits enter into the cost of production of all things, they cannot

affect the value of any. It is only by entering in a greater degree into the cost

of production of some things than of others, that they can have any influence

on value.

              For example, we have seen that there are causes which necessitate a

permanently higher rate of profit in certain employments than in others.

There must be a compensation for superior risk, trouble, and

disagreeableness. This can only be obtained by selling the commodity at a

value above that which is due to the quantity of labour necessary for its

production. If gunpowder exchanged for other things in no higher ratio than

that of the labour required from first to last for producing it, no one would set

up a powder-mill. Butchers are certainly a more prosperous class than bakers,

and do not seem to be exposed to greater risks, since it is not remarked that

they are oftener bankrupts. They seem, therefore, to obtain higher profits,

which can only arise from the more limited competition caused by the

unpleasantness, and to a certain degree, the unpopularity, of their trade. But

this higher profit implies that they sell their commodity at a higher value than

that due to their labour and outlay. All inequalities of profit which are

necessary and permanent, are represented in the relative values of thecommodities.

              5. Profits, however, may enter more largely into the conditions of

production of one commodity than of another, even though there be no

difference in the rate of profit between the two employments. The one

commodity may be called upon to yield profit during a longer period of time

than the other. The example by which this case is usually illustrated is that of

wine. Suppose a quantity of wine, and a quantity of cloth, made by equal

amounts of labour, and that labour paid at the same rate. The cloth does not

improve by keeping; the wine does. Suppose that, to attain the desired

quality, the wine requires to be kept five years. The producer or dealer will

not keep it, unless at the end of five years he can sell it for as much more than

the cloth, as amounts to five years’ profit, accumulated at compound interest.

The wine and the cloth were made by the same original outlay. Here then is a

case in which the natural values, relatively to one another, of two

commodities, do not conform to their cost of production alone, but to their

cost of production plus something else. Unless, indeed, for the sake of

generality in the expression, we include the profit which the wine-merchant

foregoes during the five years, in the cost of production of the wine: looking

upon it as a kind of additional outlay, over and above his other advances, for

which outlay he must be indemnified at last.

              All commodities made by machinery are assimilated, at least

approximately, to the wine in the preceding example. In comparison with

things made wholly by immediate labour, profits enter more largely into their

cost of production. Suppose two commodities, A and B, each requiring a year

for its production, by means of a capital which we will on this occasion

denote by money, and suppose to be 1000l. A is made wholly by immediate

labour, the whole 1000l. being expended directly in wages. B is made by

means of labour which costs 500l. and a machine which cost 500l., and the

machine is worn out by one year’s use. The two commodities will be exactly

of the same value; which, if computed in money, and if profits are 20 per cent

per annum, will be 1200l. But of this 1200l., in the case of A, only 200l., or

one-sixth, is profit: while in the case of B there is not only the 200l., but as

much of 500l. (the price of the machine) as consisted of the profits of the

machine-maker; which, if we suppose the machine also to have taken a year

for its production, is again one-sixth. So that in the case of A only one-sixth

of the entire return is profit, whilst in B the element of profit comprises notonly a sixth of the whole, but an additional sixth of a large part.

              The greater the proportion of the whole capital which consists of

machinery, or buildings, or material, or anything else which must be provided

before the immediate labour can commence, the more largely will profits

enter into the cost of production. It is equally true, though not so obvious at

first sight, that greater durability in the portion of capital which consists of

machinery or buildings, has precisely the same effect as a greater amount of

it. As we just supposed one extreme case, of a machine entirely worn out by a

year’s use, let us now suppose the opposite and still more extreme case of a

machine which lasts for ever, and requires no repairs. In this case, which is as

well suited for the purposed of illustration as if it were a possible one, it will

be unnecessary that the manufacturer should ever be repaid the 500l. which

he gave for the machine, since he has always the machine itself, worth 500l.;

but he must be paid, as before, a profit on it. The commodity B, therefore,

which in the case previously supposed was sold for 1200l. of which sum

1000l. were to replace the capital and 200l. were profit, can now be sold for

700l., being 500l. to replace wages, and 200l. profit on the entire capital.

Profit, therefore, enters into the value of B in the ratio of 200l. out of 700l.,

being two-sevenths of the whole, or 28 4/7 per cent, while in the case of A, as

before, it enters only in the ratio of one-sixth, or 16 2/3 per cent. The case is

of course purely ideal, since no machinery or other fixed capital lasts for

ever; but the more durable it is, the nearer it approaches to this ideal case, and

the more largely does profit enter into the return. If, for instance, a machine

worth 500l. loses one-fifth of its value by each year’s use, l00l. must be

added to the return to make up this loss, and the price of the commodity will

be 8OOl. Profit therefore will enter into it in the ratio of 200l. to 800l., or

one-fourth, which is still a much higher proportion than one-sixth, or 200l. in

1200l., as in case A. From the unequal proportion in which, in different

employments, profits enter into the advances of the capitalist, and therefore

into the returns required by him, two consequences follow in regard to value.

One is, that commodities do not exchange in the ratio simply of the quantities

of labour required to produce them; not even if we allow for the unequal rates

at which different kinds of labour are permanently remunerated. We have

already illustrated this by the example of wine : we shall now further

exemplify it by the case of commodities made by machinery. Suppose, as

before, an article A made by a thousand pounds’ worth of immediate labour.

But instead of B, made by 500l. worth of immediate labour and a machineworth 500l., let us suppose C, made by 500l. worth of immediate labour with

the aid of a machine which has been produced by another 500l. worth of

immediate labour: the machine requiring a year for making, and worn out by

a year’s use; profits being as before 20 per cent. A and C are made by equal

quantities of labour, paid at the same rate: A costs 1000l. worth of direct

labour; C, only 500l. worth, which however is made up to 1000l. by the

labour expended in the construction of the machine. If labour, or its

remuneration, were the sole ingredient of cost of production, these two things

would exchange for one another. But will they do so? Certainly not. The

machine having been made in a year by an outlay of 500l., and profits being

20 per cent, the natural price of the machine is 600l.: making an additional

100l. which must be advanced, over and above his other expenses, by the

manufacturer of C, and repaid to him with a profit of 20 per cent. While,

therefore, the commodity A is sold for 1200l., C cannot be permanently sold

for less than 1320l.

              A second consequence is, that every rise or fall of general profits

will have an effect on values. Not indeed by raising or lowering them

generally, (which, as we have so often said, is a contradiction and an

impossibility): but by altering the proportion in which the values of things are

affected by the unequal lengths of time for which profit is due. When two

things, though made by equal labour, are of unequal value because the one is

called upon to yield profit for a greater number of years or months than the

other; this difference of value will be greater when profits are greater, and

less when they are less. The wine which has to yield five years’ profit more

than the cloth, will surpass it in value much more if profits are 40 per cent,

than if they are only 20. The commodities A and C, which, though made by

equal quantities of labour, were sold for 1200l. and 1320l., a difference of 10

per cent, would, if profits had been only half as much, have been sold for

1100l. and 1155l., a difference of only 5 per cent.

              It follows from this, that even a general rise of wages, when it

involves a real increase in the cost of labour, does in some degree influence

values. It does not affect them in the manner vulgarly supposed, by raising

them universally. But an increase in the cost of labour, lowers profits; and

therefore lowers in natural value the things into which profits enter in a

greater proportion than the average, and raises those into which they enter in

a less proportion than the average. All commodities in the production ofwhich machinery bears a large part, especially if the machinery is very

durable, are lowered in their relative value when profits fall; or, what is

equivalent, other things are raised in value relatively to them. This truth is

sometimes expressed in a phraseology more plausible than sound, by saying

that a rise of wages raises the value of things made by labour, in comparison

with those made by machinery. But things made by machinery, just as much

as any other things, are made by labour, namely, the labour which made the

machinery itself: the only difference being that profits enter somewhat more

largely into the production of things for which machinery is used, though the

principal item of the outlay is still labour. It is better, therefore, to associate

the effect with fall of profits than with rise of wages; especially as this last

expression is extremely ambiguous, suggesting the idea of an increase of the

labourer’s real remuneration, rather than of what is alone to the purpose here,

namely, the cost of labour to its employer.

              6. Besides the natural and necessary elements in cost of production-

labour and profits-there are others which are artificial and casual, as for

instance a tax. The tax on malt is as much a part of the cost of production of

that article as the wages of the labourers. The expenses which the law

imposes, as well as those which the nature of things imposes, must be

reimbursed with the ordinary profit from the value of the produce, or the

things will not continue to be produced. But the influence of taxation on

value is subject to the same conditions as the influence of wages and of

profits. It is not general taxation, but differential taxation, that produces the

effect. If all productions were taxed so as to take an equal percentage from all

profits, relative values would be in no way disturbed. If only a few

commodities were taxed, their value would rise: and if only a few were left

untaxed, their value would fall. If half were taxed and the remainder untaxed,

the first half would rise and the last would fall relatively to each other. This

would be necessary in order to equalize the expectation of profit in all

employments, without which the taxed employments would ultimately, if not

immediately, be abandoned. But general taxation, when equally imposed, and

not disturbing the relations of different productions to one another, cannot

produce any effect on values.

              We have thus far supposed that all the means and appliances which

enter into the cost of production of commodities, are things whose own value

depends on their cost of production. Some of them, however, may belong tothe class of things which cannot be increased ad libitum in quantity, and

which therefore, if the demand goes beyond a certain amount, command a

scarcity value. The materials of many of the ornamental articles

manufactured in Italy are the substances called rosso, giallo, and verde antico,

which, whether truly or falsely I know not, are asserted to be solely derived

from the destruction of ancient columns and other ornamental structures; the

quarries from which the stone was originally cut being exhausted, or their
                    180
locality forgotten. A material of such a nature, if in much demand, must be

at a scarcity value; and this value enters into the cost of production, and

consequently into the value, of the finished article. The time seems to be

approaching when the more valuable furs will come under the influence of a

scarcity value of the material. Hitherto the diminishing number of the animals

which produce them, in the wildernesses of Siberia, and on the coasts of the

Esquimaux Sea, has operated on the value only through the greater labour

which has become necessary for securing any given quantity of the article,

since, without doubt, by employing labour enough, it might still be obtained

in much greater abundance for some time longer.

              But the case in which scarcity value chiefly operates in adding to

cost of production, is the case of natural agents. These, when unappropriated,

and to be had for the taking, do not enter into cost of production, save to the

extent of the labour which may be necessary to fit them for use. Even when

appropriated, they do not (as we have already seen) bear a value from the

mere fact of the appropriation, but only from scarcity, that is, from limitation

of supply. But it is equally certain that they often do bear a scarcity value.

Suppose a fall of water, in a place where there are more mills wanted than

there is water-power to supply them, the use of the fall of water will have a

scarcity value, sufficient either to bring the demand down to the supply, or to

pay for the creation of an artificial power, by steam or otherwise, equal in

efficiency to the water-power.

              A natural agent being a possession in perpetuity, and being only

serviceable by the products resulting from its continued employment, the

ordinary mode of deriving benefit from its ownership is by an annual

equivalent, paid by the person who uses it, from the proceeds of its use. This

equivalent always might be, and generally is, termed rent. The question,

therefore, respecting the influence which the appropriation of natural agents

produces on values, is often stated in this form: Does Rent enter into Cost ofProduction? and the answer of the best political economists is in the negative.

The temptation is strong to the adoption of these sweeping expressions, even

by those who are aware of the restrictions with which they must be taken; for

there is no denying that they stamp a general principle more firmly on the

mind, than if it were hedged round in theory with all its practical limitations.

But they also puzzle and mislead, and create an impression unfavourable to

political economy, as if it disregarded the evidence of facts. No one can deny

that rent sometimes enters into cost of production. If I buy or rent a piece of

ground, and build a cloth manufactory on it, the ground-rent forms

legitimately a part of my expenses of production, which must be repaid by

the product. And since all factories are built on ground, and most of them in

places where ground is peculiarly valuable, the rent paid for it must, on the

average, be compensated in the values of all things made in factories. In what

sense it is true that rent does not enter into the cost of production or affect the

value of agricultural produce, will be shown in the succeeding chapter.

        171
               Supra, pp. 31–2.

        172
               Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, ch. 1,sect.3.

        173
               Some of these quarries, I believe, have been rediscovered, and are

again worked.

 

 

                 Chapter 5 – Of Rent, in Its Relation to Value

 

 

              1. We have investigated the laws which determine the value of two

classes of commodities: the small class which, being limited to a definite

quantity, have their value entirely determined by demand and supply, save

that their cost of production (if they have any) constitutes a minimum below

which they cannot permanently fall; and the large class, which can be

multiplied ad libitum by labour and capital, and of which the cost of

production fixes the maximum as well as the minimum at which they can

permanently exchange. But there is still a third kind of commodities to be

considered: those which have, not one, but several costs of production: which

can always be increased in quantity by labour and capital, but not by the same

amount of labour and capital; of which so much may be produced at a given

cost, but a further quantity not without a greater cost. These commodities

form an intermediate class, partaking of the character of both the others. The

principal of them is agricultural produce. We have already made abundant

reference to the fundamental truth, that in agriculture, the state of the art

being given, doubling the labour does not double the produce; that if an

increased quantity of produce is required, the additional supply is obtained at

a greater cost than the first. Where a hundred quarters of corn are all that is at

present required from the lands of a given village, if the growth of population

made it necessary to raise a hundred more, either by breaking up worse land

now uncultivated, or by a more elaborate cultivation of the land already under

the plough, the additional hundred, or some part of them at least, might cost

double or treble as much per quarter as the former supply.

              If the first hundred quarters were all raised at the same expense (only

the best land being cultivated); and if that expense would be remunerated

with the ordinary profit by a price of 20s. the quarter; the natural price of

wheat, so long as no more than that quantity was required, would be 20s.; and

it could only rise above, or fall below that price, from vicissitudes of seasons,

or other casual variations in supply. But if the population of the district

advanced, a time would arrive when more than a hundred quarters would be

necessary to feed it. We must suppose that there is no access to any foreign

supply. By the hypothesis, no more than a hundred quarters can be producedin the district, unless by either bringing worse land into cultivation, or

altering the system of culture to a more expensive one. Neither of these

things will be done without a rise in price. ThiS rise of price will gradually be

brought about by the increasing demand. So long as the price has risen, but

not risen enough to repay with the ordinary profit the cost of producing an

additional quantity, the increased value of the limited supply partakes of the

nature of a scarcity value. Suppose that it will not answer to cultivate the

second best land, or land of the second degree of remoteness, for a less return

than 25s. the quarter; and that this price is also necessary to remunerate the

expensive operations by which an increased produce might be raised from

land of the first quality. If so, the price will rise, through the increased

demand, until it reaches 25s. That will now be the natural price; being the

price without which the quantity, for which society has a demand at that

price, will not be produced. At that price, however, society can go on for

some time longer; could go on perhaps for ever, if population did not

increase. The price, having attained that point, will not again permanently

recede (though it may fall temporarily from accidental abundance); nor will it

advance further, so long as society can obtain the supply it requires without a

second increase of the cost of production.

              I have made use of Price in this reasoning, as a convenient symbol of

Value, from the greater familiarity of the idea; and I shall continue to do so as

far as may appears to be necessary.

              In the case supposed, different portions of the supply of corn have

different costs of production. Though the 20, or 50, or 150 quarters additional

have been produced at a cost proportional to 25s., the original hundred

quarters per annum are still produced at a cost only proportional to 20s. This

is self-evident, if the original and the additional supply are produced on

different qualities of land. It is equally true if they are produced on the same

land. Suppose that land of the best quality, which produced 100 quarters at

20s., has been made to produce 150 by an expensive process, which it would

not answer to undertake without a price of 25s. The cost which requires 25s.

is incurred for the sake of 50 quarters alone: the first hundred might have

continued for ever to be produced at the original cost, and with the benefit, on

that quantity, of the whole rise of price caused by the increased demand: no

one, therefore, will incur the additional expense for the sake of the additional

fifty, unless they alone will pay for the whole of it. The fifty, therefore, willbe produced at their natural price, proportioned to the cost of their

production; while the other hundred will now bring in 5s. a quarter more than

their natural price-than the price corresponding to, and sufficing to

remunerate, their lower cost of production.

              If the production of any, even the smallest, portion of the supply,

requires as a necessary condition a certain price, that price will be obtained

for all the rest. We are not able to buy one loaf cheaper than another because

the corn from which it was made, being grown on a richer soil, has cost less

to the grower. The value, therefore, of an article (meaning its natural, which

is the same with its average value) is determined by the cost of that portion of

the supply which is produced and brought to market at the greatest expense.

This is the Law of Value of the third of the three classes into which all

commodities are divided.

              2. If the portion of produce raised in the most unfavourable

circumstances, obtains a value proportioned to its cost of production; all the

portions raised in more favorable circumstances, selling as they must do at

the same value, obtain a value more than proportioned to their cost of

production. Their value is not, correctly speaking, a scarcity value, for it is

determined by the circumstances of the production of the commodity, and not

by the degree of dearness necessary for keeping down the demand to the level

of a limited supply. The owners, however, of those portions of the produce

enjoy a privilege; they obtain a value which yields them more than the

ordinary profit. If this advantage depends upon any special exemption, such

as being free from a tax, or upon any personal advantages, physical or

mental, Or any peculiar process only known to themselves, or upon the

possession of a greater capital than other people, or upon various other things

which might be enumerated, they retain it to themselves as an extra gain, over

and above the general profits of capital, of the nature, in some sort, of a

monopoly profit. But when, as in the case which we are more particularly

considering, the advantage depends on the possession of a natural agent of

peculiar quality, as for instance of more fertile land than that which

determines the general value of the commodity; and when this natural agent

is not owned by themselves; the person who does own it, is able to exact

from them, in the form of rent, the whole extra gain derived from its use. We

are thus brought by another road to the Law of Rent, investigated in the

concluding chapter of the Second Book. Rent, we again see, is the differencebetween the unequal returns to different parts of the capital employed on the

soil. Whatever surplus any portion of agricultural capital produces, beyond

what is produced by the same amount of capital on the worst soil, or under

the most expensive mode of cultivation, which the existing demands of

society compel a recourse to; that surplus will naturally be paid as rent from

that capital, to the owner of the land on which it is employed.

              It was long thought by political economists, among the rest even by

Adam Smith, that the produce of land is always at a monopoly value, because

(they said) in addition to the ordinary rate of profit, it always yields

something further for rent. This we now see to be erroneous. A thing cannot

be at a monopoly value, when its supply can be increased to an indefinite

extent if we are only willing to incur the cost. If no more corn than the

existing quantity is grown, it is because the value has not risen high enough

to remunerate any one for growing it. Any land (not reserved for other uses,

or for pleasure ) which at the existing price, and by the existing processes,

will yield the ordinary profit, is tolerably certain, unless some artificial

hindrance intervenes, to be cultivated, although nothing may be left for rent.

As long as there is any land fit for cultivation, which at the existing price

cannot be profitably cultivated at all, there must be some land a little better,

which will yield the ordinary profit, but allow nothing for rent: and that land,

if within the boundary of a farm, will be cultivated by the farmer; if not so,

probably by the proprietor, or by some other person on sufferance. Some

such land at least, under cultivation, there can scarcely fail to be.

              Rent, therefore, forms no part of the cost of production which

determines the value of agricultural produce. Circumstances no doubt may be

conceived in which it might do so, and very largely too. We can imagine a

country so fully peopled, and with all its cultivable soil so completely

occupied, that to produce any additional quantity would require more labour

than the produce would feed: and if we suppose this to be the condition of the

whole world, or of a country debarred from foreign supply, then, if

population continued increasing, both the land and its produce would really

rise to a monopoly or scarcity price. But this state of things never can have

really existed anywhere, unless possibly in some small island cut off from the

rest of the world; nor is there any danger whatever that it should exist. It

certainly exists in no known region at present. Monopoly, we have seen, can

take effect on value, only through limitation of supply. In all countries of anyextent there is more cultivable land than is yet cultivated; and while there is

any such surplus, it is the same thing, so far as that quality of land is

concerned, as if there were an infinite quantity. What is practically limited in

supply is only the better qualities; and even for those, so much rent cannot be

demanded as would bring in the competition of the lands not yet in

cultivation; the rent of a piece of land must be somewhat less than the whole

excess of its productiveness over that of the best land which it is not yet

profitable to cultivate; that is, it must be about equal to the excess above the

worst land which it is profitable to cultivate. The land or the capital most

unfavourably circumstanced among those actually employed, pays no rent;

and that land or capital determines the cost of production which regulates the

value of the whole produce. Thus rent is, as we have already seen, no cause

of value, but the price of the privilege which the inequality of the returns to

different portions of agricultural produce confers on all except the least

favoured portions.

              Rent, in short, merely equalizes the profits of different farming

capitals, by enabling the landlord to appropriate all extra gains occasioned by

superiority of natural advantages. If all landlords were unanimously to forego

their rent, they would but transfer it to the farmers, without benefiting the

consumer; for the existing price of corn would still be an indispensable

condition of the production of part of the existing supply, and if a part

obtained that price the whole would obtain it. Rent, therefore, unless

artificially increased by restrictive laws, is no burthen on the consumer: it

does not raise the price of corn, and is no otherwise a detriment to the public,

than inasmuch as if the state had retained it, or imposed an equivalent in the

shape of a land-tax, it would then have been a fund applicable to general

instead of private advantage.

              3. Agricultural productions are not the only commodities which have

several different costs of production at once, and which, in consequence of

that difference, and in proportion to it, afford a rent. Mines are also an

instance. Almost all kinds of raw material extracted from the interior of the

earthmetal, coals, precious stones, &c., are obtained from mines differing

considerably in fertility, that is, yielding very different quantities of the

product to the same quantity of labour and capital. This being the case, it is

an obvious question, why are not the most fertile mines so worked as to

supply the whole market? No such question can arise as to land; it being self-evident, that the most fertile lands could not possibly be made to supply the

whole demand of a fully-peopled country; and even of what they do yield, a

part is extorted from them by a labour and outlay as great as that required to

grow the same amount on worse land. But it is not so with mines; at least, not

universally. There are, perhaps, cases in which it is impossible to extract from

a particular vein, in a given time, more than a certain quantity of ore, because

there is only a limited surface of the vein exposed, on which more than a

certain number of labourers cannot be simultaneously employed. But this is

not true of all mines. In collieries, for example, some other cause of limitation

must be sought for. In some instances the owners limit the quantity raised, in

order not too rapidly to exhaust the mine.. in others there are said to be

combinations of owners, to keep up a monopoly price by limiting the

production. Whatever be the causes, it is a fact that mines of different degrees

of richness are in operation, and since the value of the produce must be

proportional to the cost of production at the worst mine (fertility and situation

taken together), it is more than proportional to that of the best. All mines

superior in produce to the worst actually worked, will yield, therefore, a rent

equal to the excess. They may yield more; and the worst mine may itself

yield a rent. Mines being comparatively few, their qualities do not graduate

gently into one another, as the qualities of land do; and the demand may be

such as to keep the value of the produce considerably above the cost of

production at the worst mine now worked, without being sufficient to bring

into operation a still worse. During the interval, the produce is really at a

scarcity value.

              Fisheries are another example. Fisheries in the open sea are not

appropriated, but fisheries in lakes or rivers almost always are so, and

likewise oyster-beds or other particular fishing grounds on coasts. We may

take salmon fisheries as an example of the whole class. Some rivers are far

more productive in salmon than others. None, however, without being

exhausted, can supply more than a very limited demand. The demand of a

country like England can only be supplied by taking salmon from many

different rivers of unequal productiveness, and the value must be sufficient to

repay the cost of obtaining the fish from the least productive of these. All

others, therefore, will if appropriated afford a rent equal to the value of their

superiority. Much higher than this it cannot be, if there are salmon rivers

accessible which from distance or inferior productiveness have not yet

contributed to supply the market. If there are not, the value, doubtless, mayrise to a scarcity rate, and the worst fisheries in use may then yield a

considerable rent.

              Both in the case of mines and of fisheries, the natural order of events

is liable to be interrupted by the opening of a new mine, or a new fishery, of

superior quality to some of those already in use. The first effect of such an

incident is an increase of the supply; which of course lowers the value to call

forth an increased demand. This reduced value may be no longer sufficient to

remunerate the worst of the existing mines or fisheries, and these may

consequently be abandoned. If the superior mines or fisheries, with the

addition of the one newly opened, produce as much of the commodity as is

required at the lower value corresponding to their lower cost of production,

the fall of value will be permanent, and there will be a corresponding fall in

the rents of those mines or fisheries which are not abandoned. In this case,

when things have permanently adjusted themselves, the result will be, that the

scale of qualities which supply the market will have been cut short at the

lower end, while a new insertion will have been made in the scale at some

point higher up; and the worst mine or fishery in use — the one which

regulates the rents of the superior qualities and the value of the commodity —

will be a mine or fishery of better quality than that by which they were

previously regulated.

              Land is used for other purposes than agriculture, especially for

residence; and when so used, yields a rent, determined by principles similar

to those already laid down. The ground rent of a building, and the rent of a

garden or park attached to it, will not be less than the rent which the same

land would afford in agriculture: but may be greater than this to an indefinite

amount; the surplus being either in consideration of beauty or of

convenience, the convenience often consisting in superior facilities for

pecuniary gain. Sites of remarkable beauty are generally limited in supply,

and therefore, if in great demand, are at a scarcity value. Sites superior only

in convenience are governed as to their value by the ordinary principles of

rent. The ground rent of a house in a small village is but little higher than the

rent of a similar patch of ground in the open fields: but that of a shop in

Cheapside will exceed these, by the whole amount at which people estimate

the superior facilities of money-making in the more crowded place. The rents

of wharfage, dock and harbour room, waterpower, and many other privileges,

may be analysed on similar principles.              4. Cases of extra profit analogous to rent, are more frequent in the

transactions of industry than is sometimes supposed. Take the case, for

example, of a patent, or exclusive privilege for the use of a process by which

cost of production is lessened. If the value of the product continues to be

regulated by what it costs to those who are obliged to persist in the old

process, the patentee will make an extra profit equal to the advantage which

his process possesses over theirs. This extra profit is essentially similar to

rent, and sometimes even assumes the form of it; the patentee allowing to

other producers the use of his privilege, in consideration of an annual

payment. So long as he, and those whom he associates in the privilege, do not

produce enough to supply the whole market, so long the original cost of

production, being the necessary condition of producing a part, will regulate

the value of the whole; and the patentee will be enabled to keep up his rent to

a full equivalent for the advantage which his process gives him. In the

commencement indeed he will probably forego a part of this advantage for

the sake of underselling others: the increased supply which he brings forward

will lower the value, and make the trade a bad one for those who do not share

in the privilege: many of whom therefore will gradually retire, or restrict their

operations, or enter into arrangements with the patentee: as his supply

increases theirs will diminish, the value meanwhile continuing slightly

depressed. But if he stops short in his operations before the market is wholly

supplied by the new process, things will again adjust themselves to what was

the natural value before the invention was made, and the benefit of the

improvement will accrue solely to the patentee.

              The extra gains which any producer or dealer obtains through

superior talents for business, or superior business arrangements, are very

much of a similar kind. If all his competitors had the same advantages, and

used them, the benefit would be transferred to their customers, through the

diminished value of the article: he only retains it for himself because he is

able to bring his commodity to market at a lower cost, while its value is

determined by a higher. All advantages, in fact, which one competitor has

over another, whether natural or acquired, whether personal or the result of

social arrangements, bring the commodity, so far, into the Third Class, and

assimilate the possessor of the advantage to a receiver of rent. Wages and

profits represent the universal elements in production, while rent may be

taken to represent the differential and peculiar: any difference in favour of

certain producers, or in favour of production in certain circumstances, beingthe source of a gain, which, though not called rent unless paid periodically by

one person to another, is governed by laws entirely the same with it. The

price paid for a differential advantage in producing a commodity, cannot

enter into the general cost of production of the commodity.

              A commodity may no doubt, in some contingencies, yield a rent

even under the most disadvantageous circumstances of its production: but

only when it is, for the time, in the condition of those commodities which are

absolutely limited in supply, and is therefore selling at a scarcity value; which

never is, nor has been, nor can be, a permanent condition of any of the great

rent-yielding commodities: unless through their approaching exhaustion, if

they are mineral products (coal for example), or through an increase of

population, continuing after a further increase of production becomes

impossible: a contingency, which the almost inevitable progress of human

culture and improvement in the long interval which has first to elapse, forbids

us to consider as probable.

 

 

                 Chapter 6 – Summary of the Theory of Value

 

 

              1. We have now attained a favourable point for looking back, and

taking a simultaneous view of the space which we have traversed since the

commencement of the present Book. The following are the principles of the

theory of Value, so far as we have yet ascertained them.

              I. Value is a relative term. The value of a thing means the quantity of

some other thing, or of things in general, which it exchanges for. The values

of all things can never, therefore, rise or fall simultaneously. There is no such

thing as a general rise or a general fall of values. Every rise of value supposes

a fall, and every fall a rise.

              II. The temporary or market value of a thing, depends on the demand

and supply; rising as the demand rises, and falling as the supply rises. The

demand, however, varies with the value, being generally greater when the

thing is cheap than when it is dear; and the value always adjusts itself in such

a manner, that the demand is equal to the supply.

              III. Besides their temporary value, things have also a permanent, or

as it may be called, a Natural Value, to which the market value, after every

variation, always tends to return; and the oscillations compensate for one

another, so that, on the average, commodities exchange at about their natural

value.

              IV. The natural value of some things is a scarcity value; but most

things naturally exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost of

production, or at what may be termed their Cost Value.

              V. The things which are naturally and permanently at a scarcity

value, are those of which the supply cannot be increased at all, or not

sufficiently to satisfy the whole of the demand which would exist for them at

their cost value.

              VI. A monopoly value means a scarcity value. Monopoly cannot

give a value to anything except through a limitation of the supply.

              VII. Every commodity of which the supply can be indefinitelyincreased by labour and capital, exchanges for other things proportionally to

the cost necessary for producing and bringing to market the most costly

portion of the supply required. The natural value is synonymous with the

Cost Value, and the cost value of a thing, means the cost value of the most

costly portion of it.

              VIII. Cost of Production consists of several elements, some of which

are constant and universal, others occasional. The universal elements of cost

of production are, the wages of the labour, and the profits of the capital. The

occasional elements are taxes, and any extra cost occasioned by a scarcity

value of some of the requisites.

              IX. Rent is not an element in the cost of production of the

commodity which yields it; except in the cases (rather conceivable than

actually existing) in which it results from, and represents, a scarcity value.

But when land capable of yielding rent in agriculture is applied to some other

purpose, the rent which it would have yielded is an element in the cost of

production of the commodity which it is employed to produce.

              X. Omitting the occasional elements; things which admit of

indefinite increase, naturally and permanently exchange for each other

according to the comparative amount of wages which must be paid for

producing them, and the comparative amount of profits which must be

obtained by the capitalists who pay those wages.

              XI. The comparative amount of wages does not depend on what

wages are in themselves. High wages do not make high values, nor low

wages low values. The comparative amount of wages depends partly on the

comparative quantities of labour required, and partly on the comparative rates

of its remuneration.

              XII. So, the comparative rate of profits does not depend on what

profits are in themselves; nor do high or low profits make high or low values.

It depends partly on the comparative lengths of time during which the capital

is employed, and partly on the comparative rate of profits in different

employments.

              XIII. If two things are made by the same quantity of labour, and that

labour paid at the same rate, and if the wages of the labourer have to be

advanced for the same space of time, and the nature of the employment doesnot require that there be a permanent difference in their rate of profit; then,

whether wages and profits be high or low, and whether the quantity of labour

expended be much or little, these two things will, on the average, exchange

for one another.

              XIV. If one of two things commands, on the average, a greater value

than the other, the cause must be that it requires for its production either a

greater quantity of labour, or a kind of labour permanently paid at a higher

rate; or that the capital, or part of the capital, which suPports that labour,

must be advanced for a longer period; or lastly, that the production is

attended with some circumstance which requires to be compensated by a

permanently higher rate of profit.

              XV. Of these elements, the quantity of labour required for the

production is the most important: the effect of the others is smaller, though

none of them are insignificant.

              XVI. The lower profits are, the less important become the minor

elements of cost of production, and the less do commodities deviate from a

value proportioned to the quantity and quality of the labour required for their

production.

              XVII. But every fall of profits lowers, in some degree, the cost value

of things made with much or durable machinery, and raises that of things

made by hand; and every rise of profits does the reverse.

              2. Such is the general theory of Exchange Value. It is necessary,

however, to remark that this theory contemplates a system of production

carried on by capitalists for profit, and not by labourers for subsistence. In

proportion as we admit this last supposition — and in most counties we must

admit it, at least in respect of agricultural produce, to a very great extent-such

of the preceding theorems as relate to the dependence of value on cost of

production will require modification. Those theorems are all grounded on the

supposition, that the producer’s object and aim is to derive a profit from his

capital. This canted, it follows that he must sell his commodity at the price

which will afford the ordinary rate of profit, that is to say, it must exchange

for other commodities at its cost value. But the peasant proprietor, the

metayer, and even the peasant-farmer or allotment-holder — the labourer,

under whatever name, producing on his own account-is seeking, not an

investment for his little capital, but an advantageous employment for his timeand labour. His disbursements, beyond his own maintenance and that of his

family, are so small, that nearly the whole proceeds of the sale of the produce

are wages of labour. When he and his family have been fed from the produce

of the farm (and perhaps clothed with materials grown thereon, and

manufactured in the family) he may, in respect of the supplementary

remuneration derived from the sale of the surplus produce, be compared to

those labourers who, deriving their subsistence from an independent source,

can afford to sell their labour at any price which is to their minds worth the

exertion. A peasant, who supports himself and his family with one portion of

his produce, will often sell the reminder very much below what would be its

cost value to the capitalist.

              There is, however, even in this case, a minimum, or inferior limit, of

value. The produce which he carries to market, must bring in to him the value

of all necessaries which he is compelled to purchase; and it must enable him

to pay his rent. Rent, under peasant cultivation, is not governed by the

principles set forth in the chapters immediately preceding, but is either

determined by custom, as in the case of metayers, or, if fixed by competition,

depends on the ratio of population to land. Rent, therefore, in this case, is an

element of cost of production. The peasant must work until he has cleared his

rent and the price of all purchased necessaries. After this, he will go on

working only if he can sell the produce for such a price as will overcome his

aversion to labour.

              The minimum just mentioned is what the peasant must obtain in

exchange for the whole of his surplus produce. But inasmuch as this surplus

is not a fixed quantity, but may be either greater or less according to the

degree of his industry, a minimum value for the whole of it does not give any

minimum value for a definite quantity of the commodity. In this state of

things, therefore, it can hardly be sid, that the value depends at all on cost of

production. It depends entirely on demand and supply, that is, on the

proportion between the quantity of surplus food which the peasants choose to

produce, and the numbers of the non-agricultural, or rather of the non-peasant

population. If the buying class were numerous and the growing class lazy,

food might be permanently at a scarcity price. I am not aware that this case

has anywhere a real existence. If the growing class is energetic and

industrious, and the buyers few, food will be extremely cheap. This also is a

rare case, though some parts of France perhaps approximate to it. Thecommon cases are, either that, as in Ireland until lately, the peasant class is

indolent and the buyers few, or the peasants industrious and the town

population numerous and opulent, as in Belgium, the north of Italy, and parts

of Germany. The price of the produce will adjust itself to these varieties of

circumstances, unless modified, as in many cases it is, by the competition of

producers who are not peasants, or by the prices of foreign markets.

              3. Another anomalous case is that of slave-grown produce: which

presents, however, by no means the same degree of complication. The slave-

owner is a capitalist, and his inducement to production consists in a profit on

his capital. This profit must amount to the ordinary rate. In respect to his

expenses, he is in the same position as if his slaves were free labourers

working with their present efficiency, and were hired with wages equal to

their present cost. If the cost is less in proportion to the work done, than the

wages of free labour would be, so much the greater are his profits: but if all

other producers in the country possess the same advantage, the values of

commodities will not be at all affected by it. The only case in which they can

be affected, is when the privilege of cheap labour is confined to particular

branches of production, free labourers at proportionally higher wages being

employed in the remainder. In this case, as in all cases of permanent

inequality between the wages of different employments, prices and values

receive the impress of the inequality. Slave-grown will exchange for non-

slave-grown commodities in a less ratio than that of the quantity of labour

required for their production; the value of the former will be less, of the latter

greater, than if slavery did not exist.

              The further adaptation of the theory of value to the varieties of

existing or possible industrial systems may be left with great advantage to the

intelligent reader. It is well said by Montesquieu, “Il ne faut pas toujours

tellement epuiser un sujet, qu’on ne laisse rien a faire au lecteur. Il ne s’agit
                                            181
pas de faire lire, mais de faire penser.” 

        174
               Esprit des Lois, xi, ad finem.

 

 

                               Chapter 7 – Of Money

 

 

              1. Having proceeded thus far in ascertaining the general laws of

Value, without introducing the idea of Money (except occasionally for

illustration,) it is time that we should now superadd that idea, and consider in

what manner the principles of the mutual interchange of commodities are

affected by the use of what is termed a Medium of Exchange.

              In order to understand the manifold functions of a Circulating

Medium, there is no better way than to consider what are the principal

inconveniences which we should experience if we had not such a medium.

The first and most obvious would be the want of a common measure for

values of different sorts. If a tailor had only coats, and wanted to buy bread or

a horse, it would be very troublesome to ascertain how much bread he ought

to obtain for a coat, or how many coats he should give for a horse. The

calculation must be recommenced on different data, every time he bartered

his coats for a different kind of article; and there could be no current price, or

regular quotations of value. Whereas now each thing has a current price in

money, and he gets over all difficulties by reckoning his coat at 4l. or 5l., and

a four-pound loaf at 6d. or 7d. As it is much easier to compare different

lengths by expressing them in a common language of feet and inches, so it is

much easier to compare values by means of a common language of pounds,

shillings, and pence. In no other way can values be arranged one above

another in a scale; in no other can a person conveniently calculate the sum of

his possessions; and it is easier to ascertain and remember the relations of

many things to one thing, than their innumerable cross relations with one

another. This advantage of having a common language in which values may

be expressed, is, even by itself, so important, that some such mode of

expressing and computing them would probably be used even if a pound or a

shilling did not express any real thing, but a mere unit of calculation. It is said

that there are African tribes in which this somewhat artificial contrivance

actually prevails. They calculate the value of things in a sort of money of

account, called macutes. They say, one thing is worth ten macutes, another
                          182
fifteen, another twenty. There is no real thing called a macute: it is a

conventional unit, for the more convenient comparison of things with oneanother.

              This advantage, however, forms but an inconsiderable part of the

economical benefits derived from the use of money. The inconveniences of

barter are so great, that without some more commodious means of effecting

exchanges, the division of employments could hardly have been carried to

any considerable extent. A tailor, who had nothing but coats, might starve

before he could find any person having bread to sell who wanted a coat:

besides, he would not want as much bread at a time as would be worth a coat,

and the coat could not be divided. Every person, therefore, would at all times

hasten to dispose of his commodity in exchange for anything which, though it

might not be fitted to his own immediate wants, was in great and general

demand, and easily divisible, so that he might be sure of being able to

purchase with it whatever was offered for sale. The primary necessaries of

life possess these properties in a high degree. Bread is extremely divisible,

and an object of universal desire. Still, this is not the sort of thing required :

for, of food, unless in expectation of a scarcity, no one wishes to possess

more at once, than is wanted for immediate consumption; so that a person is

never sure of finding an immediate purchaser for articles of food; and unless

soon disposed of, most of them perish. The thing which people would select

to keep by them for making purchases, must be one which, besides being

divisible and generally desired, does not deteriorate by keeping. This reduces

the choice to a small number of articles.

              2. By a tacit concurrence, almost all nations, at a very early period,

fixed upon certain metals, and especially gold and silver, to serve this

purpose. No other substances unite the necessary qualities in so great a

degree, with so many subordinate advantages. Next to food and clothing, and

in some climates even before clothing, the strongest inclination in a rude state

of society is for personal ornament, and for the kind of distinction which is

obtained by rarity or costliness in such ornaments. After the immediate

necessities of life were satisfied, every one was eager to accumulate as great a

store as possible of things at once costly and ornamental; which were chiefly

gold, silver, and jewels. These were the things which it most pleased every

one to possess, and which there was most certainty of finding others willing

to receive in exchange for any kind of produce. They were among the most

imperishable of all substances. They were also portable, and containing great

value in small bulk, were easily hid; a consideration of much importance inan age of insecurity. Jewels are inferior to gold and silver in the quality of

divisibility; and are of very various qualities, not to be accurately

discriminated without great trouble. Gold and silver are eminently divisible,

and when pure, always of the same quality; and their purity may be

ascertained and certified by a public authority. Accordingly, though furs have

been employed as money in some countries, cattle in others, in Chinese

Tartary cubes of tea closely pressed together, the shell called cowries on the

coast of Western Africa, and in Abyssinia at this day blocks of rock salt;

though even of metals, the less costly have sometimes been chosen, as iron in

Lacedaemon from an ascetic policy, copper in the early Roman republic from

the poverty of the people; gold and silver have been generally preferred by

nations which were able to obtain them, either by industry, commerce, or

conquest. To the qualities which originally recommended them, another came

to be added, the importance of which only unfolded itself by degrees. Of all

commodities, they are among the least influenced by any of the causes which

produce fluctuations of value. No commodity is quite free from such

fluctuations. Gold and silver have sustained, since the beginning of history,

one great permanent alteration of value, from the discovery of the American

mines; and some temporary variations, such as that which, in the last great

war, was produced by the absorption of the metals in hoards, and in the

military chests of the immense armies constantly in the field. In the present

age the opening of new sources of supply, so abundant as the Ural mountains,

California, and Australia, may be the commencement of another period of

decline, on the limits of which it would be useless at present to speculate. But

on the whole, no commodities are so little exposed to causes of variation.

They fluctuate less than almost any other things in their cost of production.

And from their durability, the total quantity in existence is at all times so

great in proportion to the annual supply, that the effect on value even of a

change in the cost of production is not sudden: a very long time being

required to diminish materially the quantity in existence, and even to increase

it very greatly not being a rapid process. Gold and silver, therefore, are more

fit than any other commodity to be the subject of engagements for receiving

or paying a given quantity at some distant period. If the engagement were

made in corn, a failure of crops might increase the burthen of the payment in

one year to fourfold what was intended, or an exuberant harvest sink it in

another to one-fourth. If stipulated in cloth, some manufacturing invention

might permanently reduce the payment to a tenth of its original value. Suchthings have occurred even in the case of payments stipulated in gold and

silver; but the great fall of their value after the discovery of America, is, as

yet, the only authenticated instance; and in this case the change was

extremely gradual, being spread over a period of many years.

              When gold and silver had become virtually a medium of exchange,

by becoming the things for which people generally sold, and with which they

generally bought, whatever they had to sell or to buy; the contrivance of

coining obviously suggested itself. By this process the metal was divided into

convenient portions, of any degree of smallness, and bearing a recognised

proportion to one another; and the trouble was saved of weighing and

assaying at every change of possessors, an inconvenience which on the

occasion of small purchases would soon have become insupportable.

Governments found it their interest to take the operation into their own hands,

and to interdict all coining by private persons; indeed, their guarantee was

often the only one which would have been relied on, a reliance however

which very often it ill deserved; profligate governments having until a very

modern period seldom scrupled, for the sake of robbing their creditors, to

confer on all other debtors a licence to rob theirs, by the shallow and

impudent artifice of lowering the standard; that least covert of all modes of

knavery, which consists in calling a shilling a pound, that a debt of one

hundred pounds may be cancelled by the payment of a hundred shillings. It

would have been as simple a plan, and would have answered the purpose as

well, to have enacted that “a hundred” should always be interpreted to mean

five, which would have affected the same reduction in all pecuniary

contracts, and would not have been at all more shameless. Such strokes of

policy have not wholly ceased to be recommended, but they have ceased to

be practised; except occasionally through the medium of paper money, in

which case the character of the transaction, from the greater obscurity of the

subject, is a little less barefaced.

              3. Money, when its use has grown habitual, is the medium through

which the incomes of the different members of the community are distributed

to them, and the measure by which they estimate their possessions. As it is

always by means of money that people provide for their different necessities,

there grows up in their minds a powerful association leading them to regard

money as wealth in a more peculiar sense than any other article; and even

those who pass their lives in the production of the most useful objects,acquire the habit of regarding those objects as chiefly important by their

capacity of being exchanged for money. A person who parts with money to

obtain commodities, unless he intends to sell them, appears to the

imagination to be making a worse bargain than a person who parts with

commodities to get money; the one seems to be spending his means, the other

adding to them. Illusions which, though now in some measure dispelled, were

long powerful enough to overmaster the mind of every politician, both

speculative and practical, in Europe.

              It must be evident, however, that the mere introduction of a

particular mode of exchanging things for one another, by first exchanging a

thing for money, and then exchanging the money for something else, makes

no difference in the essential character of transactions. It is not with money

that things are really purchased. Nobody’s income (except that of the gold or

silver miner) is derived from the precious metals. The pounds or shillings

which a person receives weekly or yearly, are not what constitutes his

income; they are a sort of tickets or orders which he can present for payment

at any shop he pleases, and which entitle him to receive a certain value of any

commodity that he makes choice of. The farmer pays his labourers and his

landlord in these tickets, as the most convenient plan for himself and them;

but their real income is their share of his corn, cattle, and hay, and it makes

no essential difference whether he distributes it to them directly, or sells it for

them and gives them the price; but as they would have to sell it for money if

he did not, and as he is a seller at any rate, it best suits the purposes of all,

that he should sell their share along with his own, and leave the labourers

more leisure for work and the landlord for being idle. The capitalists, except

those who are producers of the precious metals, derive no part of their

income from those metals, since they only get them by buying them with

their own produce : while all other persons have their incomes paid to them

by the capitalists, or by those who have received payment from the

capitalists, and as the capitalists have nothing, from the first, except their

produce, it is that and nothing else which supplies all incomes furnished by

them. There cannot, in short, be intrinsically a more insignificant thing, in the

economy of society, than money; except in the character of a contrivance for

sparing time and labour. It is a machine for doing quickly and commodiously,

what would be done, though less quickly and commodiously, without it: and

like many other kinds of machinery, it only exerts a distinct and independent

influence of its own when it gets out of order.              The introduction of money does not interfere with the operation of

any of the Laws of Value laid down in the preceding chapters. The reasons

which make the temporary or market value of things depend on the demand

and supply, and their average and permanent values upon their cost of

production, are as applicable to a money system as to a system of barter.

Things which by barter would exchange for one another, will, if sold for

money, sell for an equal amount of it, and so will exchange for one another

still, though the process of exchanging them will consist of two operations

instead of only one. The relations of commodities to one another remain

unaltered by money: the only new relation introduced, is their relation to

money itself; how much or how little money they will exchange for; in other

words, how the Exchange Value of money itself is determined. And this is

not a question of any difficulty, when the illusion is dispelled, which caused

money to be looked upon as a peculiar thing, not governed by the same laws

as other things. Money is a commodity, and its value is determined like that

of other commodities, temporarily by demand and supply, permanently and

on the average by cost of production. The illustration of these principles,

considered in their application to money, must be given in some detail, on

account of the confusion which, in minds not scientifically instructed on the

subject, envelopes the whole matter; partly from a lingering remnant of the

old misleading associations, and partly from the mass of vapoury and

baseless speculation with which this, more than any other topic of political

economy, has in latter times become surrounded. I shall therefore treat of the

Value of Money in a chapter apart.

        175
               Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois, liv. xxii, ch. 8.

 

 

   Chapter 8 – Of the Value of Money, as Dependent on Demand and

                                        Supply

 

 

              1. It is unfortunate that in the very outset of the subject we have to

clear from our path a formidable ambiguity of language. The Value of Money

is to appearance an expression as precise, as free from possibility of

misunderstanding, as any in science. The value of a thing, is what it will

exchange for: the value of money, is what money will exchange for; the

purchasing power of money. If prices are low, money will buy much of other

things, and is of high value; if prices are high, it will buy little of other things,

and is of low value. The value of money is inversely as general prices: falling

as they rise, and rising as they fall.

              But unhappily the same phrase is also employed, in the current

language of commerce, in a very different sense. Money, which is so

commonly understood as the synonyme of wealth, is more especially the term

in use to denote it when it is the subject of borrowing. When one person lends

to another, as well as when he pays wages or rent to another, what he

transfers is not the mere money, but a right to a certain value of the produce

of the country, to be selected at pleasure; the lender having first bought this

right, by giving for it a portion of his capital. What he really lends is so much

capital; the money is the mere instrument of transfer. But the capital usually

passes from the lender to the receiver through the means either of money, or

of an order to receive money, and at any rate it is in money that the capital is

computed and estimated. Hence, borrowing capital is universally called

borrowing money; the loan market is called the money market: those who

have their capital disposable for investment on loan are called the monied

class: and the equivalent given for the use of capital, or in other words,

interest, is not only called the interest of money, but, by a grosser perversion

of terms, the value of money. This misapplication of language, assisted by
                                                                                      183
some fallacious appearances which we shall notice and clear up hereafter,

has created a general notion among persons in business, that the Value of

Money, meaning the rate of interest, has an intimate connexion with the

Value of Money in its proper sense, the value or purchasing power of the

circulating medium. We shall return to this subject before long: at present it isenough to say, that by Value I shall always mean Exchange Value, and by

money the medium of exchange, not the capital which is passed from hand to

hand through that medium.

              2. The value or purchasing power of money depends, in the first

instance, on demand and supply. But demand and supply, in relation to

money, present themselves in a somewhat different shape from the demand

and supply of other things.

              The supply of a commodity means the quantity offered for sale. But

it is not usual to speak of offering money for sale. People are not usually said

to buy or sell money. This, however, is merely an accident of language. In

point of fact, money is bought and sold like other things, whenever other

things are bought and sold for money. Whoever sells corn, or tallow, or

cotton, buys money. Whoever buys bread, or wine, or clothes, sells money to

the dealer in those articles. The money with which people are offering to buy,

is money offered for sale. The supply of money, then, is the quantity of it

which people are wanting to lay out; that is, all the money they have in their

possession, except what they are hoarding, or at least keeping by them as a

reserve for future contingencies. The supply of money, in short, is all the

money in circulation at the time.

              The demand for money, again, consists of all the goods offered for

sale. Every seller of goods is a buyer of money, and the goods he brings with

him constitute his demand. The demand for money differs from the demand

for other things in this, that it is limited only by the means of the purchaser.

The demand for other things is for so much and no more; but there is always

a demand for as much money as can be got. Persons may indeed refuse to

sell, and withdraw their goods from the market, if they cannot get for them

what they consider a sufficient price. But this is only when they think that the

price will rise, and that they shall get more money by waiting. If they thought

the low price likely to be permanent, they would take what they could get. It

is always a sine qua non with a dealer to dispose of his goods.

              As the whole of the goods in the market compose the demand for

money, so the whole of the money constitutes the demand for goods. The

money and the goods are seeking each other for the purpose of being

exchanged. They are reciprocally supply and demand to one another. It is

indifferent whether, in characterizing the phenomena, we speak of thedemand and supply of goods, or the supply and the demand of money. They

are equivalent expressions.

              We shall proceed to illustrate this proposition more fully. And in

doing this, the reader will remark a great difference between the class of

questions which now occupy us, and those which we previously had under

discussion respecting Values. In considering Value, we were only concerned

with causes which acted upon particular commodities apart from the rest.

Causes which affect all commodities alike, do not act upon values. But in

considering the relation between goods and money, it is with the causes that

operate upon all goods whatever, that we are specially concerned. We are

comparing goods of all sorts on one side, with money on the other side, as

things to be exchanged against each other.

              Suppose, everything else being the same, that there is an increase in

the quantity of money, say by the arrival of a foreigner in a place, with a

treasure of gold and silver. When he commences expending it (for this

question it matters not whether productively or unproductively), he adds to

the supply of money, and by the same act, to the demand for goods.

Doubtless he adds, in the first instance, to the demand only for certain kinds

of goods, namely, those which he selects for purchase; he will immediately

raise the price of those, and so far as he is individually concerned, of those

only. If he spends his funds in giving entertainments, he will raise the prices

of food and wine. If he expends them in establishing a manufactory, he will

raise the prices of labour and materials. But at the higher prices, more money

will pass into the hands of the sellers of these different articles; and they,

whether labourers or dealers, having more money to lay out, will create an

increased demand for all the things which they are accustomed to purchase:

these accordingly will rise in price, and so on until the rise has reached

everything. I say everything, though it is of course possible that the influx of

money might take place through the medium of some new class of

consumers, or in such a manner as to alter the proportions of different classes

of consumers to one another, so that a greater share of the national income

than before would thenceforth be expended in some articles, and a smaller in

others; exactly as if a change had taken place in the tastes and wants of the

community. If this were the case, then until production had accommodated

itself to this change in the comparative demand for different things, there

would be a real alteration in values, and some things would rise in price morethan others, while some perhaps would not rise at all. These effects, however,

would evidently proceed, not from the mere increase of money, but from

accessory circumstances attending it. We are now only called upon to

consider what would be the effect of an increase of money, considered by

itself. Supposing the money in the hands of individuals to be increased, the

wants and inclinations of the community collectively in respect to

consumption remaining exactly the same; the increase of demand would

reach all things equally, and there would be an universal rise of prices. We

might suppose, with Hume, that some morning, every person in the nation

should wake and find a gold coin in his pocket: this example, however, would

involve an alteration of the proportions in the demand for different

commodities; the luxuries of the poor would, in the first instance be raised in

price, in a much greater degree than other things. Let us rather suppose,

therefore, that to every pound, or shilling, or penny, in the possession of any

one, another pound, shilling, or penny, were suddenly added. There would be

an increased money demand, and consequently an increased money value, or

price, for things of all sorts. This increased value would do no good to any

one; would make no difference, except that of having to reckon pounds,

shillings, and pence, in higher numbers. It would be an increase of values

only as estimated in money, a thing only wanted to buy other things with; and

would not enable any one to buy more of them than before. Prices would

have risen in a certain ratio, and the value of money would have fallen in the

same ratio.

              It is to be remarked that this ratio would be precisely that in which

the quantity of money had been increased. If the whole money in circulation

was doubled, prices would be doubled. If it was only increased one-fourth,

prices would rise one-fourth. There would be one-fourth more money, all of

which would be used to purchase goods of some description. When there had

been time for the increased supply of money to reach all markets, or

(according to the conventional metaphor) to permeate all the channels of

circulation, all prices would have risen one-fourth. But the general rise of

price is independent of this diffusing and equalizing process. Even if some

prices were raised more, and others less, the average rise would be one-

fourth. This is a necessary consequence of the fact, that a fourth more money

would have been given for only the same quantity of goods. General prices,

therefore, would in any case be a fourth higher.              The very same effect would be produced on prices if we suppose the

goods diminished, instead of the money increased: and the contrary effect if

the goods were increased or the money diminished. If there were less money

in the hands of the community, and the same amount of goods to be sold, less

money altogether would be given for them, and they would be sold at lower

prices; lower, too, in the precise ratio in which the money was diminished. So

that the value of money, other things being the same, varies inversely as its

quantity; every increase of quantity lowering the value, and every diminution

raising it, in a ratio exactly equivalent.

              This, it must be observed, is a property peculiar to money. We did

not find it to be true of commodities generally, that every diminution of

supply raised the value exactly in proportion to the deficiency, or that every

increase lowered it in the precise ratio of the excess. Some things are usually

affected in a greater ratio than that of the excess or deficiency, others usually

in a less: because, in ordinary cases of demand, the desire, being for the thing

itself, may be stronger or weaker: and the amount of what people are willing

to expend on it, being in any case a limited quantity, may be affected in very

unequal degrees by difficulty or facility of attainment. But in the case of

money, which is desired as the means of universal purchase, the demand

consists of everything which people have to sell; and the only limit to what

they are willing to give, is the limit set by their having nothing more to offer.

The whole of the goods being in any case exchanged for the whole of the

money which comes into the market to be laid out, they will sell for less or

more of it, exactly according as less or more is brought.

              3. From what precedes, it might for a moment be supposed, that all

the goods on sale in a country at any one time, are exchanged for all the

money existing and in circulation at that same time: or in other words, that

there is always in circulation in a country, a quantity of money equal in value

to the whole of the goods then and there on sale. But this would be a

complete misapprehension. The money laid out is equal in value to the goods

it purchases; but the quantity of money laid out is not the same thing with the

quantity in circulation. As the money passes from hand to hand, the same

piece of money is laid out many times, before all the things on sale at one

time are purchased and finally removed from the market: and each pound or

dollar must be counted for as many pounds or dollars, as the number of times

it changes hands in order to effect this object. The greater part of the goodsmust also be counted more than once, not only because most things pass

through the hands of several sets of manufacturers and dealers before they

assume the form in which they are finally consumed, but because in times of

speculation (and all times are so, more or less) the same goods are often

bought repeatedly, to be resold for a profit, before they are bought for the

purpose of consumption at all.

              If we assume the quantity of goods on sale, and the number of times

those goods are resold, to be fixed quantities, the value of money will depend

upon its quantity, together with the average number of times that each piece

changes hands in the process. The whole of the goods sold (counting each

resale of the same goods as so much added to the goods) have been

exchanged for the whole of the money, multiplied by the number of

purchases made on the average by each piece. Consequently, the amount of

goods and of transactions being the same, the value of money is inversely as

its quantity multiplied by what is called the rapidity of circulation. And the

quantity of money in circulation, is equal to the money value of all the goods

sold, divided by the number which expresses the rapidity of circulation.

              The phrase, rapidity of circulation, requires some comment. It must

not be understood to mean, the number of purchases made by each piece of

money in a given time. Time is not the thing to be considered. The state of

society may he such, that each piece of money hardly performs more than

one purchase in a year; but if this arises from the small number of

transactions-from the small amount of business done, the want of activity in

traffic, or because what traffic there is, mostly takes place by barter — it

constitutes no reason why prices should be lower, or the value of money

higher. The essential point is, not how often the same money changes hands

in a given time, but how often it changes hands in order to perform a given

amount of traffic. We must compare the number of purchases made by the

money in a given time, not with the time itself, but with the goods sold in that

same time. If each piece of money changes hands on an average ten times

while goods are sold to the value of a million sterling, it is evident that the

money required to circulate those goods is 100,000l. And conversely, if the

money in circulation is 100,000l., and each piece changes hands by the

purchase of goods ten times in a month, the sales of goods for money which

take place every month must amount on the average to 1,000,000l.

              Rapidity of circulation being a phrase so ill adapted to express theonly thing which it is of any importance to express by it, and having a

tendency to confuse the subject by suggesting a meaning extremely different

from the one intended, it would be a good thing if the phrase could be got rid

of, and another substituted, more directly significant of the idea meant to be

conveyed. Some such expression as “the efficiency of money,” though not

unexceptionable, would do better; as it would point attention to the quantity

of work done, without suggesting the idea of estimating it by time. Until an

appropriate term can be devised, we must be content when ambiguity is to be

apprehended, to express the idea by the circumlocution which alone conveys

it adequately, namely, the average number of purchases made by each piece

in order to effect a given pecuniary amount of transactions.

              4. The proposition which we have laid down respecting the

dependence of general prices upon the quantity of money in circulation, must

be understood as applying only to a state of things in which money, that is,

gold or silver, is the exclusive instrument of exchange, and actually passes

from hand to hand at every purchase, credit in any of its shapes being

unknown. When credit comes into play as a means of purchasing, distinct

from money in hand, we shall hereafter find that the connexion between

prices and the amount of the circulating medium is much less direct and

intimate, and that such connexion as does exist, no longer admits of so simple

a mode of expression. But on a subject so full of complexity as that of

currency and prices, it is necessary to lay the foundation of our theory in a

thorough understanding of the most simple cases, which we shall always find

lying as a groundwork or substratum under those which arise in practice. That

an increase of the quantity of money raises prices, and a diminution lowers

them, is the most elementary proposition in the theory of currency, and

without it we should have no key to any of the others. In any state of things,

however, except the simple and primitive one which we have supposed, the

proposition is only true other things being the same: and what those other

things are, which must be the same, we are not yet ready to pronounce. We

can, however, point out, even now, one or two of the cautions with which the

principle must be guarded in attempting to make use of it for the practical

explanation of phenomena; cautions the more indispensable, as the doctrine,

though a scientific truth, has of late years been the foundation of a greater

mass of false theory, and erroneous interpretation of facts, than any other

proposition relating to interchange. From the time of the resumption of cash

payments by the Act of 1819, and especially since the commercial crisis of1825, the favourite explanation of every rise or fall of prices has been “the

currency;” and like most popular theories, the doctrine has been applied with

little regard to the conditions necessary for making it correct.

              For example, it is habitually assumed that whenever there is a

greater amount of money in the country, or in existence, a rise of prices must

necessity follow. But this is by no means an inevitable consequence. In no

commodity is it the quantity in existence, but the quantity offered for sale,

that determines the value. Whatever may be the quantity of money in the

country, only that part of it will affect prices, which goes into the market of

commodities, and is there actually exchanged against goods. Whatever

increases the amount of this portion of the money in the country, tends to

raise prices. But money hoarded does not act on prices. Money kept in

reserve by individuals to meet contingencies which do not occur, does not act

on prices. The money in the coffers of the Bank, or retained as a reserve by

private bankers, does not act on prices until drawn out, nor even then unless

drawn out to be expended in commodities.

              It frequently happens that money, to a considerable amount, is

brought into the country, is there actually invested as capital, and again flows

out, without having ever once acted upon the markets of commodities, but

only upon the market of securities, or, as it is commonly though improperly

called, the money market. Let us return to the case already put for illustration,

that of a foreigner landing in the country with a treasure. We supposed him to

employ his treasure in the purchase of goods for his own use, or in setting up

a manufactory and employing labourers; and in either case he would, caeteris

paribus, raise prices. But instead of doing either of these things, he might

very probably prefer to invest his fortune at interest; which we shall suppose

him to do in the most obvious way, by becoming a competitor for a portion of

the stock, exchequer bills, railway debentures, mercantile bills, mortgages,

&c., which are at all times in the hands of the public. By doing this he would

raise the prices of those different securities, or in other words would lower

the rate of interest; and since this would disturb the relation previously

existing between the rate of interest on capital in the country itself, and that in

foreign countries, it would probably induce some of those who had floating

capital seeking employment, to send it abroad for foreign investment rather

than buy securities at home at the advanced price. As much money might

thus go out as had previously come in, while the prices of commoditieswould have shown no trace of its temporary presence. This is a case highly

deserving of attention: and it is a fact now beginning to be recognised, that

the passage of the precious metals from country to country is determined

much more than was formerly supposed, by the state of the loan market in

different countries, and much less by the state of prices.

              Another point must be adverted to, in order to avoid serious error in

the interpretation of mercantile phenomena. If there be, at any time, an

increase in the number of money transactions, a thing continually liable to

happen from differences in the activity of speculation, and even in the time of

year (since certain kinds of business are transacted only at particular

seasons); an increase of the currency which is only proportional to this

increase of transactions, and is of no longer duration, has no tendency to raise

prices. At the quarterly periods when the public dividends are paid at the

Bank, a sudden increase takes place of the money in the hands of the public;

an increase estimated at from a fifth to two-fifths of the whole issues of the

Bank of England. Yet this never has any effect on prices; and in a very few

weeks, the currency has again shrunk into its usual dimensions, by a mere

reduction in the demands of the public (after so copious a supply of ready

money) for accommodation from the Bank in the way of discount or loan. In

like manner the currency of the agricultural districts fluctuates in amount at

different seasons of the year. It is always lowest in August: “it rises generally

towards Christmas, and obtains its greatest elevation about Lady-day, when

the farmer commonly lays in his stock, and has to pay his rent and summer

taxes,” and when he therefore makes his principal applications to country

bankers for loans. “Those variations occur with the same regularity as the

season, and with just as little disturbance of the markets as the quarterly

fluctuations of the notes of the Bank of England. As soon as the extra

payments have been completed, the superfluous” currency, which is

estimated at half a million, “as certainly and immediately is reabsorbed and
              184
disappears.” 

              If extra currency were not forthcoming to make these extra

payments, one of three things must happen. Either the payments must be

made without money, by a resort to some of those contrivances by which its

use is dispensed with; or there must be an increase in the rapidity of

circulation, the same sum of money being made to perform more payments;

or if neither of these things took place, money to make the extra paymentsmust be withdrawn from the market for commodities, and prices,

consequently, must fall. An increase of the circulating medium, conformable

in extent and duration to the temporary stress of business, does not raise

prices, but merely prevents this fall.

              The sequel of our investigation will point out many other

qualifications with which the proposition must be received, that the value of

the circulating medium depends on the demand and supply, and is in the

inverse ratio of the quantity; qualifications which, under a complex system of

credit like that existing in England, render the proposition an extremely

incorrect expression of the fact.

        176
               Infra, chap. xxiii.

        177
               Fullarton on the Regulation of Currencies, 2nd edit., pp. 87–9.

 

 

 Chapter 9 – Of the Value of Money, as Dependent on Cost of Production

 

 

              1. But money, no more than commodities in general, has its value

definitively determined by demand and supply. The ultimate regulator of its

value is Cost of Production.

              We are supposing, of course, that things are left to themselves.

Governments have not always left things to themselves. They have

undertaken to prevent the quantity of money from adjusting itself according

to spontaneous laws, and have endeavoured to regulate it at their pleasure;

generally with a view of keeping a greater quantity of money in the country,

than would otherwise have remained there. It was, until lately, the policy of

all governments to interdict the exportation and the melting of money; while,

by encouraging the exportation and impeding the importation of other things,

they endeavoured to have a stream of money constantly flowing in. By this

course they gratified two prejudices; they drew, or thought that they drew,

more money into the country, which they believed to be tantamount to more

wealth; and they gave, or thought that they gave, to all producers and dealers,

high prices, which, though no real advantage, people are always inclined to

suppose to be one.

              In this attempt to regulate the value of money artificially by means

of the supply, governments have never succeeded in the degree, or even in

the manner, which they intended. Their prohibitions against exporting or

melting the coin have never been effectual. A commodity of such small bulk

in proportion to its value is so easily smuggled, and still more easily melted,

that it has been impossible by the most stringent measures to prevent these

operations. All the risk which it was in the power of governments to attach to
                                                        185
them, was outweighed by a very moderate profit. In the more indirect mode

of aiming at the same purpose, by throwing difficulties in the way of making

the returns for exported goods in any other commodity than money, they have

not been quite so unsuccessful. They have not, indeed, succeeded in making

money flow continuously into the country; but they have to a certain extent

been able to keep it at a higher than its natural level; and have, thus far,

removed the value of money from exclusive dependence on the causes which

fix the value of things not artificially interfered with.              We are, however, to suppose a state, not of artificial regulation, but

of freedom. In that state, and assuming no charge to be made for coinage, the

value of money will conform to the value of the bullion of which it is made.

A pound weight of gold or silver in coin, and the same weight in an ingot,

will precisely exchange for one another. On the supposition of freedom, the

metal cannot be worth more in the state of bullion than of coin; for as it can

be melted without any loss of time, and with hardly any expense, this would

of course be done until the quantity in circulation was so much diminished as

to equalize its value with that of the same weight in bullion. It may be

thought however that the coin, though it cannot be of less, may be, and being

a manufactured article will naturally be, of greater value than the bullion

contained in it, on the same principle on which linen cloth is of more value

than an equal weight of linen yarn. This would be true, were it not that

Government, in this country, and in some others, coins money gratis for any

one who furnishes the metal. The labour and expense of coinage, when not

charged to the possessor, do not raise the value of the article. If Government

opened an office where, on delivery of a given weight of yarn, it returned the

same weight of cloth to any one who asked for it, cloth would be worth no

more in the market than the yarn it contained. As soon as coin is worth a

fraction more than the value of the bullion, it becomes the interest of the

holders of bullion to send it to be coined. If Government, however, throws

the expense of coinage, as is reasonable, upon the holder, by making a charge

to cover the expense (which is done by giving back rather less in coin than

has been received in bullion, and is called levying a seignorage), the coin will

rise, to the extent of the seignorage, above the value of the bullion. If the

Mint kept back one per cent, to pay the expense of coinage, it would be

against the interest of the holders of bullion to have it coined, until the coin

was more valuable than the bullion by at least that fraction. The coin,

therefore, would be kept one per cent higher in value, which could only be by

keeping it one per cent less in quantity, than if its coinage were gratuitous.

              The Government might attempt to obtain a profit by the transaction,

and might lay on a seignorage calculated for that purpose; but whatever they

took for coinage beyond its expenses, would be so much profit on private

coining. Coining, though not so easy an operation as melting, is far from a

difficult one, and, when the coin produced is of full weight and standard

fineness, is very difficult to detect. If, therefore, a profit could be made by

coining good money, it would certainly be done: and the attempt to makeseignorage a source of revenue would be defeated. Any attempt to keep the

value of the coin at an artificial elevation, not by a seignorage, but by
                                                                  186
refusing to coin, would be frustrated in the same manner.

              2. The value of money, then, conforms, permanently, and, in a state

of freedom, almost immediately, to the value of the metal of which it is made;

with the addition, or not, of the expenses of coinage, according as those

expenses are borne by the individual or by the state. This simplifies

extremely the question which we have here to consider: since gold and silver

bullion are commodities like any others, and their value depends, like that of

other things, on their cost of production.

              To the majority of civilized countries, gold and silver are foreign

products: and the circumstances which govern the values of foreign products,

present some questions which we are not yet ready to examine. For the

present, therefore, we must suppose the country which is the subject of our

inquiries, to be supplied with gold and silver by its own mines, reserving for

future consideration how far our conclusions require modification to adapt

them to the more usual case.

              Of the three classes into which commodities are divided — those

absolutely limited in supply, those which may be had in unlimited quantity at

a given cost of production, and those which may be had in unlimited quantity,

but at an increasing cost of production — the precious metals, being the

produce of mines, belong to the third class. Their natural value, therefore, is

in the long run proportional to their cost of production in the most

unfavourable existing circumstances, that is, at the worst mine which it is

necessary to work in order to obtain the required supply. A pound weight of

gold will, in the gold-producing countries, ultimately tend to exchange for as

much of every other commodity, as is produced at a cost equal to its own;

meaning by its own cost the cost in labour and expense, at the least

productive sources of supply which the then existing demand makes it

necessary to work. The average value of gold is made to conform to its

natural value, in the same manner as the values of other things are made to

conform to their natural value. Suppose that it were selling above its natural

value; that is, above the value which is an equivalent for the labour and

expense of mining, and for the risks attending a branch of industry in which

nine out of ten experiments have usually been failures. A part of the mass of

floating capital which is on the look out for investment, would take thedirection of mining enterprise; the supply would thus be increased, and the

value would fall. If, on the contrary, it were selling below its natural value,

miners would not be obtaining the ordinary profit; they would slacken their

works; if the depreciation was great, some of the inferior mines would

perhaps stop working altogether: and a falling off in the annual supply,

preventing the annual wear and tear from being completely compensated,

would by degrees reduce the quantity, and restore the value.

              When examined more closely, the following are the details of the

process. If gold is above its natural or cost value — the coin, as we have seen,

conforming in its value to the bullion-money will be of high value, and the

prices of all things, labour included, will be low. These low prices will lower

the expenses of all producers; but as their returns will also be lowered, no

advantage will be obtained by any producer, except the producer of gold:

whose returns from his mine, not depending on price, will be the same as

before, and his expenses being less, he will obtain extra profits, and will be

stimulated to increase his production. E converso if the metal is below its

natural value: since this is as much as to say that prices are high, and the

money expenses of all producers unusually great: for this, however, all other

producers will be compensated by increased money returns: the miner alone

will extract from his mine no more metal than before, while his expenses will

be greater: his profits therefore being diminished or annihilated, he will

diminish his production, if not abandon his employment.

              In this manner it is that the value of money is made to conform to the

cost of production of the metal of which it is made. It may be well, however,

to repeat (what has been said before) that the adjustment takes a long time to

effect, in the case of a commodity so generally desired and at the same time

so durable as the precious metals. Being so largely used not only as money

but for plate and ornament, there is at all times a very large quantity of these

metals in existence: while they are so slowly worn out, that a comparatively

small annual production is sufficient to keep up the supply, and to make any

addition to it which may be required by the increase of goods to be circulated,

or by the increased demand for gold and silver articles by wealthy consumers.

Even if this small annual supply were stopt entirely, it would require many

years to reduce the quantity so much as to make any very material difference

in prices. The quantity may be increased, much more rapidly than it can be

diminished; but the increase must be very great before it can make itselfmuch felt over such a mass of the precious metals as exists in the whole

commercial world. And hence the effects of all changes in the conditions of

production of the precious metals are at first, and continue to be for many

years, questions of quantity only, with little reference to cost of production.

More especially is this the case when, as at the present time, many new

sources of supply have been simultaneously opened, most of them practicable

by labour alone, without any capital in advance beyond a pickaxe and a

week’s food; and when the operations are as yet wholly experimental, the

comparative permanent productiveness of the different sources being entirely

unascertained.

              3. Since, however, the value of money really conforms, like that of

other things, though more slowly, to its cost of production, some political

economists have objected altogether to the statement that the value of money

depends on its quantity combined with the rapidity of circulation; which, they

think, is assuring a law for money that does not exist for any other

commodity, when the truth is that it is governed by the very same laws. To

this we may answer, in the first place, that the statement in question assumes

no peculiar law. It is simply the law of demand and supply, which is

acknowledged to be applicable to all commodities, and which, in the case of

money as of most other things, is controlled, but not set aside, by the law of

cost of production, since cost of production would have no effect on value if

it could have none on supply. But, secondly, there really is, in one respect, a

closer connexion between the value of money and its quantity, than between

the values of other things and their quantity. The value of other things

conforms to the changes in the cost of production, without requiring, as a

condition, that there should be any actual alteration of the supply: the

potential alteration is sufficient; and if there even be an actual alteration, it is

but a temporary one, except in so far as the altered value may make a

difference in the demand, and so require an increase or diminution of supply,

as a consequence, not a cause, of the alteration in value. Now this is also true

of gold and silver, considered as articles of expenditure for ornament and

luxury; but it is not true of money. If the permanent cost of production of

gold were reduced one-fourth, it might happen that there would not be more

of it bought for plate, gilding, or jewellery, than before; and if so, though the

value would fall, the quantity extracted from the mines for these purposes

would be no greater than previously. Not so with the portion used as money;

that portion could not fall in value one-fourth, unless actually increased one-fourth; for, at prices one-fourth higher, one-fourth more money would be

required to make the accustomed purchases; and if this were not forthcoming,

some of the commodities would be without purchasers, and prices could not

be kept up. Alterations, therefore, in the cost of production of the precious

metals, do not act upon the value of money except just in proportion as they

increase or diminish its quantity; which cannot be said of any other

commodity. It would therefore, I conceive, be an error both scientifically and

practically, to discard the proposition which asserts a connexion between the

value of money and its quantity.

              It is evident, however, that the cost of production, in the long run,

regulates the quantity; and that every country (temporary fluctuations

excepted) will possess, and have in circulation, just that quantity of money,

which will perform all the exchanges required of it, consistently with

maintaining a value conformable to its cost of production. The prices of

things will, on the average, be such that money will exchange for its own cost

in all other goods: and, precisely because the quantity cannot be prevented

from affecting the value, the quantity itself will (by a sort of self-acting

machinery) be kept at the amount consistent with that standard of prices-at

the amount necessary for performing, at those prices, all the business required

of it.

              “The quantity wanted will depend partly on the cost of producing

gold, and partly on the rapidity of its circulation. The rapidity of circulation

being given, it would depend on the cost of production: and the cost of

production being given, the quantity of money would depend on the rapidity
                    187
of its circulation.” After what has been already said, I hope that neither of

these propositions stands in need of any further illustration.

              Money, then, like commodities in general, having a value dependent

on, and proportional to, its cost of production; the theory of money is, by the

admission of this principle, stript of a great part of the mystery which

apparently surrounded it. We must not forget, however, that this doctrine

only applies to the places in which the precious metals are actually produced;

and that we have yet to enquire whether the law of the dependence of value

on cost of production applies to the exchange of things produced at distant

places. But however this may be, our propositions with respect to value will

require no other alteration, where money is an imported commodity, than that

of substituting for the cost of its production, the cost of obtaining it in thecountry. Every foreign commodity is bought by giving for it some domestic

production; and the labour and capital which a foreign commodity costs to us,

is the labour and capital expended in producing the quantity of our own

goods which we give in exchange for it. What this quantity depends upon, —

what determines the proportions of interchange between the productions of

one country and those of another, — is indeed a question of somewhat

greater complexity than those we have hitherto considered. But this at least is

indisputable, that within the country itself the value of imported commodities

is determined by the value, and consequently by the cost of production, of the

equivalent given for them; and money, where it is an imported commodity, is

subject to the same law.

        178
               The effect of the prohibition cannot, however, have been so

entirely insignificant as it has been supposed to be by writers on the subject.

The facts adduced by Mr Fullerton, in the note to page 7 of his work on the

Regulation of Currencies, show that it required a greater percentage of

difference in value between coin and bullion that has commonly been

imagined, to bring the coin to the melting pot.

        179
               In England, though there is no seignorage on gold coin, (the Mint

returning in coin the same weight of pure metal which it receives in bullion)

there is a delay of a few weeks after the bullion is deposited, before the coin

can be obtained, occasioning a loss of interest, which, to the holder, is

equivalent to a trifling seignorage. From this cause, the value of coin is in

general slightly above that of the bullion it contains. An ounce of gold,

according to the quantity of metal in a sovereign, should be worth 3l. 17s. 10

1/2d.; but it was usually quoted at 3l. 17s. 6d., until the Bank Charter Act of

1844 made it imperative on the Bank to give its notes for all bullion offered

to it at the rate of 3l. 17s. 9d.

        180
               From some printed, but not published, Lectures of Mr Senior: in

which the great differences in the business done by money, as well as in the

rapidity of its circulation, in different states of society and civilization, are

interestingly illustrated.

 

 

         Chapter 10 – Of a Double Standard, and Subsidiary Coins

 

 

              1. Though the qualities necessary to fit any commodity for being

used as money are rarely united in any considerable perfection, there are two

commodities which possess them in an eminent, and nearly an equal degree;

the two precious metals, as they are called; gold and silver. Some nations

have accordingly attempted to compose their circulating medium of these two

metals indiscriminately. There is an obvious convenience in making use of

the more costly metal for larger payments, and the cheaper one for smaller;

and the only question relates to the mode in which this can best be done. The

mode most frequently adopted has been to establish between the two metals a

fixed proportion; to decide, for example, that a gold coin called a sovereign

should be equivalent to twenty of the silver coins called shillings: both the

one and the other being called, in the ordinary money of account of the

country, by the same denomination, a pound: and it being left free to every

one who has a pound to pay, either to pay it in the one metal or in the other.

              At the time when the valuation of the two metals relatively to each

other, say twenty shillings to the sovereign, or twenty-one shillings to the

guinea, was first made, the proportion probably corresponded, as nearly as it

could be made to do, with the ordinary relative values of the two metals

grounded on their cost of production: and if those natural or cost values

always continued to bear the same ratio to one another, the arrangement

would be unobjectionable. This, however, is far from being the fact. Gold and

silver, though the least variable in value of all commodities, are not

invariable, and do not always vary simultaneously. Silver, for example, was

lowered in permanent value more than gold, by the discovery of the

American mines; and those smal1 variations of value which take place

occasionally, do not affect both metals alike. Suppose such a variation to take

place: the value of the two metals relatively to one another no longer agreeing

with their rated proportion, one or other of them will now be rated below its

bullion value, and there will be a profit to be made by melting it.

              Suppose, for example, that gold rises in value relatively to silver, so

that the quantity of gold in a sovereign is now worth more than the quantity

of silver in twenty shillings. Two consequences will ensue. No debtor willany longer find it his interest to pay in gold. He will always pay in silver,

because twenty shillings are a legal tender for a debt of one pound, and he

can procure silver convertible into twenty shillings for less gold than that

contained in a sovereign. The other consequence will be, that unless a

sovereign can be sold for more than twenty shillings, all the sovereigns will

be melted, since as bullion they will purchase a greater number of shillings

than they exchange for as coin. The converse of all this would happen if

silver, instead of gold, were the metal which had risen in comparative value.

A sovereign would not now be worth so much as twenty shillings, and

whoever had a pound to pay would prefer paying it by a sovereign; while the

silver coins would be collected for the purpose of being melted, and sold as

bullion for gold at their real value, that is, above the legal valuation. The

money of the community, therefore, would never really consist of both

metals, but of the one only which, at the particular time, best suited the

interest of debtors; and the standard of the currency would be constantly

liable to change from the one metal to the other, at a loss, on each change, of

the expense of coinage on the metal which fell out of use.

              It appears, therefore, that the value of money is liable to more

frequent fluctuations when both metals are a legal tender at a fixed valuation,

than when the exclusive standard of the currency is either gold or silver.

Instead of being only affected by variations in the cost of production of one

metal, it is subject to derangement from those of two. The particular kind of

variation to which a currency is rendered more liable by having two legal

standards, is a fall of value, or what is commonly called a depreciation; since

practically that one of the two metals will always be the standard, of which

the real has fallen below the rated value. If the tendency of the metals be to

rise in value, all payments will be made in the one which has risen least; and

if to fall, then in that which has fallen most.

              2. The plan of a double standard is still occasionally brought forward

by here and there a writer or orator as a great improvement in currency. It is

probable that, with most of its adherents, its chief merit is its tendency to a

sort of depreciation, there being at all times abundance of supporters for any

mode, either open or covert, of lowering the standard. Some, however, are

influenced by an exaggerated estimate of an advantage which to a certain

extent is real, that of being able to have recourse, for replenishing the

circulation, to the united stock of gold and silver in the commercial world,instead of being confined to one of them, which, from accidental absorption,

may not be obtainable with sufficient rapidity. The advantage without the

disadvantages of a double standard, seems to be best obtained by those

nations with whom one only of the two metals is a legal tender, but the other

also is coined, and allowed to pass for whatever value the market assigns to

it.

              When this plan is adopted, it is naturally the more costly metal

which is left to be bought and sold as an article of commerce. But nations

which, like England, adopt the more costly of the two as their standard, resort

to a different expedient for retaining them both in circulation, namely, to

make silver a legal tender, but only for small payments. In England, no one

can be compelled to receive silver in payment for a larger amount than forty

shillings. With this regulation there is necessarily combined another, namely,

that silver coin should be rated, in comparison with gold, somewhat above its

intrinsic value; that there should not be, in twenty shillings, as much silver as

is worth a sovereign: for if there were, a very slight turn of the market in its

favour would make it worth more than a sovereign, and it would be profitable

to melt the silver coin. The over-valuation of the silver coin creates an

inducement to buy silver and send it to the Mint to be coined, since it is given

back at a higher value than properly belongs to it: this, however, has been

guarded against, by limiting the quantity of the silver coinage, which is not

left, like that of gold, to the discretion of individuals, but is determined by the

government, and restricted to the amount supposed to be required for small

payments. The only precaution necessary is, not to put so high a valuation

upon the silver, as to hold out a strong temptation to private coining.

 

 

             Chapter 11 – Of Credit, as a Substitute for Money

 

 

              1. The functions of credit have been a subject of as much

misunderstanding and as much confusion of ideas, as any single topic in

Political Economy. This is not owing to any peculiar difficulty in the theory

of the subject, but to the complex nature of some of the mercantile

phenomena arising from the forms in which credit clothes itself; by which

attention is diverted from the properties of credit in general, to the

peculiarities of its particular forms.

              As a specimen of the confused notions entertained respecting the

nature of credit, we may advert to the exaggerated language so often used

respecting its national importance. Credit has a great, but not, as many people

seem to suppose, a magical power; it cannot make something out of nothing.

How often is an extension of credit talked of as equivalent to a creation of

capital, or as if credit actually were capital. It seems strange that there should

be any need to point out, that credit being only permission to use the capital

of another person, the means of production cannot be increased by it, but only

transferred. If the borrower’s means of production and of employing labour

are increased by the credit given him, the lender’s are as much diminished.

The same sum cannot be used as capital both by the owner and also by the

person to whom it is lent: it cannot supply its entire value in wages, tools, and

materials, to two sets of labourers at once. It is true that the capital which A

has borrowed from B, and makes use of in his business, still forms part of the

wealth of B for other purposes: he can enter into arrangements in reliance on

it, and can borrow, when needful, an equivalent sum on the security of it; so

that to a superficial eye it might seem as if both B and A had the use of it at

once. But the smallest consideration will show that when B has parted with

his capital to A, the use of it as capital rests with A alone, and that B has no

other service from it than in so far as his ultimate claim upon it serves him to

obtain the use of another capital from a third person C. All capital (not his

own) of which any person has really the use, is, and must be, so much
                                                    188
subtracted from the capital of some one else.

              2. But though credit is but a transfer of capital from hand to hand, it

is generally, and naturally, a transfer to hands more competent to employ thecapital efficiently in production. If there were no such thing as credit, or if,

from general insecurity and want of confidence, it were scantily practised,

many persons who possess more or less of capital, but who, from their

occupations, or for want of the necessary skill and knowledge, cannot

personally superintend its employment, would derive no benefit from it: their

funds would either lie idle, or would be, perhaps, wasted and annihilated in

unskilful attempts to make them yield a profit. All this capital is now lent at

interest, and made available for production. Capital thus circumstanced forms

a large portion of the productive resources of any commercial country; and is

naturally attracted to those producers or traders who, being in the greatest

business, have the means of employing it to most advantage; because such

are both the most desirous to obtain it, and able to give the best security.

Although, therefore, the productive funds of the country are not increased by

credit, they are called into a more complete state of productive activity. As

the confidence on which credit is grounded extends itself, means are

developed by which even the smallest portions of capital, the sums which

each person keeps by him to meet contingencies, are made available for

productive uses. The principal instruments for this purpose are banks of

deposit. Where these do not exist, a prudent person must keep a sufficient

sum unemployed in his own possession, to meet every demand which he has

even a slight reason for thinking himself liable to. When the practice,

however, has grown up of keeping this reserve not in his own custody but

with a banker, many small sums, previously lying idle, become aggregated in

the banker’s hands; and the banker, being taught by experience what

proportion of the amount is likely to be wanted in a given time, and knowing

that if one depositor happens to require more than the average, another will

require less, is able to lend the remainder, that is, the far greater part, to

producers and dealers: thereby adding the amount, not indeed to the capital in

existence, but to that in employment, and making a corresponding addition to

the aggregate production of the community.

              While credit is thus indispensable for rendering the whole capital of

the country productive, it is also a means by which the industrial talent of the

country is turned to better account for purposes of production. Many a person

who has either no capital of his own, or very little, but who has qualifications

for business which are known and appreciated by some possessors of capital,

is enabled to obtain either advances in money, or more frequently goods on

credit, by which his industrial capacities are made instrumental to theincrease of the public wealth; and this benefit will be reaped far more largely,

whenever, through better laws and better education, the community shall

have made such progress in integrity, that personal character can be accepted

as a sufficient guarantee not only against dishonestly appropriating, but

against dishonestly risking, what belongs to another.

              Such are, in the most general point of view, the uses of credit to the

productive resources of the world. But these considerations only apply to the

credit given to the industrious classes-to producers and dealers. Credit given

by dealers to unproductive consumers is never an addition, but always a

detriment, to the sources of public wealth. It makes over in temporary use,

not the capital of the unproductive classes to the productive, but that of the

productive to the unproductive. If A, a dealer, supplies goods to B, a

landowner or annuitant, to be paid for at the end of five years, as much of the

capital of A as is equal to the value of these goods, remains for five years

unproductive. Wring such a period, if payment had been made at once, the

sum might have been several times expended and replaced, and goods to the

amount might have been several times produced, consumed, and reproduced:

consequently B’s withholding 100l. for five years, even if he pays at last, has

cost to the labouring classes of the community during that period an absolute

loss of probably several times that amount. A, individually, is compensated,

by putting a higher price upon his goods, which is ultimately paid by B: but

there is no compensation made to the labouring classes, the chief sufferers by

every diversion of capital, whether permanently or temporarily, to

unproductive uses. The country has had 100l. less of capital during those five

years, B having taken that amount from A’s capital, and spent it

unproductively, in anticipation of his own means, and having only after five

years set apart a sum from his income and converted it into capital for the

purpose of indemnifying A.

              3. Thus far of the general functions of Credit in production. It is not

a productive power in itself, though, without it, the productive powers

already existing could not be brought into complete employment. But a more

intricate portion of the theory of Credit is its influence on prices; the chief

cause of most of the mercantile phenomena which perplex observers. In a

state of commerce in which much credit is habitually given, general prices at

any moment depend much more upon the state of credit than upon the

quantity of money. For credit, though it is not productive power, ispurchasing power; and a person who, having credit, avails himself of it in the

purchase of goods, creates just as much demand for the goods, and tends

quite as much to raise their price, as if he made an equal amount of purchases

with ready money.

              The credit which we are now called upon to consider, as a distinct

purchasing power, independent of money, is of course not credit in its

simplest form, that of money lent by one person to another, and paid directly

into his hands; for when the borrower expends this in purchases, he makes

the purchases with money, not credit, and exerts no purchasing power over

and above that conferred by the money. The forms of credit which create

purchasing power, are those in which no money passes at the time, and very

often none passes at all, the transaction being included with a mass of other

transactions in an account, and nothing paid but a balance. This takes place in

a variety of ways, which we shall proceed to examine, beginning, as is our

custom, with the simplest.

              First: Suppose A and B to be two dealers, who have transactions

with each other both as buyers and as sellers. A buys from B on credit. B

does the like with respect to A. At the end of the year, the sum of A’s debts to

B is set against the sum of B’s debts to A, and it is ascertained to which side a

balance is due. This balance, which may be less than the amount of many of

the transactions singly, and is necessarily less than the sum of the

transactions, is all that is paid in money. and perhaps even this is not paid, but

carried over in an account current to the next year. A single payment of a

hundred pounds may in this manner suffice to liquidate a long series of

transactions, some of them to the value of thousands.

              But secondly. The debts of A to B may be paid without the

intervention of money, even though there be no reciprocal debts of B to A. A

may satisfy B by making over to him a debt due to himself from a third

person, C. This is conveniently done by means of a written instrument, called

a bill of exchange, which is, in fact, a transferable order by a creditor upon

his debtor, and when accepted by the debtor, that is authenticated by his

signature, becomes an acknowledgment of debt.

              4. Bills of exchange were first introduced to save the expense and

risk of transporting the precious metals from place to place. “Let it be
                                          189
supposed,” says Mr Henry Thornton, “that there are in London tenmanufacturers who sell their article to ten shopkeepers in York, by whom it is

retailed; and that there are in York ten manufacturers of another commodity,

who sell it to ten shopkeepers in London. There would be no occasion for the

ten shopkeepers in London to send yearly to York guineas for the payment of

the York manufacturers, and for the ten York shopkeepers to send yearly as

many guineas to London. It would only be necessary for the York

manufacturers to receive from each of the shopkeepers at their own door the

money in question, giving in return letters which should acknowledge the

receipt of it; and which should also direct the money, lying ready in the hands

of their debtors in London, to be paid to the London manufacturers, so as to

cancel the debt in London in the same manner as that at York. The expense

and the risk of all transmission of money would thus he saved. Letters

ordering the transfer of the debt are termed, in the language of the present

day, bills of exchange. They are bills by which the debt of one person is

exchanged for the debt of another; and the debt, perhaps, which is due in one

place, for the debt due in another.”

              Bills of exchange having been found convenient as means of paying

debts at distant places without the expense of transporting the precious

metals, their use was afterwards greatly extended from another motive. It is

usual in every trade to give a certain length of credit for goods bought: three

months, six months, a year, even two years, according to the convenience or

custom of the particular trade. A dealer who has sold goods, for which he is

to be paid in six months, but who desires to receive payment sooner, draws a

bill on his debtor payable in six months, and gets the bill discounted by a

banker or other money-lender, that is, transfers the bill to him, receiving the

amount, minus interest for the time it has still to run. It has become one of the

chief functions of bills of exchange to serve as a means by which a debt due

from one person can thus be made available for obtaining credit from

another. The convenience of the expedient has led to the frequent creation of

bills of exchange not grounded on any debt previously due to the drawer of

the bill by the person on whom it is drawn. These are called accommodation

bills; and sometimes, with a tinge of disapprobation, fictitious bills. Their

nature is so clearly stated, and with such judicious remarks, by the author
                                                                            190
whom I have just quoted, that I shall transcribe the entire passage.

              “A, being in want of 100l., requests B to accept a note or bill drawn

at two months, which B, therefore, on the face of it, is bound to pay; it isunderstood, however, that A will take care either to discharge the bill himself,

or to furnish B with the means of paying it. A obtains ready money for the

bill on the joint credit of the two parties. A fulfils his promise of paying it

when due, and thus concludes the transaction. This service rendered by B to

A is, however, not unlikely to be requited, at a more or less distant period, by

a similar acceptance of a bill on A, drawn and discounted for B’s

convenience.

              “Let us now compare such a bill with a real bill. Let us consider in

what points they differ, or seem to differ. and in what they agree.

              “They agree, inasmuch as each is a discountable article; each has

also been created for the purpose of being discounted; and each is, perhaps,

discounted in fact. Each, therefore, serves equally to supply means of

speculation to the merchant. So far, moreover, as bills and notes constitute

what is called the circulating medium, or paper currency of the country, and

prevent the use of guineas, the fictitious and the real bill are upon an equality.

and if the price of commodities be raised in proportion to the quantity of

paper currency, the one contributes to that rise exactly in the same manner as

the other.

              “Before we come to the points in which they differ, let us advert to

one point in which they are commonly supposed to be unlike; but in which

they cannot be said always or necessarily to differ.

              “Real notes (it is sometimes said) represent actual property. There

are actual goods in existence, which are the counterpart to every real note.

Notes which are not drawn in consequence of a sale of goods, are a species of

false wealth, by which a nation is deceived. These supply only an imaginary

capital; the others indicate one that is real.

              “In answer to this statement it may be observed, first, that the notes

given in consequence of a real sale of goods cannot be considered as on that

account certainly representing any actual property. Suppose that A sells 100l.

worth of goods to B at six months’ credit, and takes a bill at six months for it;

and that B, within a month after, sells the same goods, at a like credit, to C,

taking a like bill; and again, that C, after another month, sells them to D,

taking a like bill, and so on. There may then, at the end of six months, be six

bills of 100l. each, existing at the same time; and every one of these may

possibly have been discounted. Of all these bills, then, only one representsany actual property.

              “In order to justify the supposition that a real bill (as it is called)

represents actual property, there ought to be some power in the bill-holder to

prevent the property which the bill represents, from being turned to other

purposes than that of paying the bill in question. No such power exists;

neither the man who holds the real bill, nor the man who discounts it, has any

property in the specific goods for which it was given : he as much trusts to

the general ability to pay of the giver of the bill, as the holder of any fictitious

bill does. The fictitious bill may, in many cases, be a bill given by a person

having a large and known capital, a part of which the fictitious bill may be

said in that case to represent. The supposition that real bills represent

property, and that fictitious bills do not, seems, therefore, to be one by which

more than justice is done to one of these species of bills, and something less

than justice to the other.

              “We come next to some point in which they differ.

              “First, the fictitious note, or note of accommodation, is liable to the

objection that it professes to be what it is not. This objection, however, lies

only against those fictitious bills which are passed as real. In many cases it is

sufficiently obvious what they are. Secondly, the fictitious bill is, in general,

less likely to be punctually paid than the real one. There is a general

presumption, that the dealer in fictitious bills is a man who is a more

adventurous speculator than he who carefully abstains from them. It follows,

thirdly, that fictitious bills, besides being less safe, are less subject to

limitation as to their quantity. The extent of a man’s actual sales forms some

limit to the amount of his real notes; and as it is highly desirable in commerce

that credit should be dealt out to all persons in some sort of regular and due

proportion, the measure of a man’s actual sales, certified by the appearance of

his bills drawn in virtue of those sales, is some rule in the case, though a very

imperfect one in many respects.

              “A fictitious bill, or bill of accommodation, is evidently in substance

the same as any common promissory note; and even better in this respect,

that there is but one security to the promissory note, whereas in the case of

the bill of accommodation, there are two. So much jealousy subsists lest

traders should push their means of raising money too far, that paper, the same

in its general nature with that which is given, being the only paper which canbe given, by men out of business, is deemed somewhat discreditable when

coming from a merchant. And because such paper, when in the merchant’s

hand, necessarily imitates the paper, which passes on the occasion of a sale of

goods, the epithet fictitious has been cast upon it; an epithet which haS

seemed to countenance the confused and mistaken notion, that there is

something altogether false and delusive in the nature of a certain part both of

the paper and of the apparent wealth of the country.”

              A bill of exchange, when merely discounted, and kept in the

portfolio of the discounter until it falls due, does not perform the functions or

supply the place of money, but is itself bought and sold for money. It is no

more currency than the public funds, or any other securities. But when a bill

drawn upon one person is paid to another (or even to the same person) in

discharge of a debt or a pecuniary claim, it does something for which, if the

bill did not exist, money would be required: it performs the functions of

currency. This is a use to which bills of exchange are often applied. “They
                                        191
not only,” continues Mr. Thornton, “spare the use of ready money; they

also occupy its place in many cases. Let us imagine a farmer in the country to

discharge a debt of 10l. to his neighbouring grocer, by giving him a bill for

that sum, drawn on his corn-factor in London for grain sold in the metropolis;

and the grocer to transit the bill, he having previously indorsed it to a

neighbouring sugar-baker, in discharge of a like debt; and the sugar-baker to

send it, when again indorsed, to a West India merchant in an outport, and the

West India merchant to deliver it to his country banker, who also indorses it,

and sends it into further circulation. The bill in this case will have effected

five payments, exactly as if it were a 10l. note payable to a bearer on demand.

A multitude of bills pass between trader and trader in the country, in the

manner which has been described; and they evidently form, in the strictest

sense, a part of the circulating medium of the kingdom.”

              Many bills, both domestic and foreign, are at least presented for

payment quite covered with indorsements, each of which represents either a

fresh discounting, or a pecuniary transaction in which the bill has performed

the functions of money. Within the present generation, the circulating

medium of Lancashire for sums above five pounds, was almost entirely

composed of such bills.

              5. A third form in which credit is employed as a substitute for

currency, is that of promissory notes. A bill drawn upon any one andaccepted by him, and a note of hand by him promising to pay the same sum,

are, as far as he is concerned, exactly equivalent, except that the former

commonly bears interest and the latter generally does not’. and that the

former is commonly payable only after a certain lapse of time, and the latter

payable at sight. But it is chiefly in the latter form that it has become in

commercial countries, an express occupation to issue such substitutes for

money. Dealers in money (as lenders by profession are improperly called)

desire, like other dealers, to stretch their operations beyond what can be

carried on by their own means: they wish to lend, not their capital merely, but

their credit, and not only such portion of their credit as consists of funds

actually deposited with them, but their power of obtaining credit from the

public generally, so far as they think they can safely employ it. This is done

in a very convenient manner by lending their own promissory notes payable

to bearer on demand: the borrower being willing to accept these as so much

money, because the credit of the lender makes other people willingly receive

them on the same footing, in purchases or other payments. These notes,

therefore, perform all the functions of currency, and render an equivalent

amount of money which was previously in circulation, unnecessary. As,

however, being payable on demand, they may be at any time returned on the

issuer, and money demanded for them, he must, on pain of bankruptcy, keep

by him as much money as will enable him to meet any claims of that sort

which can be expected to occur within the time necessary for providing

himself with more: and prudence also requires that he should not attempt to

issue notes beyond the amount which experience shows can remain in

circulation without being presented for payment.

              The convenience of this mode of (as it were) coining credit, having

once been discovered, governments have availed themselves of the same

expedient, and have issued their own promissory notes in payment of their

expenses; a resource the more useful, because it is the only mode in which

they are able to borrow money without paying interest, their promises to pay

on demand being, in the estimation of the holders, equivalent to money in

hand. The practical differences between such government notes and the

issues of private bankers, and the further diversities of which this class of

substitutes for money are susceptible, will be considered presently.

              6. A fourth mode of making credit answer the purposes of money, by

which, when carried far enough, money may be very completely superseded,consists in making payments by cheques. The custom of keeping the spare

cash reserved for immediate use or against contingent demands, in the hands

of a banker, and making all payments, except small ones, by orders on

bankers, is in this country spreading to a continually larger portion of the

public. If the person making the payment, and the person receiving it, keep

their money with the same banker, the payment takes place without any

intervention of money, by the mere transfer of its amount in the banker’s

books from the credit of the payer to that of the receiver. If all persons in

London kept their cash at the same banker’s and made all their payments by

means of cheques, no money would be required or used for any transactions

beginning and terminating in London. This ideal limit is almost attained in

fact, so far as regards transactions between dealers. It is chiefly in the retail

transactions between dealers and consumers, and in the payment of wages,

that money or bank notes now pass, and then only when the amounts are

small. In London, even shopkeepers of any amount of capital or extent of

business have generally an account with a banker; which, besides the safety

and convenience of the practice, is to their advantage in another respect, by

giving them an understood claim to have their bills discounted in cases when

they could not otherwise expect it. As for the merchants and larger dealers,

they habitually make all payments in the course of their business by cheques.

They do not, however, all deal with the same banker, and when A gives a

cheque to B, B usually pays it not into the same but into some other bank.

But the convenience of business has given birth to an arrangement which

makes all the banking houses of the City of London, for certain purposes,

virtually one establishment. A banker does not send the cheques which are

paid into his banking house, to the banks on which they are drawn, and

demand money for them. There is a building called the Clearing-house, to

which every City banker sends, each afternoon, all the cheques on other

bankers which he has received during the day, and they are there exchanged

for the cheques on him which have come into the hands of other bankers, the

balances only being paid in money; or even these not in money, but in

cheques on the Bank of England. By this contrivance, all the business

transactions of the City of London during that day, amounting often to

millions of pounds, and a vast amount besides of country transactions,

represented by bills which country bankers have drawn upon their London

correspondents, are liquidated by payments not exceeding on the average
          192
200,000l.               By means of the various instruments of credit which have now been

explained, the immense business of a country like Great Britain is transacted

with an amount of the precious metals surprisingly small; many times

smaller, in proportion to the pecuniary value of the commodities bought and

sold, than is found necessary in France, or any other country in which, the

habit and the disposition to give credit not being so generally diffused, these

“economizing expedients,” as they have been called, are not practised to the

same extent. What becomes of the money thus superseded in its functions,

and by what process it is made to disappear from circulation, are questions

the discussion of which must be for a short time postponed.

        181
               To make the proposition in the text strictly true, a corrective,

though a very slight one, requires to be made. The circulating medium

existing in a country at a given time, is partly employed in purchases for

productive, and partly for unproductive consumption. According as a larger

proportion of it is employed in the one way or in the other, the real capital of

the country is greater or less. If, then, an addition were made to the

circulating medium in the hands of unproductive consumers exclusively, a

larger portion of the existing stock of commodities would be bought for

unproductive consumption, and a smaller for productive, which state of

things, while it lasted, would be equivalent to a diminution of capital; and on

the contrary, if the addition made be to the portion of the circulating medium

which is in the hands of producers, and destined for their business, a greater

portion of the commodities in the country will for the present be employed as

capital, and a less portion unproductively. Now an effect of this latter

character naturally attends some extensions of credit, especially when taking

place in the form of bank notes, or other instruments of exchange. The

additional bank notes are, in ordinary course, first issued to producers or

dealers, to be employed as capital: and though the stock of commodities in

the country is no greater than before, yet as a greater share of that stock now

comes by purchase into the hands of producers and dealers, to that extent

what would have been unproductively consumed is applied to production,

and there is a real increase of capital. The effect ceases, and a counter-process

takes place, when the additional credit is stopped, and the notes called in.

        182
               Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great

Britain, p. 24. This work, published in 1802, is even now the clearest

exposition that I am acquainted with, in the English language, of the modes inwhich credit is given and taken in a mercantile community.

        183
               Pp. 29–33.

        184
               P. 40.

        185
               According to Mr. Tooke (Inquiry into the Currency Principle, p.

27) the adjustments at the clearing-house “in the year 1839 amounted to

954,401,600l., making an average amount of payments of upwards of

3,000,000l. of bills of exchange and cheques daily effected through the

medium of little more than 200,0001. of bank notes.” At present a very much

greater amount of transactions is daily liquidated, without bank notes at all,

cheques on the Bank of England supplying their place.

 

 

                   Chapter 12 – Influence of Credit on Money

 

 

              1. Having now formed a general idea of the modes in which credit is

made available as a substitute for money, we have to consider in what

manner the use of these substitutes affects the value of money, or, what is

equivalent, the prices of commodities. It is hardly necessary to say that the

permanent value of money — the natural and average prices of commodities

— are not in question here. These are determined by the cost of producing or

of obtaining the precious metals. An ounce of gold or silver will in the long

run exchange for as much of every other commodity, as can be produced or

imported at the same cost with itself. And an order, or note of hand, or bill

payable at sight, for an ounce of gold, while the credit of the giver is

unimpaired, is worth neither more nor less than the gold itself.

              It is not, however, with ultimate or average, but with immediate and

temporary prices, that we are now concerned. These, as we have seen, may

deviate very widely from the standard of cost of production. Among other

causes of fluctuation, one we have found to be, the quantity of money in

circulation. Other things being the same, an increase of the money in

circulation raises prices, a diminution lowers them. If more money is thrown

into circulation than the quantity which can circulate at a value conformable

to its cost of production, the value of money, so long as the excess lasts, will

remain below the standard of cost of production, and general prices will be

sustained above the natural rate.

              But we have now found that there are other things, such as bank

notes, bills of exchange, and cheques, which circulate as money, and perform

all the functions of it: and the question arises, Do these various substitutes

operate on prices in the same manner as money itself? Does an increase in the

quantity of transferable paper tend to raise prices, in the same manner and

degree as an increase in the quantity of money? There has been no small

mount of discussion on this point among writers on currency, without any

result so conclusive as to have yet obtained general assent.

              I apprehend that bank notes, bills, or cheques, as such, do not act on

prices at all. What does act on prices is Credit, in whatever shape given, andwhether it gives rise to any transferable instruments capable of passing into

circulation, or not.

              I proceed to explain and substantiate this opinion.

              2. Money acts upon prices in no other way than by being tendered in

exchange for commodities. The demand which influences the prices of

commodities consists of the money offered for them. But the money offered,

is not the same thing with the money possessed. It is sometimes less,

sometimes very much more. In the long run indeed, the money which people

lay out will be neither more nor less than the money which they have to lay

out: but this is far from being the case at any given time. Sometimes they

keep money by them for fear of an emergency, or in expectation of a more

advantageous opportunity for expending it. In that case the money is said not

to be in circulation: in plainer language, it is not offered, nor about to he

offered, for commodities. Money not in circulation has no effect on prices.

The converse, however, is a much commoner case; people make purchases

with money not in their possession. An article, for instance, which is paid for

by a cheque on a banker, is bought with money which not only is not in the

payer’s possession, but generally not even in the banker’s, having been lent

by him (all but the usual reserve) to other persons. We just now made the

imaginary supposition that all persons dealt with a bank, and all with the

same bank, payments being universally made by cheques. In this ideal case,

there would be no money anywhere except in the hands of the banker: who

might then safely part with all of it, by selling it as bullion, or lending it, to be

sent out of the country in exchange for goods or foreign securities. But

though there would then be no money in possession, or ultimately perhaps

even in existence, money would be offered, and commodities bought with it,

just as at present. People would continue to reckon their incomes and their

capitals in money, and to make their usual purchases with orders for the

receipt of a thing which would have literally ceased to exist. There would be

in all this nothing to complain of, so long as the money, in disappearing, left

an equivalent value in other things, applicable when required to the

reimbursement of those to whom the money originally belonged.

              In the case however of payment by cheques, the purchases are at any

rate made, though not with money in the buyer’s possession, yet with money

to which he has a right. But he may make purchases with money which he

only expects to have, or even only pretends to expect. He may obtain goodsin return for his acceptances payable at a future time; or on his note of hand;

or on a simple book credit, that is, on a mere promise to pay. All these

purchases have exactly the same effect on price, as if they were made with

ready money. The amount of purchasing power which a person can exercise

is composed of all the money in his possession or due to him, and of all his

credit. For exercising the whole of this power he finds a sufficient motive

only under peculiar circumstances; but he always possesses it; and the portion

of it which he at any time does exercise, is the measure of the effect which he

produces on price.

              Suppose that, in the expectation that some commodity will rise in

price, he determines, not only to invest in it all his ready money, but to take

up on credit, from the producers or importers, as much of it as their opinion

of his resources will enable him to obtain. Every one must see that by thus

acting he produces a greater effect on price, than if he limited his purchases

to the money he has actually in hand. He creates a demand for the article to

the full amount of his money and credit taken together, and raises the price

proportionally to both. And this effect is produced, though none of the

written instruments called substitutes for currency may be called into

existence; though the transaction may give rise to no bill of exchange, nor to

the issue of a single bank note. The buyer, instead of taking a mere book

credit, might have given a bill for the amount; or might have paid for the

goods with bank notes borrowed for that purpose from a hanker, thus making

the purchase not on his own credit with the seller, but on the banker’s credit

with the seller, and his own with the banker. Had he done so, he would have

produced as great an effect on price as by a simple purchase to the same

amount on a book credit, but no greater effect. The credit itself, not the form

and mode in which it is given, is the operating cause.

              3. The inclination of the mercantile public to increase their demand

for commodities by making use of all or much of their credit as a purchasing

power, depends on their expectation of profit. When there is a general

impression that the price of some commodity is likely to rise, from an extra

demand, a short crop, obstructions to importation, or any other cause, there is

a disposition among dealers to increase their stocks, in order to profit by the

expected rise. This disposition tends in itself to produce the effect which it

looks forward to, a rise of price: and if the rise is considerable and

progressive, other speculators are attracted, who, so long as the price has notbegun to fall, are willing to believe that it will continue rising. These, by

further purchases, produce a further advance: and thus a rise of price for

which there were originally some rational grounds, is often heightened by

merely speculative purchases, until it greatly exceeds what the original

grounds will justify. After a time this begins to be perceived; the price ceases

to rise, and the holders, thinking it time to realize their gains, are anxious to

sell. Then the price begins to decline: the holders rush into the market to

avoid a still greater loss, and, few being willing to buy in a falling market, the

price falls much more suddenly than it rose. Those who have bought at a

higher price than reasonable calculation justified, and who have been

overtaken by the revulsion before they had realized, are losers in proportion

to the greatness of the fall, and to the quantity of the commodity which they

hold, or have bound themselves to pay for.

              Now all these effects might take place in a community to which

credit was unknown: the prices of some commodities might rise from

speculation, to an extravagant height, and then fall rapidly back. But if there

were no such thing as credit, this could hardly happen with respect to

commodities generally. If all purchases were made with ready money, the

payment of increased prices for some articles would draw an unusual

proportion of the money of the community into the markets for those articles,

and must therefore draw it away from some other class of commodities, and

thus lower their prices. The vacuum might, it is true, be partly filled up by

increased rapidity of circulation; and in this manner the money of the

community is virtually increased in a time of speculative activity, because

people keep little of it by them, but hasten to lay it out in some tempting

adventure as soon as possible after they receive it. This resource, however, is

limited: on the whole, people cannot, while the quantity of money remains.

the same, lay out much more of it in some things, without laying out less in

others. But what they cannot do by ready money, they can do by an extension

of credit. When people go into the market and purchase with money which

they hope to receive hereafter, they are drawing upon an unlimited, not a

limited fund. Speculation, thus supported, may be going on in any number of

commodities, without disturbing the regular course of business in others. It

might even be going on in all commodities at once. We could imagine that in

an epidemic fit of the passion of gambling, all dealers, instead of giving only

their accustomed orders to the manufacturers or growers of their commodity,

commenced buying up all of it which they could procure, as far as theircapital and credit would go. All prices would rise enormously, even if there

were no increase of money, and no paper credit, but a mere extension of

purchases on book credits. After a time those who had bought would wish to

sell, and prices would collapse.

              This is the ideal extreme case of what is called a commercial crisis.

There is said to be a commercial crisis, when a great number of merchants

and traders at once, either have, or apprehend that they shall have, a difficulty

in meeting their engagements. The most usual cause of this general

embarrassment, is the recoil of prices after they have been raised by a spirit

of speculation, intense in degree, and extending to many commodities. Some

accident which excites expectations of rising prices, such as the opening of a

new foreign market, or simultaneous indications of a short supply of several

great articles of commerce, sets speculation at work in several leading

departments at once. The prices rise, and the holders realize, or appear to

have the power of realizing, great gains. In certain states of the public mind,

such examples of rapid increase of fortune call forth numerous imitators, and

speculation not only goes much beyond what is justified by the original

grounds for expecting rise of price, but extends itself to articles in which

there never was any such ground: these, however, rise like the rest as soon as

speculation sets in. At periods of this kind, a great extension of credit takes

place. Not only do all whom the contagion reaches, employ their credit much

more freely than usual; but they really have more credit, because they seem to

be making unusual gains, and because a generally reckless and adventurous

feeling prevails, which disposes people to give as well as take credit more

largely than at other times, and give it to persons not entitled to it. In this

manner, in the celebrated speculative year 1825, and at various other periods

during the present century, the prices of many of the principal articles of

commerce rose greatly, without any fall in others, so that general prices

might, without incorrectness, be said to have risen. When, after such a rise,

the reaction comes, and prices begin to fall, though at first perhaps only

through the desire of the holders to realize, speculative purchases cease: but

were this all, prices would only fall to the level from which they rose, or to

that which is justified by the state of the consumption and of the supply. They

fall, however, much lower; for as, when prices were rising, and everybody

apparently making a fortune, it was easy to obtain almost any amount of

credit, so now, when everybody seems to be losing, and many fail entirely, it

is with difficulty that firms of known solidity can obtain even the credit towhich they are accustomed, and which it is the greatest inconvenience to

them to be without; because all dealers have engagements to fulfil, and

nobody feeling sure that the portion of his means which he has entrusted to

others will be available in time, no one likes to part with ready money, or to

postpone his claim to it. To these rational considerations there is superadded,

in extreme cases, a panic as unreasoning as the previous overconfidence;

money is borrowed for short periods at almost any rate of interest, and sales

of goods for immediate payment are made at almost any sacrifice. Thus

general prices, during a commercial revulsion, fall as much below the usual

level, as during the previous period of speculation they have risen above it:

the fall, as well as the rise, originating not in anything affecting money, but in

the state of credit; an unusually extended employment of credit during the

earlier period, followed by a great diminution, never amounting however to

an entire cessation of it, in the later.

              It is not, however, universally true that the contraction of credit,

characteristic of a commercial crisis, must have been preceded by an

extraordinary and irrational extension of it. There are other causes; and one of

the more recent crises, that of 1847, is an instance, having been preceded by

no particular extension of credit, and by no speculations; except those in

railway shares, which, though in many cases extravagant enough, yet being

carried on mostly with that portion of means which the speculators could

afford to lose, were not calculated to produce the widespread ruin which

arises from vicissitudes of price in the commodities in which men habitually

deal, and in which the bulk of their capital is invested. The crisis of 1847

belonged to another class of mercantile phenomena. There occasionally

happens a concurrence of circumstances tending to withdraw from the loan

market a considerable portion of the capital which usually supplies it. These

circumstances, in the present case, were great foreign payments, (occasioned

by a high price of cotton and an unprecedented importation of food,) together

with the continual demands on the circulating capital of the country by

railway calls and the loan transactions of railway companies, for the purpose

of being converted into fixed capital and made unavailable for future lending.

These various demands fell principally, as such demands always do, on the

loan market. A great, though not the greatest part of the imported food, was

actually paid for by the proceeds of a government loan. The extra payments

which purchasers of corn and cotton, and railway shareholders, found

themselves obliged to make, were either made with their own spare cash, orwith money raised for the occasion. On the first supposition, they were made

by withdrawing deposits from bankers, and thus cutting off a part of the

streams which fed the loan market; on the second supposition, they were

made by actual drafts on the loan market, either by the sale of securities, or

by taking up money at interest. This combination of a fresh demand for loans,

with a curtailment of the capital disposable for them, raised the rate of

interest, and made it impossible to borrow except on the very best security.

Some firms, therefore, which by an improvident and unmercantile mode of

conducting business had allowed their capital to become either temporarily or

permanently unavailable, became unable to command that perpetual renewal

of credit which had previously enabled them to struggle on. These firms

stopped payment: their failure involved more or less deeply many other firms

which had trusted them; and, as usual in such cases, the general distrust,

commonly called a panic, began to set in, and might have produced a

destruction of credit equal to that of 1825, had not circumstances which may

almost be called accidental, given to a very simple measure of the

government (the suspension of the Bank Charter Act of 1844) a fortunate

power of allaying panic, to which, when considered in itself, it had no sort of
      193
claim.

              4. The general operation of credit upon prices being such as we have

described, it is evident that if any particular mode or form of credit is

calculated to have a greater operation on prices than others, it can only be by

giving greater facility, or greater encouragement, to the multiplication of

credit transactions generally. If bank notes, for instance, or bills, have a

greater effect on prices than book credits, it is not by any difference in the

transactions themselves, which are essentially the same, whether taking place

in the one way or in the other: it must be that there are likely to be more of

them. If credit is likely to be more extensively used as a purchasing power

when bank notes or bills are the instruments used, than when the credit is

given by mere entries in an account, to that extent and no more there is

ground for ascribing to the former a greater power over the markets than

belongs to the latter.

              Now it appears that there is some such distinction. As far as respects

the particular transactions, it makes no difference in the effect on price

whether A buys goods of B on simple credit, or gives a bill for them, or pays

for them with bank notes lent to him by a banker C. The difference is in asubsequent stage. If A has bought the goods on a book credit, there is no

obvious or convenient mode by which B can make A’s debt to him a means

of extending his own credit. Whatever credit he has, will be due to the

general opinion entertained of his solvency; he cannot specifically pledge A’s

debt to a third person, as a security for money lent or goods bought. But if A

has given him a bill for the amount, he can get this discounted, which is the

same thing as borrowing money on the joint credit of A and himself: or he

may pay away the bill in exchange for goods, which is obtaining goods on the

same joint credit. In either case, here is a second credit transaction, grounded

on the first, and which would not have taken place if the first had been

transacted without the intervention of a bill. Nor need the transactions end

here. The bill may be again discounted, or again paid away for goods, several

times before it is itself presented for payment. Nor would it be correct to say

that these successive holders, if they had not had the bill, might have attained

their purpose by purchasing goods on their own credit with the dealers. They

may not all of them be persons of credit, or they may already have stretched

their credit as far as it will go. And at all events, either money or goods are

more readily obtained on the credit of two persons than of one. Nobody will

pretend that it is as easy a thing for a merchant to borrow a thousand pounds

on his own credit, as to get a bill discounted to the same amount, when the

drawee is of known solvency.

              If we now suppose that A, instead of giving a bill, obtains a loan of

bank notes from a banker C, and with them pays B for his goods, we shall

find the difference to be still greater. B is now independent even of a

discounter: A’s bill would have been taken in payment only by those who

were acquainted with his reputation for solvency, but a banker is a person

who has credit with the public generally, and whose notes are taken in

payment by every one, at least in his own neighbourhood: insomuch that, by

a custom which has grown into law, payment in bank notes is a complete

acquittance to the payer, whereas if he has paid by a bill, he still remains

liable to the debt, if the person on whom the bill is drawn fails to pay it when

due. B therefore can expend the whole of the bank notes without at all

involving his own credit; and whatever power he had before of obtaining

goods on book credit, remains to him unimpaired, in addition to the

purchasing power he derives from the possession of the notes. The same

remark applies to every person in succession, into whose hands the notes may

come. It is only A, the first holder, (who used his credit to obtain the notes asa loan from the issuer,) who can possibly find the credit he possesses in other

quarters abated by it; and even in his case that result is not probable; for

though, in reason, and if all his circumstances were known, every draft

already made upon his credit ought to diminish by so much his power of

obtaining more, yet in practice the reverse more frequently happens, and his

having been trusted by one person is supposed to be evidence that he may

safely be trusted by others also.

              It appears, therefore, that bank notes are a more powerful instrument

for raising prices than bills, and bills than book credits. It does not, indeed,

follow that credit will be more used because it can be. When the state of trade

holds out no particular temptation to make large purchases on credit, dealers

will use only a small portion of the credit power, and it will depend only on

convenience whether the portion which they use will be taken in one form or

in another. It is not until the circumstances of the markets, and the state of the

mercantile mind, render many persons desirous of stretching their credit to an

unusual extent, that the distinctive properties of the different forms of credit

display themselves. Credit already stretched to the utmost in the form of book

debts, would be susceptible of a great additional extension by means of bills,

and of a still greater by means of bank notes. The first, because each dealer,

in addition to his own credit, would be enabled to create a further purchasing

power out of the credit which he had himself given to others: the second,

because the banker’s credit with the public at large, coined into notes, as

bullion is coined into pieces of money to make it portable and divisible, is so

much purchasing power superadded, in the hands of every successive holder,

to that which he may derive from his own credit. To state the matter

otherwise; one single exertion of the credit-power in the form of book credit,

is only the foundation of a single purchase: but if a bill is drawn, that same

portion of credit may serve for as many purchases as the number of times the

bill changes hands: while every bank note issued, renders the credit of the

banker a purchasing power to that amount in the hands of all the successive

holders, without impairing any power they may possess of effecting

purchases on their own credit. Credit, in short, has exactly the same

purchasing power with money; and as money tells upon prices not simply in

proportion to its amount, but to its amount multiplied by the number of times

it changes hands, so also does credit; and credit transferable from hand to

hand is in that proportion more potent, than credit which only performs one

purchase.              5. All this purchasing power, however, is operative upon prices, only

according to the proportion of it which is used; and the effect, therefore, is

only felt in a state of circumstances calculated to lead to an unusually

extended use of credit. In such a state of circumstances, that is, in speculative

times, it cannot, I think, be denied, that prices are likely to rise higher if the

speculative purchases are made with bank notes, than when they are made

with bills, and when made by bills than when made by book credits. This,

however, is of far less practical importance than might at first be imagined;

because, in point of fact, speculative purchases are not, in the great majority

of cases, made either with bank notes or with bills, but are made almost

exclusively on book credits. “Applications to the Bank for extended
                                                              194
discount,” says the highest authority on such subjects, (and the same thing

must be true of applications to other banks) “occur rarely if ever in the origin

or progress of extensive speculations in commodities. These are entered into,

for the most part if not entirely, in the first instance, on credit, for the length

of term usual in the several trades; thus entailing on the parties no immediate

necessity for borrowing so much as may he wanted for the purpose beyond

their own available capital. This applies particularly to speculative purchases

of commodities on the spot, with a view to resale. But these generally form

the smaller proportion of engagements on credit. By far the largest of those

entered into on the prospect of a rise of prices, are such as have in view

importations from abroad. The same remark, too, is applicable to the export

of commodities, when a large proportion is on the credit of the shippers or

their consignees. As long as circumstances hold out the prospect of a

favourable result, the credit of the parties is generally sustained. If some of

them wish to realize, there are others with capital and credit ready to replace

them; and if the events fully justify the grounds on which the speculative

transactions were entered into (thus admitting of sales for consumption in

time to replace the capital embarked) there is no unusual demand for

borrowed capital to sustain them. It is only when by the vicissitudes of

political events, or of the seasons, or other adventitious circumstances, the

forthcoming supplies are found to exceed the computed rate of consumption,

and a fall of prices ensues, that an increased demand for capital takes place;

the market rate of interest then rises, and increased applications are made to

the Bank of England for discount.” So that the multiplication of bank notes

and other transferable paper does not, for the most part, accompany and

facilitate the speculation; but comes into play chiefly when the tide is turning,and difficulties begin to be felt.

              Of the extraordinary height to which speculative transactions can be

carried upon mere book credits, without the smallest addition to what is

commonly called the currency, very few persons are at all aware. “The power
                                  195
of purchase,” says Mr Tooke, “by persons having capital and credit, is

much beyond anything that those who are unacquainted practically with

speculative markets have any idea of.... A person having the reputation of

capital enough for his regular business, and enjoying good credit in his trade,

if he takes a sanguine view of the prospect of a rise of price of the article in

which he deals, and is favoured by circumstances in the outset and progress

of his speculation, may effect purchases to an extent perfectly enormous,

compared with his capital.” Mr Tooke confirms this statement by some

remarkable instances, exemplifying the immense purchasing power which

may be exercised, and rise of price which may be produced, by credit not

represented by either bank notes or bills of exchange.

              “Amongst the earlier speculators for an advance in the price of tea,

in consequence of our dispute with China in 1839, were several retail grocers

and tea-dealers. There was a general disposition among the trade to get into

stock: that is, to lay in at once a quantity which would meet the probable

demand from their customers for several months to come. Some, however,

among them, more sanguine and adventurous than the rest, availed

themselves of their credit with the importers and wholesale dealers, for

purchasing quantities much beyond the estimated demand in their own

business. As the purchases were made in the first instance ostensibly, and

perhaps really, for the legitimate purposes and within the limits of their

regular business, the parties were enabled to buy without the condition of any

deposit; whereas speculators, known to be such, are required to pay 2l. per

chest, to cover any probable difference of price which might arise before the

expiration of the prompt, which, for this article, is three months. Without,

therefore, the outlay of a single farthing of actual capital or currency in any

shape, they made purchases to a considerable extent; and with the profit

realized on the resale of a part of these purchases, they were enabled to pay

the deposit on further quantities when required, as was the case when the

extent of the purchases attracted attention. In this way, the speculation went

on at advancing prices (100 per cent and upwards) till nearly the expiration of

the prompt, and if at that time circumstances had been such as to justify theapprehension which at one time prevailed, that all future supplies would be

cut off, the prices might have still further advanced, and at any rate not have

retrograded. In this case, the speculators might have realized, if not all the

profit they had anticipated, a very handsome sum, upon which they might

have been enabled to extend their business greatly, or to retire from it

altogether, with a reputation for great sagacity in thus making their fortune.

But instead of this favourable result, it so happened that two or three cargoes

of tea which had been transhipped were admitted, contrary to expectation, to

entry on their arrival here, and it was found that further indirect shipments

were in progress. Thus the supply was increased beyond the calculation of the

speculators: and at the same time, the consumption had been diminished by

the high price. There was, consequently, a violent reaction on the market; the

speculators were unable to sell without such a sacrifice as disabLed them

from fulfilling their engagements, and several of them consequently failed.

Among these, one was mentioned, whO having a capital not exceeding 1200l.

which was locked up in his business, had contrived to buy 4000 chests, value

above 80,000l., the loss upon which was about 16,000l.

              “The other example which I have to give, is that of the operation on

the corn market between 1838 and 1842. There was an instance of a person

who, when he entered on his extensive speculations, was, as it appeared by

the subsequent examination of his affairs, possessed of a capital not

exceeding 5000l., but being successful in the outset, and favoured by

circumstances in the progress of his operations, he contrived to make

purchases to such an extent, that when he stopped payment his engagements

were found to amount to between 500,000l. and 600,000l. Other instances

might be cited of parties without any capital at all, who, by dint of mere

credit, were enabled, while the aspect of the market favoured their views, to

make purchases to a very great extent.

              “And be it observed, that these speculations, involving enormous

purchases on little or no capital, were carried on in 1839 and 1840, when the

money market was in its most contracted state; or when, according to modern

phraseology, there was the greatest scarcity of money.”

              But though the great instrument of speculative purchases is book

credits, it cannot be contested that in speculative periods an increase does

take place in the quantity both of bills of exchange and of bank notes. This

increase, indeed, so far as bank notes are concerned, hardly ever takes placein the earliest stage of the speculations: advances from bankers (as Mr Tooke

observes) not being applied for in order to purchase, but in order to hold on

without selling when the usual term of credit has expired, and the high price

which was calculated on has not arrived. But the tea speculators mentioned

by Mr Tooke could not have carried their speculations beyond the three

months which are the usual term of credit in their trade, unless they had been

able to obtain advances from bankers, which, if the expectation of a rise of

price had still continued, they probably could have done.

              Since, then, credit in the form of bank notes is a more potent

instrument for raising prices than book credits, an unrestrained power of

resorting to this instrument may contribute to prolong and heighten the

speculative rise of prices, and hence to aggravate the subsequent recoil. But

in what degree? and what importance ought we to ascribe to this possibility?

It may help us to form some judgment on this point, if we consider the

proportion which the utmost increase of bank notes in a period of speculation,

bears, I do not say to the whole mass of credit in the country, but to the bills

of exchange alone. The average amount of bills in existence at any one time
                                                                  196
is supposed greatly to exceed a hundred millions sterling. The bank note

circulation of Great Britain and Ireland seldom exceeds forty millions, and

the increase in speculative periods at most two or three. And even this, as we

have seen, hardly ever comes into play until that advanced period of the

speculation at which the tide shows signs of turning, and the dealers generally

are rather thinking of the means of fulfilling their existing engagements, than

meditating an extension of them: while the quantity of bills in existence is

largely increased from the very commencement of the speculations.

              6. It is well known that of late years, an artificial limitation of the

issue of bank notes has been regarded by many political economists, and by a

great portion of the public, as an expedient of supreme efficacy for

preventing, and when it cannot prevent, for moderating, the fever of

speculation; and this opinion received the recognition and sanction of the

legislature by the Currency Act of 1844. At the point, however, which our

inquiries have reached, though we have conceded to bank notes a greater

power over prices than is possessed by bills or book credits, we have not

found reason to think that this superior efficacy has much share in producing

the rise of prices which accompanies a period of speculation, nor

consequently that any restraint applied to this one instrument can beefficacious to the degree which is often supposed, in moderating either that

rise, or the recoil which follows it. We shall be still less inclined to think so,

when we consider that there is a fourth form of credit transactions, by

cheques on bankers, and transfers in a banker’s books, which is exactly

parallel in every respect to bank notes, giving equal facilities to an extension

of credit, and capable of acting on prices quite as powerfully. In the words of
              197
Mr. Fullarton, “there is not a single object at present attained through the

agency of Bank of England notes, which might not be as effectually

accomplished by each individual keeping an account with the bank, and

transacting all his payments of five pounds and upwards by cheque.” A bank,

instead of lending its notes to a merchant or dealer, might open an account

with him, and credit the account with the sum it had agreed to advance: on an

understanding that he should not draw out that sum in any other mode than

by drawing cheques against it in favour of those to whom he had occasion to

make payments. These cheques might possibly even pass from hand to hand

like bank notes; more commonly however the receiver would pay them into

the hands of his own banker, and when he wanted the money, would draw a

fresh cheque against it: and hence an objector may urge that as the original

cheque would very soon be presented for payment, when it must be paid

either in notes or in coin, notes or coin to an equal amount must be provided

as the ultimate means of liquidation. It is not so, however. The person to

whom the cheque is transferred, may perhaps deal with the same banker, and

the cheque may return to the very bank on which it was drawn: this is very

often the case in country districts; if so, no payment will be called for, but a

simple transfer in the banker’s books will settle the transaction. If the cheque

is paid into a different bank, it will not be presented for payment, but

liquidated by set-off against other cheques; and in a state of circumstances

favourable to a general extension of banking credits, a banker who has

granted more credit, and has therefore more cheques drawn on him, will also

have more cheques on other bankers paid to him, and will only have to

provide notes or cash for the payment of balances; for which purpose the

ordinary reserve of prudent bankers, one-third of their liabilities, will

abundantly suffice. Now, if he had granted the extension of credit by means

of an issue of his own notes, he must equally have retained, in coin or Bank

of England notes, the usual reserve: so that he can, as Mr. Fullarton says, give

every facility of credit by what may be termed a cheque circulation, which he

could give by a note circulation.              This extension of credit by entries in a banker’s books, has all that

superior efficiency in acting on prices, which we ascribed to an extension by

means of bank notes. As a bank note of 20l., paid to any one, gives him 20l.

of purchasing-power based on credit, over and above whatever credit he had

of his own, so does a cheque paid to him do the same: for, although he may

make no purchase with the cheque itself, he deposits it with his banker, and

can draw against it. As this act of drawing a cheque against another which

has been exchanged and cancelled, can be repeated as often as a purchase

with a bank note, it effects the same increase of purchasing power. The

original loan, or credit, given by the banker to his customer, is potentially

multiplied as a means of purchase, in the hands of the successive persons to

whom portions of the credit are paid away, just as the purchasing power of a

bank note is multiplied by the number of persons through whose hands it

passes before it is returned to the issuer.

              These considerations abate very much from the importance of any

effect which can be produced in allaying the vicissitudes of commerce, by so

superficial a contrivance as the one so much relied on of late, the restriction

of the issue of bank notes by an artificial rule. An examination of all the

consequences of that restriction, and an estimate of the reasons for and

against it, must be deferred until we have treated of the foreign exchanges,

and the international movements of bullion. At present we are only concerned

with the general theory of prices, of which the different influence of different

kinds of credit is an essential part.

              7. There has been a great amount of discussion and argument on the

question whether several of these forms of credit, and in particular whether

bank notes, ought to be considered as money. The question is so purely

verbal as to be scarcely worth raising, and one would have some difficulty in

comprehending why so much importance is attached to it, if there were not

some authorities who, still adhering to the doctrine of the infancy of society

and of political economy, that the quantity of money compared with that of

commodities, determines general prices, think it important to prove that bank

notes and no other forms of credit are money, in order to support the

inference that bank notes and no other forms of credit influence prices. It is

obvious, however, that prices do not depend on money, but on purchases.

Money left with a banker, and not drawn against, or drawn against for other

purposes than buying commodities, has no effect on prices, any more thancredit which is not used. Credit which is used to purchase commodities,

affects prices in the same manner as money. Money and credit are thus

exactly on a par, in their effect on prices; and whether we choose to class

bank notes with the one or the other, is in this respect entirely immaterial.

              Since, however, this question of nomenclature has been raised, it

seems desirable that it should be answered. The reason given for considering

bank notes as money, is, that by law and usage they have the property, in

common with metallic money, of finally closing the transactions in which

they are employed; while no other mode of paying one debt by transferring

another, has that privilege. The first remark which here suggests itself is, that

on this showing, the notes at least of private banks are not money; for a

creditor cannot be forced to accept them in payment of a debt. They certainly

close the transaction if he does accept them; but so, on the same supposition,

would a bale of cloth, or a pipe of wine; which are not for that reason

regarded as money. It seems to be an essential part of the idea of money, that

it be legal tender. An inconvertible paper which is legal tender is universally

admitted to be money; in the French language the phrase papier-monnaie

actually means inconvertibility, convertible notes being merely billets a

porteur. It is only in the case of Bank of England notes under the law of

convertibility, that any difficulty arises; those notes not being a legal tender

from the Bank itself, though a legal tender from all other persons. Bank of

England notes undoubtedly do close transactions, so far as respects the buyer.

When he has once paid in Bank of England notes, he can in no case be

required to pay over again. But I confess I cannot see how the transaction can

be deemed complete as regards the seller, when he will only be found to have

received the price of his commodity provided the Bank keeps its promise to

pay. An instrument which would be deprived of all value by the insolvency

of a corporation, cannot be money in any sense in which money is opposed to

credit. It either is not money, or it is money and credit too. It may be most

suitably described as coined credit. The other forms of credit may be

distinguished from it as credit in ingots.

              8. Some high authorities have claimed for bank notes, as compared

with other modes of credit, a greater distinction in respect to influence on

price, than we have seen reason to allow; a difference, not in degree, but in

kind. They ground this distinction on the fact, that all bills and cheques, as

well as all book-debts, are from the first intended to be, and actually are,ultimately liquidated either in coin or in notes. The bank notes in circulation,

jointly with the coin, are therefore, according to these authorities, the basis on

which all the other expedients of credit rest; and in proportion to the basis

will be the superstructure; insomuch that the quantity of bank notes

determines that of all the other forms of credit. If bank notes are multiplied,

there will, they seem to think, be more bills, more payments by cheque, and I

presume, more book credits; and by regulating and limiting the issue of bank

notes, they think that all other forms of credit are, by an indirect

consequence, brought under a similar limitation. I believe I have stated the

opinion of these authorities correctly, though I have nowhere seen the

grounds of it set forth with such distinctness as to make me feel quite certain

that I understand them. It may be true, that according as there are more or

fewer bank notes, there is also in general (though not invariably), more or

less of other descriptions of credit; for the same state of affairs which leads to

an increase of credit in one shape, leads to an increase of it in other shapes.

But I see no reason for believing that the one is the cause of the other. If

indeed we begin by assuming, as I suspect is tacitly done, that prices are

regulated by coin and bank notes, the proposition maintained will certainly

follow; for, according as prices are higher or lower, the same purchases will

give rise to bills, cheques, and book credits of a larger or a smaller amount.

But the premise in this reasoning is the very proposition to be proved. Setting

this assumption aside, I know not how the conclusion can be substantiated.

The credit given to any one by those with whom he deals, does not depend on

the quantity of bank notes or coin in circulation at the time, but on their

opinion of his solvency: if any consideration of a more general character

enters into their calculation, it is only in a time of pressure on the loan

market, when they are not certain of being themselves able to obtain the

credit on which they have been accustomed to rely; and even then, what they

look to is the general state of the loan market, and not (preconceived theory

apart) the amount of bank notes. So far, as to the willingness to give credit.

And the willingness of a dealer to use his credit, depends on his expectations

of gain, that is, on his opinion of the probable future price of his commodity;

an opinion grounded either on the rise or fall already going on, or on his

prospective judgment respecting the supply and the rate of consumption.

When a dealer extends his purchases beyond his immediate means of

payment, engaging to pay at a specified time, he does so in the expectation

either that the transaction will have terminated favourably before that timearrives, or that he shall then be in possession of sufficient funds from the

proceeds of his other transactions. The fulfilment of these expectations

depends upon prices, but not especially upon the amount of bank notes. He

may, doubtless, also ask himself, in case he should be disappointed in these

expectations, to what quarter he can look for a temporary advance, to enable

him, at the worst, to keep his engagements. But in the first place, this

prospective rejection on the somewhat more or less of difficulty which he

may have in tiding over his embarrassments, seems too slender an

inducement to be much of a restraint in a period supposed to be one of rash

adventure, and upon persons so confident of success as to involve themselves

beyond their certain means of extrication. And further, I apprehend that their

confidence of being helped out in the event of ill-fortune, will mainly depend

on their opinion of their own individual credit, with, perhaps, some

consideration, not of the quantity of the currency, but of the general state of

the loan market. They are aware that, in case of a commercial crisis, they

shall have difficulty in obtaining advances. But if they thought it likely that a

commercial crisis would occur before they had realized, they would not

speculate. If no great contraction of general credit occurs, they will feel no

doubt of obtaining any advances which they absolutely require, provided the

state of their own affairs at the time affords in the estimation of lenders a

sufficient prospect that those advances will be repaid.

        186
               The commercial difficulties, not however amounting to a

commercial crisis, of 1864, had essentially the same origin. heavy payments

for cotton imported at high prices, and large investments in banking and other

joint stock projects, combined with the loan operations of foreign

governments, made such large drafts upon the loan market as to raise the rate

of discount on mercantile bills as high as nine per cent.

        187
               Tooke’s History of Prices, vol. iv, pp. 125–6.

        188
               Inquiry into the Currency Principle, pp. 79 and 136–8.

        189
               The most approved estimate is that of Mr Leatham, grounded on

the official returns of bill stamps issued. The following are the results: —

                  Bills created in

                   Great Britain Average amount in Year

                  and Ireland, circulation at one                   founded on time in each year

Year returns of

                   Bill Stamps

                  issued from the

                   Stamp Office

              1832 £356,153,409 £89,038,352 1833 383,659,585 95,914,896 1834

379,155,052 94,788,763 1835 405,403,051 101,350,762 1836 485,943,473

121,485,868 1837 455,084,445 113,771,111 1838 465,504,041 116,376,010

1839 528,493,842 132,123.460

              “Mr. Leatham,” says Mr. Tooke, “gives the process by which, upon

the data furnished by the returns of stamps, he arrives at these results; and I

am disposed to think that they are as near an approximation to the truth as the

nature of the materials admits of arriving at.” — Inquiry into the Currency

Principle, p. 26. Mr. Newmarch (Appendix No. 39 to Report of the

Committee on the Bank Acts in 1857, and History of Prices, vol. vi. p. 587)

shows grounds for the opinion that the total bill circulation in 1857 was not

much less than 180 millions sterling, and that it sometimes rises to 200

millions.

              5. On the Regulation of Currencies, p. 41.

 

 

               Chapter 13 – Of an Inconvertible Paper Currency

 

 

              1. After experience had shown that pieces of paper, of no intrinsic

value, by merely bearing upon them the written profession of being

equivalent to a certain number of francs, dollars, or pounds, could be made to

circulate as such, and to produce all the benefit to the issuers which could

have been produced by the coins which they purported to represent;

governments began to think that it would be a happy device if they could

appropriate to themselves this benefit, free from the condition to which

individuals issuing such paper substitutes for money were subject, of giving,

when required, for the sign, the thing signified. They determined to try

whether they could not emancipate themselves from this unpleasant

obligation, and make a piece of paper issued by them pass for a pound, by

merely calling it a pound, and consenting to receive it in payment of the

taxes. And such is the influence of almost all established governments, that

they have generally succeeded in attaining this object: I believe I might say

they have always succeeded for a time, and the power has only been lost to

them after they had compromised it by the most flagrant abuse. In the case

supposed, the functions of money are performed by a thing which derives its

power for performing them solely from convention: but convention is quite

sufficient to confer the power; since nothing more is needful to make a

person accept anything as money, and even at any arbitrary value, than the

persuasion that it will be taken from him on the same terms by others. The

only question is, what determines the value of such a currency; since it

cannot be, as in the case of gold and silver (or paper exchangeable for them at

pleasure), the cost of production.

              We have seen, however, that even in the case of a metallic currency,

the immediate agency in determining its value is its quantity. If the quantity,

instead of depending on the ordinary mercantile motives of profit and loss,

could be arbitrarily fixed by authority, the value would depend on the fiat of

that authority, not on cost of production. The quantity of a paper currency not

convertible into the metals at the option of the holder, can be arbitrarily fixed;

especially if the issuer is the sovereign power of the state. The value,

therefore, of such a currency, is entirely arbitrary.              Suppose that, in a country of which the currency is wholly metallic,

a paper currency is suddenly issued, to the amount of half the metallic

circulation; not by a banking establishment, or in the form of loans, but by

the government, in payment of salaries and purchase of commodities. The

currency being suddenly increased by one-half, all prices will rise, and

among the rest, the prices of all things made of gold and silver. An ounce of

manufactured gold will become more valuable than an ounce of gold coin, by

more than that customary difference which compensates for the value of the

workmanship; and it will be profitable to melt the coin for the purpose of

being manufactured, until as much has been taken from the currency by the

subtraction of gold, as had been added to it by the issue of paper. Then prices

will relapse to what they were at first, and there will be nothing changed

except that a paper currency has been substituted for half of the metallic

currency which existed before. Suppose, now, a second emission of paper;

the same series of effects will be renewed; and so on, until the whole of the

metallic money has disappeared: that is, if paper be issued of as low a

denomination as the lowest coin; if not, as much will remain, as convenience

requires for the smaller payments. The addition made to the quantity of gold

and silver disposable for ornamental purposes, will somewhat reduce, for a

time, the value of the article; and as long as this is the case, even though

paper has been issued to the original amount of the metallic circulation, as

much coin will remain in circulation along with it, as will keep the value of

the currency down to the reduced value of the metallic material; but the value

having fallen below the cost of production, a stoppage or diminution of the

supply from the mines will enable the surplus to be carried off by the

ordinary agents of destruction, after which, the metals and the currency will

recover their natural value. We are here supposing, as we have supposed

throughout, that the country has mines of its own, and no commercial

intercourse with other countries; or, in a country having foreign trade, the

coin which is rendered superfluous by an issue of paper is carried off by a

much prompter method.

              Up to this point, the effects of a paper currency are substantially the

same, whether it is convertible into specie or not. It is when the metals have

been completely superseded and driven from circulation, that the difference

between convertible and inconvertible paper begins to be operative. When the

gold or silver has all gone from circulation, and an equal quantity of paper

has taken its place, suppose that a still further issue is superadded. The sameseries of phenomena recommences: prices rise, among the rest the prices of

gold and silver articles, and it becomes an object as before to procure coin in

order to convert it into bullion. There is no longer any coin in circulation; but

if the paper currency is convertible, coin may still be obtained from the

issuers, in exchange for notes. All additional notes, therefore, which are

attempted to be forced into circulation after the metals have been completely

superseded, will return upon the issuers in exchange for coin; and they will

not be able to maintain in circulation such a quantity of convertible paper, as

to sink its value below the metal which it represents. It is not so, however,

with an inconvertible currency. To the increase of that (if permitted by law)

there is no check. The issuers may add to it indefinitely, lowering its value

and raising prices in proportion; they may, in other words, depreciate the

currency without limit.

              Such a power, in whomsoever vested, is an intolerable evil. All

variations in the value of the circulating medium are mischievous: they

disturb existing contracts and expectations, and the liability to such changes

renders every pecuniary engagement of long date entirely precarious. The

person who buys for himself, or gives to another, an annuity of 100l., does

not know whether it will be equivalent to 200l. or to 50l. a few years hence.

Great as this evil would be if it depended only on accident, it is still greater

when placed at the arbitrary disposal of an individual or a body of

individuals; who may have any kind or degree of interest to be served by an

artificial fluctuation in fortunes; and who have at any rate a strong interest in

issuing as much as possible, each issue being in itself a source of profit. Not

to add, that the issuers may have, and in the case of a government paper,

always have, a direct interest in lowering the value of the currency, because it

is the medium in which their own debts are computed.

              2. In order that the value of the currency may be secure from being

altered by design, and may be as little as possible liable to fluctuation from

accident, the articles least liable of all known commodities to vary in their

value, the precious metals, have been made in all civilized countries the

standard of value for the circulating medium; and no paper currency ought to

exist of which the value cannot be made to conform to theirs. Nor has this

fundamental maxim ever been entirely lost sight of, even by the governments

which have most abused the power of creating inconvertible paper. If they

have not (as they generally have) professed an intention of paying in specie atsome indefinite future time, they have at least, by giving to their paper issues

the names of their coins, made a virtual, though generally a false, profession

of intending to keep them at a value corresponding to that of the coins. This

is not impracticable, even with an inconvertible paper. There is not indeed the

self-acting check which convertibility brings with it. But there is a clear and

unequivocal indication by which to judge whether the currency is

depreciated, and to what extent. That indication is, the price of the precious

metals. When holders of paper cannot demand coin to be converted into

bullion, and when there is none left in circulation, bullion rises and falls in

price like other things; and if it is above the Mint price, if an ounce of gold,

which would be coined into the equivalent of 3l. 17s. 101/2d., is sold for 4l.

or 5l. in paper, the value of the currency has sunk just that much below what

the value of a metallic currency would he. If, therefore, the issue of

inconvertible paper were subjected to strict rules, one rule being that

whenever bullion rose above the Mint price, the issues should he contracted

until the market price of bullion and the Mint price were again in accordance,

such a currency would not be subject to any of the evils usually deemed

inherent in an inconvertible paper.

              But also such a system of currency would have no advantages

sufficient to recommend it to adoption. An inconvertible currency, regulated

by the price of bullion, would conform exactly, in all its variations, to a

convertible one; and the only advantage gained, would be that of exemption

from the necessity of keeping any reserve of the precious metals; which is not

a very important consideration, especially as a government, so long as its

good faith is not suspected, needs not keep so large a reserve as private

issuers, being not so liable to great and sudden demands, since there never

can be any real doubt of its solvency. Against this small advantage is to be

set, in the first place, the possibility of fraudulent tampering with the price of

bullion for the sake of acting on the currency; in the manner of the fictitious

sales of corn, to influence the averages, so much and so justly complained of

while the corn laws were in force. But a still stronger consideration is the

importance of adhering to a simple principle, intelligible to the most untaught

capacity. Everybody can understand convertibility; every one sees that what

can be at any moment exchanged for five pounds, is worth five pounds.

Regulation by the price of bullion is a more complex idea, and does not

recommend itself through the same familiar associations. There would be

nothing like the same confidence, by the public generally, in an inconvertiblecurrency so regulated, as in a convertible one: and the most instructed person

might reasonably doubt whether such a rule would be as likely to be

inflexibly adhered to. The grounds of the rule not being so well understood

by the public, opinion would probably not enforce it with as much rigidity,

and, in any circumstances of difficulty, would be likely to turn against it;

while to the government itself a suspension of convertibility would appear a

much stronger and more extreme measure, than a relaxation of what might

possibly be considered a somewhat artificial rule. There is therefore a great

preponderance of reasons in favour of a convertible, in preference to even the

best regulated inconvertible currency. The temptation to over-issue, in certain

financial emergencies, is so strong, that nothing is admissible which can tend,

in however slight a degree, to weaken the barriers that restrain it.

              3. Although no doctrine in political economy rests on more obvious

grounds than the mischief of a paper currency not maintained at the same

value with a metallic, either by convertibility, or by some principal of

limitation equivalent to it; and although, accordingly, this doctrine has,

though not till after the discussions of many years, been tolerably effectually

drummed into the public mind; yet dissentients are still numerous, and

projectors every now and then start up, with plans for curing all the

economical evils of society by means of an unlimited issue of inconvertible

paper. There is, in truth, a great charm in the idea. To be able to pay off the

national debt, defray the expenses of government without taxation, and in

fine, to make the fortunes of the whole community, is a brilliant prospect,

when once a man is capable of believing that printing a few characters on bits

of paper will do it. The philosopher’s stone could not be expected to do more.

              As these projects, however often slain, always resuscitate, it is not

superfluous to examine one or two of the fallacies by which the schemers

impose upon themselves. One of the commonest is, that a paper currency

cannot be issued in excess so long aS every note issued represents property,

or has a foundation of actual property to rest on. These phrases, of

representing and resting, seldom convey any distinct or well-defined idea:

when they do, their meaning is no more than this — that the issuers of the

paper must have property, either of their own, or entrusted to them, to the

value of all the notes they issue: though for what purpose does not very

clearly appear; for if the property cannot be claimed in exchange for the

notes, it is difficult to divine in what manner its mere existence can serve touphold their value. I presume, however, it is intended as a guarantee that the

holders would be finally reimbursed, in case any untoward event should

cause the whole concern to be wound up. On this theory there have been

many schemes for “coining the whole land of the country into money” and

the like.

              In so far as this notion has any connexion at all with reason, it seems

to originate in confounding two entirely distinct evils, to which a paper

currency is liable. One is, the insolvency of the issuers; which, if the paper is

grounded on their credit — if it makes any promise of payment in cash, either

on demand or at any future time — of course deprives the paper of any vaLue

which it derives from the promise. To this evil paper credit is equally liable,

however moderately used; and against it, a proviso that all issues should be

“founded on property,” as for instance that notes should only be issued on the

security of some valuable thing expressly pledged for their redemption,

would really be efficacious as a precaution. But the theory takes no account

of another evil, which is incident to the notes of the most solvent firm,

company, or government; that of being depreciated in value from being

issued in excessive quantity. The assignats, during the French Revolution

were an example of a currency grounded on these principles. The assignats

“represented” an immense amount of highly valuable property, namely the

lands of the crown, the church, the monasteries, and the emigrants;

amounting possibly to half the territory of France. They were, in fact, orders

or assignments on this mass of land. The revolutionary government had the

idea of “coining” these lands into money; but, to do them justice, they did not

originally contemplate the immense multiplication of issues to which they

were eventually driven by the failure of all other financial resources. They

imagined that the assignats would come rapidly back to the issuers in

exchange for land, and that they should be able to reissue them continually

until the lands were all disposed of, without having at any time more than a

very moderate quantity in circulation. Their hope was frustrated: the land did

not sell so quickly as they expected; buyers were not inclined to invest their

money in possessions which were likely to be resumed without compensation

if the Revolution succumbed: the bits of paper which represented land,

becoming prodigiously multiplied, could no more keep up their value than

the land itself would have done if it had all been brought to market at once;

and the result was that it at last required an assignat of six hundred francs to

pay for a pound of butter.              The example of the assignats has been said not to be conclusive,

because an assignat only represented land in general, but not a definite

quantity of land. To have prevented their depreciation, the proper course, it is

affirmed, would have been to have made a valuation of all the confiscated

property at its metallic value, and to have issued assignats up to, but not

beyond, that limit; giving to the holders a right to demand any piece of land,

at its registered valuation, in exchange for assignats to the same amount.

There can be no question about the superiority of this plan over the one

actually adopted. Had this course been followed, the assignats could never

have been depreciated to the inordinate degree they were; for — as they

would have retained all their purchasing power in relation to land, however

much they might have fallen in respect to other things — before they had lost

very much of their market value, they would probably have been brought in

to be exchanged for land. It must be remembered, however, that their not

being depreciated would presuppose that no greater number of them

continued in circulation than would have circulated if they had been

convertible into cash. However convenient, therefore, in a time of revolution,

this currency convertible into land on demand might have been, as a

contrivance for selling rapidly a great quantity of land with the least possible

sacrifice; it is difficult to see what advantage it would have, as the permanent

system of a country, over a currency convertible into coin: while it is not at

all difficult to see what would be its disadvantages; since land is far more

variable in value than gold and silver; and besides, land, to most persons,

being rather an encumbrance than a desirable possession, except to be

converted into money, people would submit to a much greater depreciation
                                                                                    198
before demanding land, than they will before demanding gold or silver.

              4 Another of the fallacies from which the advocates of an

inconvertible currency derive support, is the notion that an increase of the

currency quickens industry. This idea was set afloat by Hume, in his Essay on

Money, and has had many devoted adherents since; witness the Birmingham

currency school, of whom Mr. Attwood was at one time the most

conspicuous representative. Mr. Attwood maintained that a rise of prices

produced by an increase of paper currency, stimulates every producer to his

utmost exertions, and brings all the capital and labour of the country into

complete employment; and that this has invariably happened in all periods of

rising prices, when the rise was on a sufficiently great scale. I presume,

however, that the inducement which, according to Mr Attwood, excited thisunusual ardour in all persons engaged in production, must have been the

expectation of getting more commodities generally, more real wealth, in

exchange for the produce of their labour, and not merely more pieces of

paper. This expectation, however, must have been, by the very terms of the

supposition, disappointed, since, all prices being supposed to rise equally, no

one was really better paid for his goods than before. Those who agree with

Mr. Attwood could only succeed in winning people on to these unwonted

exertions, by a prolongation of what would in fact be a delusion; contriving

matters so, that by a progressive rise of money prices, every producer shall

always seem to be in the very act of obtaining an increased remuneration

which he never, in reality, does obtain. It is unnecessary to advert to any

other of the objections to this plan, than that of its total impracticability. It

calculates on finding the whole world persisting for ever in the belief that

more pieces of paper are more riches, and never discovering that, with all

their paper, they cannot buy more of anything that they could before. No such

mistake was made during any of the periods of high prices, on the experience

of which this school lays so much stress. At the periods which Mr. Attwood

mistook for times of prosperity, and which were simply (as all periods of

high prices, under a convertible currency, must be) times of speculation, the

speculators did not think they were growing rich because the high prices

would last, but because they would not last, and because whoever contrived

to realize while they did last, would find himself, after the recoil, in

possession of a greater number of pounds sterling, without their having

become of less value. If, at the close of the speculation, an issue of paper had

been made, sufficient to keep prices up to the point which they attained when

at the highest, no one would have been more disappointed than the

speculators; since the gain which they thought to have reaped by realizing in

time (at the expense of their competitors, who bought when they sold, and

had to sell after the revulsion) would have faded away in their hands, and

instead of it they would have got nothing except a few more paper tickets to

count by.

              Hume’s version of the doctrine differed in a slight degree from Mr.

Attwood’s. He thought that all commodities would not rise in price

simultaneously, and that some persons therefore would obtain a real gain, by

getting more money for what they had to sell, while the things which they

wished to buy might not yet have risen. And those who would reap this gain

would always be (he seems to think) the first comers. It seems obvious,however, that for every person who thus gains more than usual, there is

necessarily some other person who gains less. The loser, if things took place

as Hume supposes, would be the seller of the commodities which are slowest

to rise; who, by the supposition, parts with his goods at the old prices, to

purchasers who have already benefited by the new. This seller has obtained

for his commodity only the accustomed quantity of money, while there are

already some things of which that money will no longer purchase as much as

before. If, therefore, he knows what is going on, he will raise his price, and

then the buyer will not have the gain, which is supposed to stimulate his

industry. But if, on the contrary, the seller does not know the state of the case,

and only discovers it when he finds, in laying his money out, that it does not

go so far, he then obtains less than the ordinary remuneration for his labour

and capital; and if the other dealer’s industry is encouraged, it should seem

that his must, from the opposite cause, be impaired.

              5. There is no way in which a general and permanent rise of prices,

or in other words, depreciation of money, can benefit anybody, except at the

expense of somebody else. The substitution of paper for metallic currency is

a national gain: any further increase of paper beyond this is but a form of

robbery.

              An issue of notes is a manifest gain to the issuers, who, until the

notes are returned for payment, obtain the use of them as if they were a real

capital: and so long as the notes are no permanent addition to the currency,

but merely supersede gold or silver to the same amount, the gain of the issuer

is a loss to no one; it is obtained by saving to the community the expense of

the more costly material. But if there is no gold or silver to be superseded —

if the notes are added to the currency, instead of being substituted for the

metallic part of it — all holders of currency lose, by the depreciation of its

value, the exact equivalent of what the issuer gains. A tax is virtually levied

on them for his benefit. It will be objected by some, that gains are also made

by the producers and dealers who, by means of the increased issue, are

accommodated with loans. Theirs, however, is not an additional gain, but a

portion of that which is reaped by the issuer at the expense of all possessors

of money. The profits arising from the contribution levied upon the public, he

does not keep to himself, but divides with his customers. But besides the

benefit reaped by the issuers, or by others through them, at the expense of the

public generally, there is another unjust gain obtained by a larger class,namely by those who are under fixed pecuniary obligations. All such persons

are freed, by a depreciation of the currency, from a portion of the burthen of

their debts or other engagements: in other words, part of the property of their

creditors is gratuitously transferred to them. On a superficial view it may be

imagined that this is an advantage to industry’. since the productive classes

are great borrowers, and generally owe larger debts to the unproductive (if we

include among the latter all persons not actually in business) than the

unproductive classes owe to them; especially if the national debt be included.

It is only thus that a general rise of prices can be a source of benefit to

producers and dealers; by diminishing the pressure of their fixed burthens.

And this might be accounted an advantage, if integrity and good faith were of

no importance to the world, and to industry and commerce in particular. Not

many, however, have been found to say that the currency ought to be

depreciated on the simple ground of its being desirable to rob the national

creditor and private creditors of a part of what is in their bond. The schemes

which have tended that way have almost always had some appearance of

special and circumstantial justification, such as the necessity of compensating

for a prior injustice committed in the contrary direction.

              6. Thus in England, for many years subsequent to 1819, it was

pertinaciously contended, that a large portion of the national debt, and a

multitude of private debts still in existence, were contracted between 1797

and 1819, when the Bank of England was exempted from giving cash for its

notes; and that it is grossly unjust to borrowers, (that is, in the case of the

national debt, to all tax-payers) that they should be paying interest on the

same nominal sums in a currency of full value, which were borrowed in a

depreciated one. The depreciation, according to the views and objects of the

particular writer, was represented to have averaged thirty, fifty, or even more

than fifty per cent: and the conclusion was, that either we ought to return to

this depreciated currency, or to strike off from the national debt, and from

mortgages or other private debts of old standing, a percentage corresponding

to the estimated amount of the depreciation.

              To this doctrine, the following was the answer usually made.

Granting that, by returning to cash payments without lowering the standard,

an injustice was done to debtors, in holding them liable for the same amount

of a currency enhanced in value, which they had borrowed while it was

depreciated; it is now too late to make reparation for this injury. The debtorsand creditors of today are not the debtors and creditors of 1819: the lapse of

years has entirely altered the pecuniary relations of the community., and it

being impossible now to ascertain the particular persons who were either

benefited or injured, to attempt to retrace our steps would not be redressing a

wrong, but superadding a second act of wide-spread injustice to the one

already committed. This argument is certainly conclusive on the practical

question; but it places the honest conclusion on too narrow and too low a

ground. It concedes that the measure of 1819, called Peel’s Bill, by which

cash payments were resumed at the original standard of 3l. 17s. 10 1/2d., was

really the injustice it was said to be. This is an admission wholly opposed to

the truth. Parliament had no alternative; it was absolutely bound to adhere to

the acknowledged standard; as may be shown on three distinct grounds, two

of fact, and one of principle.

              The reasons of fact are these. In the first place it is not true that the

debts, private or public, incurred during the Bank restriction, were contracted

in a currency of lower value than that in which the interest is now paid. It is

indeed true that the suspension of the obligation to pay in specie, did put it in

the power of the Bank to depreciate the currency. It is true also that the Bank

really exercised that power, though to a far less extent than is often

pretended; since the difference between the market price of gold and the Mint

valuation, during the greater part of the interval, was very trifling, and when

it was greatest, during the last five years of the war, did not much exceed

thirty per cent. To the extent of that difference, the currency was depreciated,

that is, its value was below that of the standard to which it professed to

adhere. But the state of Europe at that time was such — there was so unusual

an absorption of the precious metals, by hoarding, and in the military chests

of the vast armies which then desolated the Continent, that the value of the

standard itself was very considerably raised: and the best authorities, among

whom it is sufficient to name Mr Tooke, have, after an elaborate

investigation, satisfied themselves that the difference between paper and

bullion was not greater than the enhancement in value of gold itself, and that

the paper, though depreciated relatively to the then value of gold, did not sink

below the ordinary value, at other times, either of gold or of a convertible

paper. If this be true (and the evidences of the fact are conclusively stated in

Mr. Tooke’s History of Prices) the foundation of the whole case against the

fundholder and other creditors on the ground of depreciation is subverted.              But, secondly, even if the currency had really been lowered in value

at each period of the Bank restriction, in the same degree in which it was

depreciated in relation to its standard, we must remember that a part only of

the national debt, or of other permanent engagements, was incurred during

the Bank restriction. A large part had been contracted before 1797; a still

larger during the early years of the restriction, when the difference between

paper and gold was yet small. To the holders of the former part, an injury was

done, by paying the interest for twenty-two years in a depreciated currency:

those of the second, suffered an injury during the years in which the interest

was paid in a currency more depreciated than that in which the loans were

contracted. To have resumed cash payments at a lower standard would have

been to perpetuate the injury to these two classes of creditors, in order to

avoid giving an undue benefit to a third class, who had lent their money

during the few years of greatest depreciation. As it is, there was an

underpayment to one set of persons, and an overpayment to another. The late

Mr. Mushet took the trouble to make an arithmetical comparison between the

two amounts. He ascertained by calculation, that if an account had been made

out in 1819, of what the fundholders had gained and lost by the variation of

the paper currency from its standard, they would have been found as a body

to have been losers; so that if any compensation was due on the ground of

depreciation, it would not be from the fundholders collectively, but to them.

              Thus it is with the facts of the case. But these reasons of fact are not

the strongest. There is a reason of principle, still more powerful. Suppose

that, not a part of the debt merely, but the whole, had been contracted in a

depreciated currency, depreciated not only in comparison with its standard,

but with its own value before and after; and that we were now paying the

interest of this debt in a currency fifty or even a hundred per cent more

valuable than that in which it was contracted. What difference would this

make in the obligation of paying it, if the condition that it should be so paid

was part of the original compact? Now this is not only truth, but less than the

truth. The compact stipulated better terms for the fundholder than he has

received. During the whole continuance of the Bank restriction, there was a

parliamentary pledge, by which the legislature was as much bound as any

legislature is capable of binding itself, that cash payments should be resumed

on the original footing, at farthest in six months after the conclusion of a

general peace. This was therefore an actual condition of every loan; and the

terms of the loan were more favourable in consideration of it. Without somesuch stipulation, the Government could not have expected to borrow, unless

on the terms on which loans are made to the native princes of India. If it had

been understood and avowed that, after borrowing the money, the standard at

which it was commuted might be permanently lowered, to any extent which

to the “collective wisdom” of a legislature of borrowers might seem fit —

who can say what rate of interest would have been a sufficient inducement to

persons of common sense to risk their savings in such an adventure?

However much the fundholders had gained by the resumption of cash

payments, the terms of the contract insured their giving ample value for it.

They gave value for more than they received; since cash payments were not

resumed in six months, but in as many years, after the peace. So that waving

all our arguments except the last, and conceding all the facts asserted on the

other side of the question, the fundholders, instead of being unduly benefited,

are the injured party; and would have a claim to compensation, if such claims

were not very properly barred by the impossibility of adjudication, and by the

salutary general maxim of law and policy, “quod interest reipublicae ut sit

finis litium.”

        190
               Among the schemes of currency to which, strange to say,

intelligent writers have been found to give their sanction, one is as follows:

that the state should receive in pledge or mortgage, any kind or amount of

property, such as land, stock, &c., and should advance to the owners

inconvertible paper money to the estimated value. Such a currency would not

even have the recommendations of the imaginary assignats supposed in the

text: since those into whose hands the notes were paid by the persons who

received them, could not return them to the Government, and demand in

exchange land or stock which was only pledged, not alienated. There would

be no reflux of such assignats as these, and their depreciation would be

indefinite.

 

 

                         Chapter 14 – Of Excess of Supply

 

 

              1. After the elementary exposition of the theory of money contained

in the last few chapters, we shall return to a question in the general theory of

Value, which could not be satisfactorily discussed until the nature and

operations of Money were in some measure understood, because the errors

against which we have to contend mainly originate in a misunderstanding of

those operations.

              We have seen that the value of everything gravitates towards a

certain medium point (which has been called the Natural Value), namely, that

at which it exchanges for every other thing in the ratio of their cost of

production. We have seen, too, that the actual or market value coincides, or

nearly so, with the natural value, only on an average of years; and is

continually either rising above, or falling below it, from alterations in the

demand, or casual fluctuations in the supply: but that these variations correct

themselves, through the tendency of the supply to accommodate itself to the

demand which exists for the commodity at its natural value. A general

convergence thus results from the balance of opposite divergences. Dearth, or

scarcity, on the one hand, and over-supply, or in mercantile language, glut, on

the other, are incident to all commodities. In the first case, the commodity

affords to the producers or sellers, while the deficiency lasts, an unusually

high rate of profit: in the second, the supply being in excess of that for which

a demand exists at such a value as will afford the ordinary profit, the sellers

must be content with less, and must , in extreme cases, submit to a loss.

              Because this phenomenon of over-supply, and consequent

inconvenience or loss to the producer or dealer, may exist in the case of any

one commodity whatever, many persons, including some distinguished

political economists, have thought that it may exist with regard to all

commodities; that there may be a general over-production of wealth; a supply

of commodities in the aggregate, surpassing the demand; and a consequent

depressed condition of all classes of producers. Against this doctrine, of

which Mr. Malthus and Dr. Chalmers in this country, and M. de Sismondi on

the Continent, were the chief apostles, I have already contended in the First
      199
Book; but it was not possible, in that stage of our inquiry, to enter into acomplete examination of an error (as I conceive) essentially grounded on a

misunderstanding of the phenomena of Value and Price. The doctrine appears

to me to involve so much inconsistency in its very conception, that I feel

considerable difficulty in giving any statement of it which shall be at once

clear, and satisfactory to its supporters. They agree in maintaining that there

may be, and sometimes is, an excess of productions in general beyond the

demand for them; that when this happens, purchasers cannot be found at

prices which will repay the cost of production with a profit; that there ensues

a general depression of prices or values (they are seldom accurate in

discriminating between the two), so that producers, the more they produce,

find themselves the poorer, instead of richer; and Dr Chalmers accordingly

inculcates on capitalists the practice of a moral restraint in reference to the

pursuit of gain; while Sismondi deprecates machinery, and the various

inventions which increase productive power. They both maintain that

accumulation of capital may proceed too fast, not merely for the moral, but

for the material interests of those who produce and accumulate; and they

enjoin the rich to guard against this evil by an ample unproductive

consumption.

              2. When these writers speak of the supply of commodities as

outrunning the demand, it is not clear which of the two elements of demand

they have in view-the desire to possess, or the means of purchase; whether

their meaning is that there are, in such cases, more consumable products in

existence than the public desires to consume, or merely more than it is able to

pay for. In this uncertainty, it is necessary to examine both suppositions.

              First, let us suppose that the quantity of commodities produced is not

greater than the community would be glad to consume: is it, in that case,

possible that there should be a deficiency of demand for all commodities, for

want of the means of payment? Those who think so cannot have considered

what it is which constitutes the means of payment for commodities. It is

simply commodities. Each person’s means of paying for the productions of

other people consists of those which he himself possesses. All sellers are

inevitably and ex vi termini buyers. Could we suddenly double the productive

powers of the country, we should double the supply of commodities in every

market; but we should, by the same stroke, double the purchasing power.

Everybody would bring a double demand as well as supply: everybody would

be able to buy twice as much, because every one would have twice as muchto offer in exchange. It is probable, indeed, that there would now be a

superfluity of certain things. although the community would willingly double

its aggregate consumption, it may already have as much as it desires of some

commodities, and it may prefer to do more than double its consumption of

others, or to exercise its increased purchasing power on some new thing. If

so, the supply will adapt itself accordingly, and the values of things will

continue to conform to their cost of production. At any rate, it is a sheer

absurdity that all things should fall in value, and that all producers should, in

consequence, be insufficiently remunerated. If values remain the same, what

becomes of prices is immaterial, since the remuneration of producers does

not depend on how much money, but on how much of consumable articles,

they obtain for their goods. Besides, money is a commodity; and if all

commodities are supposed to be doubled in quantity, we must suppose money

to be doubled too, and then prices would no more fall than values would.

              3. A general over-supply , or excess of all commodities above the

demand, so far as demand consists in means of payment, is thus shown to be

an impossibility. But it may perhaps he supposed that it is not the ability to

purchase, but the desire to possess, that falls short, and that the general

produce of industry may be greater than the community desires to consume

— the part, at least, of the community which has an equivalent to give. It is

evident enough, that produce makes a market for produce, and that there is

wealth in the country with which to purchase all the wealth in the country;

but those who have the means, may not have the wants, and those who have

the wants may be without the means. A portion, therefore, of the

commodities produced may be unable to find a market, from the absence of

means in those who have the desire to consume, and the want of desire in

those who have the means.

              This is much the most plausible form of the doctrine, and does not,

like that which we first examined, involve a contradiction. There may easily

be a greater quantity of any particular commodity than is desired by those

who have the ability to purchase, and it is abstractedly conceivable that this

might be the case with all commodities. The error is in not perceiving that

though all who have an equivalent to give, might be fully provided with

every consumable article which they desire, the fact that they go on adding to

the production proves that this is not actually the case. Assume the most

favourable hypothesis for the purpose, that of a limited community, everymember of which possesses as much of necessaries and of all known luxuries

as he desires: and since it is not conceivable that persons whose wants were

completely satisfied would labour and economize to obtain what they did not

desire, suppose that a foreigner arrives and produces an additional quantity of

something of which there was already enough. Here, it will be said, is over-

production: true, I reply; over-production of that particular article: the

community wanted no more of that, but it wanted something. The old

inhabitants, indeed, wanted nothing; but did not the foreigner himself want

something? When he produced the superfluous article, was he labouring

without a motive? He has produced, but the wrong thing instead of the right.

He wanted, perhaps, food, and has produced watches, with which everybody

was sufficiently supplied. The new comer brought with him into the country a

demand for commodities, equal to all that he could produce by his industry,

and it was his business to see that the supply he brought should be suitable to

that demand. If he could not produce something capable of exciting a new

want or desire in the community, for the satisfaction of which some one

would grow more food and give it to him in exchange, he had the alternative

of growing food for himself; either on fresh land, if there was any

unoccupied, or as a tenant, or partner, or servant, of some former occupier,

willing to be partially relieved from labour. He has produced a thing not

wanted, instead of what was wanted; and he himself, perhaps, is not the kind

of producer who is wanted; but there is no over-production; production is not

excessive, but merely ill assorted. We saw before, that whoever brings

additional commodities to the market, brings an additional power of

purchase; we now see that he brings also an additional desire to consume;

since if he had not that desire, he would not have troubled himself to produce.

Neither of the elements of demand, therefore, can be wanting, when there is

an additional supply; though it is perfectly possible that the demand may be

for one thing, and the supply may unfortunately consist of another.

              Driven to his last retreat, an opponent may perhaps allege, that there

are persons who produce and accumulate from mere habit; not because they

have any object in growing richer, or desire to add in any respect to their

consumption, but from vis inertiae. They continue producing because the

machine is ready mounted, and save and re-invest their savings because they

have nothing on which they care to expend them. I grant that this is possible,

and in some few instances probably happens; but these do not in the smallest

degree affect our conclusion. For, what do these persons do with theirsavings? They invest them productively. that is, expend them in employing

labour. In other words, having a purchasing power belonging to them, more

than they know what to do with, they make over the surplus of it for the

general benefit of the labouring class. Now, will that class also not know

what to do with it? Are we to suppose that they too have their wants perfectly

satisfied, and go on labouring from mere habit? Until this is the case; until the

working classes have also reached the point of satiety-there will be no want

of demand for the produce of capital, however rapidly it may accumulate:

since, if there is nothing else for it to do, it can always find employment in

producing the necessaries or luxuries of the labouring class. And when they

too had no further desire for necessaries or luxuries, they would take the

benefit of any further increase of wages by diminishing their work; so that the

over-production which then for the first time would be possible in idea, could

not even then take place in fact, for want of labourers. Thus, in whatever

manner the question is looked at, even though we go to the extreme verge of

possibility to invent a supposition favourable to it, the theory of general over-

production implies an absurdity.

              4. What then is it by which men who have reflected much on

economical phenomena, and have even contributed to throw new light upon

them by original speculations, have been led to embrace so irrational a

doctrine? I conceive them to have been deceived by a mistaken interpretation

of certain mercantile facts. They imagined that the possibility of a general

oversupply of commodities was proved by experience. They believed that

they saw this phenomenon in certain conditions of the markets, the true

explanation of which is totally different.

              I have already described the state of the markets for commodities

which accompanies what is termed a commercial crisis. At such times there is

really an excess of all commodities above the money demand: in other words,

there is an under-supply of money. From the sudden annihilation of a great

mass of credit, every one dislikes to part with ready money, and many are

anxious to procure it at any sacrifice. Almost everybody therefore is a seller,

and there are scarcely any buyers; so that there may really be, though only

while the crisis lasts, an extreme depression of general prices, from what may

be indiscriminately called a glut of commodities or a dearth of money. But it

is a great error to suppose, with Sismondi, that a commercial crisis is the

effect of a general excess of production. It is simply the consequence of anexcess of speculative purchases. It is not a gradual advent of low prices, hut a

sudden recoil from prices extravagantly high: its immediate cause is a

contraction of credit, and the remedy is, not a dilution of supply , but the

restoration of confidence. It is also evident that this temporary derangement

of markets is an evil only because it is temporary. The fall being solely of

money prices, if prices did not rise again no dealer would lose, since the

smaller price would be worth as much to him as the larger price was before.

In no manner does this phenomenon answer to the description which these

celebrated economists have given of the evil of over-production. The

permanent decline in the circumstances of producers, for want of markets,

which those writers contemplate, is a conception to which the nature of a

commercial crisis gives no support.

              The other phenomenon from which the notion of a general excess of

wealth and superfluity of accumulation seems to derive countenance, is one

of a more permanent nature, namely, the fall of profits and interest which

naturally takes place with the progress of population and production. The

cause of this decline of profit is the increased cost of maintaining labour,

which results from an increase of population and of the demand for food,

outstripping the advance of agricultural improvement. This important feature

in the economical progress of nations will receive full consideration and
                                        200
discussion in the succeeding Book. It is obviously a totally different thing

from a want of market for commodities, though often confounded with it in

the complaints of the producing and trading classes. The true interpretation of

the modern or present state of industrial economy, is, that there is hardly any

amount of business which may not be done, if people will be content to do it

on small profits; and this, all active and intelligent persons in business

perfectly well know. but even those who comply with the necessities of their

time, grumble at what they comply with, and wish that there were less capital,

or as they express it, less competition, in order that there might be greater

profits. Low profits, however, are a different thing from deficiency of

demand; and the production and accumulation which merely reduce profits,

cannot be called excess of supply or of production. What the phenomenon

really is, and its effects and necessary limits, will be seen when we treat of

that express subject.

              I know not of any economical facts, except the two I have specified,

which can have given occasion to the opinion that a general over-productionof commodities ever presented itself in actual experience. I am convinced that

there is no fact in commercial affairs, which, in order to its explanation,

stands in need of that chimerical supposition.

              The point is fundamental; any difference of opinion on it involves

radically different conceptions of Political Economy, especially in its

practical aspect. On the one view, we have only to consider how a sufficient

production may be combined with the best possible distribution; but on the

other there is a third thing to be considered-how a market can be created for

produce, or how production can be limited to the capabilities of the market.

Besides; a theory so essentially self-contradictory cannot intrude itself

without carrying confusion into the very heart of the subject, and making it

impossible even to conceive with any distinctness many of the more

complicated economical workings of society. This error has been, I conceive,

fatal to the systems, as systems, of the three distinguished economists to

whom I before referred, Malthus, Chalmers, and Sismondi; all of whom have

admirably conceived and explained several of the elementary theorems of

political economy, but this fatal misconception has spread itself like a veil

between them and the more difficult portions of the subject, not suffering one

ray of light to penetrate. Still more is this same confused idea constantly

crossing and bewildering the speculations of minds inferior to theirs. It is but

justice to two eminent names, to call attention to the fact, that the merit of

having placed this most important point in its true light, belongs principally,

on the Continent, to the judicious J.B. Say, and in this country to Mr Mill;

who (besides the conclusive exposition which he gave of the subject in his

Elements of Political Economy) had set forth the correct doctrine with great

force and clearness in an early pamphlet, called forth by a temporary

controversy, and entitled, “Commerce Defended;” the first of his writings

which attained any celebrity, and which he pried more as having been his

first introduction to the friendship of David Ricardo, the most valued and

most intimate friendship of his life.

        191
               Supra, vol. i. pp. 66–8.

        192
               Infra, book iv. chap. 4.

 

                        Chapter 15 – Of a Measure of Value

 

 

              1. There has been much discussion among political economists

respecting a Measure of Value. An importance has been attached to the

subject, greater than it deserved, and what has been written respecting it has

contributed not a little to the reproach of logomachy, which is brought, with

much exaggeration, but not altogether without ground, against the

speculations of political economists. It is necessary however to touch upon

the subject, if only to show how little there is to be said on it.

              A Measure of Value, in the ordinary sense of the word measure,

would mean, something, by comparison with which we may ascertain what is

the value of any other thing. When we consider farther, that value itself is

relative, and that two things are necessary to constitute it, independently of

the third thing which is to measure it; we may define a Measure of Value to

be something, by comparing with which any two other things, we may infer

their value in relation to one another.

              In this sense, any commodity will serve as a measure of value at a

given time and place; since we can always infer the proportion in which

things exchange for one another, when we know the proportion in which each

exchanges for any third thing. To serve as a convenient measure of value is

one of the functions of the commodity selected as a medium of exchange. It

is in that commodity that the values of all other things are habitually

estimated. We say that one thing is worth 2l., another 3l.; and it is then

known without express statement, that one is worth two-thirds of the other, or

that the things exchange for one another in the proportion of 2 to 3. Money is

a complete measure of their value.

              But the desideratum sought by political economists is not a measure

of the value of things at the same time and place, but a measure of the value

of the same thing at different times and places: something by comparison

with which it may be known whether any given thing is of greater or less

value now than a century ago, or in this country than in America or China.

And for this also, money, or any other commodity, will serve quite as well as

at the same time and place, provided we can obtain the same data; providedwe are able to compare with the measure not one commodity only, but the

two or more which are necessary to the idea of value. If wheat is now 40s. the

quarter, and a fat sheep the same, and if in the time of Henry the Second

wheat was 20s., and a sheep 10s., we know that a quarter of wheat was then

worth two sheep, and is now only worth one, and that the value therefore of a

sheep, estimated in wheat, is twice as great as it was then; quite

independently of the value of money at the two periods, either in relation to

those two articles (in respect to both of which we suppose it to have fallen),

or to other commodities, in respect to which we need not make any

supposition.

              What seems to be desired, however, by writers on the subject, is

some means of ascertaining the value of a commodity by merely comparing it

with the measure, without referring it specially to any other given

commodity. They would wish to be able, from the mere fact that wheat is

now 40s. the quarter, and was formerly 20s., to decide whether wheat has

varied in its value, and in what degree, without selecting a second

commodity, such as a sheep, to compare it with; because they are desirous of

knowing, not how much wheat has varied in value relatively to sheep, but

how much it has varied relatively to things in general.

              The first obstacle arises from the necessary indefiniteness of the idea

of general exchange value — value in relation not to some one commodity,

but to commodities at large. Even if we knew exactly how much a quarter of

wheat would have purchased at the earlier period, of every marketable article

considered separately, and that it will now purchase more of some things and

less of others, we should often find it impossible to say whether it had risen

or fallen in relation to things in general. How much more impossible, when

we only know how it has varied in relation to the measure. To enable the

money price of a thing at two different periods to measure the quantity of

things in general which it will exchange for, the same sum of money must

correspond at both periods to the same quantity of things in general, that is,

money must always have the same exchange value, the same general

purchasing power. Now, not only is this not true of money, or of any other

commodity, but we cannot even suppose any state of circumstances in which

it would be true.

              2. A measure of exchange value, therefore, being impossible, writers

have formed a notion of something, under the name of a measure of value,which would be more properly termed a measure of cost of production. They

have imagined a commodity invariably produced by the same quantity of

labour; to which supposition it is necessary to add, that the fixed capital

employed in the production must bear always the same proportion to the

wages of the immediate labour, and must be always of the same durability: in

short, the same capital must be advanced for the same length of time, so that

the element of value which consists of profits, as well as that which consists

of wages, may be unchangeable. We should then have a commodity always

produced under one and the same combination of all the circumstances which

affect permanent value. Such a commodity would be by no means constant in

its exchange value; for (even without reckoning the temporary fluctuations

arising from supply and demand) its exchange value would be altered by

every change in the circumstances of production of the things against which

it was exchanged. But if there existed such a commodity, we should derive

this advantage from it, that whenever any other thing varied permanently in

relation to it, we should know that the cause of variation was not in it, but in

the other thing. It would thus be suited to serve as a measure, not indeed of

the value of other things, but of their cost of production. If a commodity

acquired a greater permanent purchasing power in relation to the invariable

commodity, its cost of production must have become greater; and in the

contrary case, less. This measure of cost, is what political economists have

generally meant by a measure of value.

              But a measure of cost, though perfectly conceivable, can no more

exist in fact, than a measure of exchange value. There is no commodity which

is invariable in its cost of production. Gold and silver are the least variable,

but even these are liable to changes in their cost of production, from the

exhaustion of old sources of supply, the discovery of new, and improvements

in the mode of working. If we attempt to ascertain the changes in the cost of

production of any commodity from the changes in its money price, the

conclusion will require to be corrected by the best allowance we can make for

the intermediate changes in the cost of the production of money itself.

              Adam Smith fancied that there were two commodities peculiarly

fitted to serve as a measure of value: corn, and labour. Of corn, he said that

although its value fluctuates much from year to year, it does not vary greatly

from century to century. This we now know to be an error: corn tends to rise

in cost of production with every increase of population, and to fall with everyimprovement in agriculture, either in the country itself, or in any foreign

country from which it draws a portion of its supplies. The supposed

constancy of the cost of the production of corn depends on the maintenance

of a complete equipoise between these antagonizing forces, an equipoise

which, if ever realized, can only be accidental. With respect to labour as a

measure of value, the language of Adam Smith is not uniform. He sometimes

speaks of it as a good measure only for short periods, saying that the value of

labour (or wages) does not vary much from year to year, though it does from

generation to generation. On other occasions he speaks as if labour were

intrinsically the most proper measure of value, on the ground that one day’s

ordinary muscular exertion of one man, may be looked upon as always, to

him, the same amount of effort or sacrifice. But this proposition, whether in

itself admissible or not, discards the idea of exchange value altogether,

substituting a totally different idea, more analogous to value in use. If a day’s

labour will purchase in America twice as much of ordinary consumable

articles as in England, it seems a vain subtlety to insist on saying that labour

is of the same value in both countries, and that it is the value of the other

things which is different. Labour, in this case, may be correctly said to be

twice as valuable, both in the market and to the labourer himself, in America

as in England.

              If the object were to obtain an approximate measure by which to

estimate value in use, perhaps nothing better could be chosen than one day’s

subsistence of an average man, reckoned in the ordinary food consumed by

the class of unskilled labourers. If in any country a pound of maize flour will

support a labouring man for a day, a thing might be deemed more or less

valuable in proportion to the number of pounds of maize flour it exchanged

for. If one thing, either by itself or by what it would purchase, could maintain

a labouring man for a day, and another could maintain him for a week, there

would be some reason in saying that the one was worth, for ordinary human

uses, seven times as much as the other. But this would not measure the worth

of the thing to its possessor for his own purposes, which might be greater to

any amount, though it could not be less, than the worth of the food which the

thing would purchase.

              The idea of a Measure of Value must not be confounded with the

idea of the regulator, or determining principle, of value. When it is said by

Ricardo and others, that the value of a thing is regulated by quantity oflabour, they do not mean the quantity of labour for which the thing will

exchange, but the quantity required for producing it. This, they mean to

affirm, determines its value; causes it to be of the value it is, and of no other.

But when Adam Smith and Malthus say that labour is a measure of value,

they do not mean the labour by which the thing was or can be made, but the

quantity of labour which it will exchange for, or purchase; in other words the

value of the thing, estimated in labour. And they do not mean that this

regulates the general exchange value of the thing, or has any effect in

determining what that value shall be, but only ascertains what it is, and

whether and how much it varies from time to time and from place to place.

To confound these two ideas, would be much the same thing as to overlook

the distinction between the thermometer and the fire.

 

 

                 Chapter 16 – Of Some Peculiar Cases of Value

 

 

              1. The general laws of value, in all the more important cases of the

interchange of commodities in the same country, have now been investigated.

We examined, first, the case of monopoly, in which the value is determined

by either a natural or an artificial limitation of quantity, that is, by demand

and supply; secondly, the case of free competition, when the article can be

produced in indefinite quantity at the same cost; in which case the permanent

value is determined by the cost of production, and only the fluctuations by

supply and demand; thirdly, a mixed case, that of the articles which can be

produced in indefinite quantity, but not at the same cost; in which case the

permanent value is determined by the greatest cost which it is necessary to

incur in order to obtain the required supply. And lastly, we have found that

money itself is a commodity of the third class; that its value, in a state of

freedom, is governed by the same laws as the values of other commodities of

its class; and that prices, therefore, follow the same laws as values.

              From this it appears that demand and supply govern the fluctuations

of values and prices in all cases, and the permanent values and prices of all

things of which the supply is determined by any agency other than that of

free competition: but that, under the regime of competition, things are, on the

average, exchanged for each other at such values, and sold at such prices, as

afford equal expectation of advantage to all classes of producers; which can

only be when things exchange for one another in the ratio of their cost of

production.

              It is now, however, necessary to take notice of certain cases, to

which, from their peculiar nature, this law of exchange value is inapplicable.

              It sometimes happens that two different commodities have what may

be termed a joint cost of production. They are both products of the same

operation, or set of operations, and the outlay is incurred for the sake of both

together, not part for one and part for the other. The same outlay would have

to be incurred for either of the two, if the other were not wanted or used at all.

There are not a few instances of commodities thus associated in their

production. For example, coke and coal-gas are both produced from the samematerial, and by the same operation. In a more partial sense, mutton and wool

are an example: beef, hides, and tallow: calves and dairy produce: chickens

and eggs. Cost of production can have nothing to do with deciding the value

of the associated commodities relatively to each other. It only decides their

joint value. The gas and the coke together have to repay the expenses of their

production, with the ordinary profit. To do this, a given quantity of gas,

together with the coke which is the residuum of its manufacture, must

exchange for other things in the ratio of their joint cost of production. But

how much of the remuneration of the producer shall be derived from the

coke, and how much from the gas, remains to be decided. Cost of production

does not determine their prices, hut the sum of their prices. A principle is

wanting to apportion the expenses of production between the two.

              Since cost of production here fails us, we must revert to a law of

value anterior to cost of production, and more fundamental, the law of

demand and supply. The law is, that the demand for a commodity varies with

its value, and that the value adjusts itself so that the demand shall be equal to

the supply. This supplies the principle of repartition which we are in quest of.

              Suppose that a certain quantity of gas is produced and sold at a

certain price, and that the residuum of coke is offered at a price which,

together with that of the gas, repays the expenses with the ordinary rate of

profit. Suppose, too, that at the price put upon the gas and coke respectively,

the whole of the gas finds an easy market, without either surplus or

deficiency, but that purchasers cannot be found for all the coke corresponding

to it. The coke will be offered at a lower price in order to force a market. But

this lower price, together with the price of the gas, will not be remunerating:

the manufacture, as a whole, will not pay its expenses with the ordinary

profit, and will not, on these terms, continue to be carried on. The gas,

therefore, must be sold at a higher price, to make up for the deficiency on the

coke. The demand consequently contracting, the production will be

somewhat reduced; and prices will become stationary when, by the joint

effect of the rise of gas and the fall of coke, so much less of the first is sold,

and so much more of the second, that there is now a market for all the coke

which results from the existing extent of the gas manufacture. Or suppose the

reverse case; that more coke is wanted at the present prices, than can be

supplied by the operations required by the existing demand for gas. Coke,

being now in deficiency, will rise in price. The whole operation will yieldmore than the usual rate of profit, and additional capital will he attracted to

the manufacture. The unsatisfied demand for coke will he supplied; but this

cannot be done without increasing the supply of gas too; and as the existing

demand was fully supplied already, an increased quantity can only find a

market by lowering the price. The result will be that the two together will

yield the return required by their joint cost of production, but that more of

this return than before will be furnished by the coke, and less by the gas.

Equilibrium will be attained when the demand for each article fits so well

with the demand for the other, that the quantity required of each is exactly as

much as is generated in producing the quantity required of the other. If there

is any surplus or deficiency on either side; if there is a demand for coke, and

not a demand for all the gas produced along with it, or vice versa; the values

and prices of the two things will so readjust themselves that both shall find a

market.

              When, therefore, two or more commodities have a joint cost of

production, their natural values relatively to each other are those which will

create a demand for each, in the ratio of the quantities in which they are sent

forth by the productive process. This theorem is not in itself of any great

importance: but the illustration it affords of the law of demand, and of the

mode in which, when cost of production fails to be applicable, the other

principle steps in to supply the vacancy, is worthy of particular attention, as

we shall find in the next chapter but one that something very similar takes

place in cases of much greater moment.

              2. Another case of values which merits attention, is that of the

different kinds of agricultural produce. This is rather a more complex

question that the last, and requires that attention should be paid to a greater

number of influencing circumstances. The case would present nothing

peculiar, if different agricultural products were either grown indiscriminately

and with equal advantage on the same soils, or wholly on different soils. The

difficulty arises from two things: first, that most soils are fitter for one kind of

produce than another, without being absolutely unfit for any; and secondly,

the rotation of crops.

              For simplicity, we will confine our supposition to two kinds of

agricultural produce; for instance, wheat and oats. If all soils were equally

adapted for wheat and for oats, both would be grown indiscriminately on all

soils, and their relative cost of production, being the same everywhere, wouldgovern their relative value. If the same labour which grows three quarters of

wheat on any given soil, would always grow on that soil five quarters of oats,

the three and the five quarters would be of the same value. If again, wheat

and oats could not be grown on the same soil at all, the value of each would

be determined by its peculiar cost of production on the least favourable of the

soils adapted for it which the existing demand required a recourse to. The

fact, however, is that both wheat and oats can be grown on almost any soil

which is capable of producing either: but some soils, such as the stiff clays,

are better adapted for wheat, while others (the light sandy soils) are more

suitable for oats. There might be some soils which would yield, to the same

quantity of labour, only four quarters of oats to three of wheat; others perhaps

less than three of wheat to five quarters of oats. Among these diversities,

what determines the relative value of the two things?

              It is evident that each grain will be cultivated in preference, on the

soils which are better adapted for it than for the other; and if the demand is

supplied from these alone, the values of the two grains will have no reference

to one another. But when the demand for both is such as to require that each

should be grown not only on the soils peculiarly fitted for it, but on the

medium soils which, without being specifically adapted to either, are about

equally suited for both, the cost of production on those medium soils will

determine the relative value of the two grains; while the rent of the soils

specifically adapted to each, will be regulated by their productive power,

considered with reference to that one alone to which they are peculiarly

applicable. Thus far the question presents no difficulty, to any one to whom

the general principles of value are familiar.

              It may happen, however, that the demand for one of the two, as for

example wheat, may so outstrip the demand for the other, as not only to

occupy the soils specially suited for wheat, but to engross entirely those

equally suitable to both, and even encroach upon those which are better

adapted to oats. To create an inducement for this unequal apportionment of

the cultivation, wheat must be relatively dearer, and oats cheaper, than

according to the cost of their production on the medium land. Their relative

value must be in proportion to the cost on that quality of land, whatever it

may be, on which the comparative demand for the two grins requires that

both of them should be grown. If, from the state of the demand, the two

cultivations meet on land more favourable to one than to the other, that onewill be cheaper and the other dearer, in relation to each other and to things in

general, than if the proportional demand were as we at first supposed.

              Here, then, we obtain a fresh illustration, in a somewhat different

manner, of the operation of demand, not as an occasional disturber of value,

but as a permanent regulator of it, conjoined with, or supplementary to, cost

of production.

              The case of rotation of crops does not require separate analysis,

being a case of joint cost of production, like that of gas and coke. If it were

the practice to grow white and green crops on all lands in alternate years, the

one being necessary as much for the sake of the other as for its own sake; the

farmer would derive his remuneration for two years’ expenses from one

white and one green crop, and the prices of the two would so adjust

themselves as to create a demand which would carry off an equal breadth of

white and of green crops.

              There would be little difficulty in finding other anomalous cases of

value, which it might be a useful exercise to resolve: hut it is neither desirable

nor possible, in a work like the present, to enter more into details than is

necessary for the elucidation of principles. I now therefore proceed to the

only part of the general theory of exchange which has not yet been touched

upon, that of International Exchanges, or to speak more generally, exchanges

between distant places.

 

 

                       Chapter 17 – Of International Trade

 

 

              1. The causes which occasion a commodity to be brought from a

distance, instead of being produced, as convenience would seem to dictate, as

near as possible to the market where it is to be sold for consumption, are

usually conceived in a rather superficial manner. Some things it is physically

impossible to produce, except in particular circumstances of heat, soil, water,

or atmosphere. But there are many things which, though they could be

produced at home without difficulty, and in any quantity, are yet imported

from a distance. The explanation which would be popularly given of this

would be, that it is cheaper to import than to produce them: and this is the

true reason. But this reason itself requires that a reason be given for it. Of two

things produced in the same place, if one is cheaper than the other, the reason

is that it can be produced with less labour and capital, or, in a word, at less

cost. Is this also the reason as between things produced in different places?

Are things never imported but from places where they can be produced with

less labour (or less of the other element of cost, time) than in the place to

which they are brought? Does the law, that permanent value is proportioned

to cost of production, hold good between commodities produced in distant

places, as it does between those produced in adjacent places?

              We shall find that it does not. A thing may sometimes be sold

cheapest, by being produced in some other place than that at which it can be

produced with the smallest amount of labour and abstinence. England might

import corn from Poland and pay for it in cloth, even though England had a

decided advantage over Poland in the production of both the one and the

other. England might send cottons to Portugal in exchange for wine, although

Portugal might be able to produce cottons with a less amount of labour and

capital than England could.

              This could not happen between adjacent places. If the north bank of

the Thames possessed an advantage over the south bank in the production of

shoes, no shoes would be produced on the south side; the shoemakers would

remove themselves and their capitals to the north bank, or would have

established themselves there originally. for being competitors in the same

market with those on the north side, they could not compensate themselvesfor their disadvantage at the expense of the consumer: the mount of it would

fall entirely on their profits; and they would not long content themselves with

a smaller profit, when, by simply crossing a river, they could increase it. But

between distant places, and especially between different countries, profits

may continue different; because persons do not usually remove themselves or

their capitals to a distant place, without a very strong motive. If capital

removed to remote parts of the world as readily, and for as small an

inducement, as it moves to another quarter of the same town; if people would

transport their manufactories to America or China whenever they could save

a small percentage in their expenses by it; profits would be alike (or

equivalent) all over the world, and all things would he produced in the places

where the same labour and capital would produce them in greatest quantity

and of best quality. A tendency may, even now, be observed towards such a

state of things; capital is becoming more and more cosmopolitan; there is so

much greater similarity of manners and institutions than formerly, and so

much less alienation of feeling, among the more civilized countries, that both

population and capital now move from one of those countries to another on

much less temptation than heretofore. But there are still extraordinary

differences, both of wages and of profits, between different parts of the

world. It needs but a small motive to transplant capital, or even persons, from

Warwickshire to Yorkshire; but a much greater to make them remove to

India, the colonies, or Ireland. To France, Germany, or Switzerland, capital

moves perhaps almost as readily as to the colonies; the difference of language

and government being scarcely so great a hindrance as climate and distance.

To countries still barbarous, or, like Russia or Turkey, only beginning to be

civilized, capital will not migrate, unless under the inducement of a very great

extra profit.

              Between all distant places therefore in some degree, but especially

between different countries (whether under the same supreme government or

not,) there may exist great inequalities in the return to labour and capital,

without causing them to move from one place to the other in such quantity as

to level those inequalities. The capital belonging to a country will, to a great

extent, remain in the country, even if there be no mode of employing it in

which it would not be more productive elsewhere. Yet even a country thus

circumstanced might, and probably would, carry on trade with other

countries. It would export articles of some sort, even to places which could

make them with less labour than itself; because those countries, supposingthem to have an advantage over it in all productions, would have a greater

advantage in some things than in others, and would find it their interest to

import the articles in which their advantage was smallest, that they might

employ more of their labour and capital on those in which it was greatest.

                                          201
              2. As I have said elsewhere after Ricardo (the thinker who has
                                                  202
done most towards clearing up this subject)  “it is not a difference in the

absolute cost of production, which determines the interchange, but a

difference in the comparative cost. It may be to our advantage to procure iron

from Sweden in exchange for cottons, even although the mines of England as

well as her manufactories should be more productive than those of Sweden;

for if we have an advantage of one-half in cottons, and only an advantage of a

quarter in iron, and could sell our cottons to Sweden at the price which

Sweden must pay for them if she produced them herself, we should obtain

our iron with an advantage of one-half as well as our cottons. We may often,

by trading with foreigners, obtain their commodities at a smaller expense of

labour and capital than they cost to the foreigners themselves. The bargain is

still advantageous to the foreigner, because the commodity which he receives

in exchange, though it has cost us less, would have cost him more.” To

illustrate the cases in which interchange of commodities will not, and those in

which it will, take place between two countries, Mr. Mill, in his Elements of
                    203
Political Economy, makes the supposition that Poland has an advantage

over England in the production both of cloth and of corn. He first supposes

the advantage to be of equal amount in both commodities; the cloth and the

corn, each of which required 100 days’ labour in Poland, requiring each 150

days’ labour in England. “It would follow, that the cloth of 150 days’ labour

in England, if sent to Poland, would be equal to the cloth of 100 days’ labour

in Poland; if exchanged for corn, therefore, it would exchange for the corn of

only 100 days’ labour. But the corn of 100 days’ labour in Poland, was

supposed to be the same quantity with that of 150 days’ labour in England.

With 150 days’ labour in cloth, therefore, England would only get as much

corn in Poland, as she could raise with 150 days’ labour at home; and she

would, in importing it, have the cost of carriage besides. In these

circumstances no exchange would take place.” In this case the comparative

costs of the two articles in England and in Poland were supposed to be the

same, though the absolute costs were different; on which supposition we see

that there would be no labour saved to either country, by confining its

industry to one of the two productions, and importing the other.              It is otherwise when the comparative, and not merely the absolute

costs of the two articles are different in the two countries. “If,” continues the

same author, “while the cloth produced with 100 days’ labour in Poland was

produced with 150 days’ labour in England, the corn which was produced in

Poland with 100 days’ labour could not be produced in England with less

than 200 days’ labour; an adequate motive to exchange would immediately

arise. With a quantity of cloth which England produced with 150 days’

labour, she would be able to purchase as much corn in Poland as was there

produced with 100 days’ labour; but the quantity which was there produced

with 100 days’ labour, would be as great as the quantity produced in England

with 200 days’ labour.” By importing corn, therefore, from Poland, and

paying for it with cloth, England would obtain for 150 days’ labour what

would otherwise cost her 200; being a saving of 50 days’ labour on each

repetition of the transaction: and not merely a saving to , for it is not obtained

at the expense of England, but a saving absolutely. Poland, who, with corn

that costs her 100 days’ labour, has purchased cloth which, if produced at

home, would have cost her the same. Poland, therefore, on this supposition,

loses nothing; but also she derives no advantage from the trade, the imported

cloth costing her as much as if it were made at home. To enable Poland to

gain anything by the interchange, something must be abated from the gain of

England : the corn produced in Poland by 100 days’ labour, must be able to

purchase from England more cloth than Poland could produce by that amount

of labour; more therefore than England could produce by 150 days’ labour,

England thus obtaining the corn which would have cost her 200 days, at a

cost exceeding 150, though short of 200. England therefore no longer gains

the whole of the labour which is saved to the two jointly by trading with one

another.

              3. From this exposition we perceive in what consists the benefit of

international exchange, or in other words, foreign commerce . Setting aside

its enabLing countries to obtain commodities which they could not

themselves produce at all; its advantage consists in a more efficient

employment of the productive forces of the world. If two countries which

trade together attempted, as far as was physically possible, to produce for

themselves what they now import from one another, the labour and capital of

the two countries would not be so productive, the two together would not

obtain from their industry so great a quantity of commodities, as when each

employs itself in producing, both for itself and for the other, the things inwhich its labour is relatively most efficient. The addition thus made to the

produce of the two combined, constitutes the advantage of the trade. It is

possible that one of the two countries may be altogether inferior to the other

in productive capacities, and that its labour and capital could be employed to

greatest advantage by being removed bodily to the other. The labour and

capital which have been sunk in rendering Holland habitable, would have

produced a much greater return if transported to America or Ireland. The

produce of the whole world would be greater, or the labour less, than it is, if

everything were produced where there is the greatest absolute facility for its

production. But nations do not, at least in modern times, emigrate en masse;

and while the labour and capital of a country remain in the country, they are

most beneficially employed in producing, for foreign markets as well as for

its own, the things in which it lies under the least disadvantage, if there be

none in which it possesses an advantage.

              4. Before proceeding further, let us contrast this view of the benefits

of international commerce with other theories which have prevailed, and

which to a certain extent still prevail, on the same subject. According to the

doctrine now stated, the only direct advantage of foreign commerce consists

in the imports. A country obtains things which it either could not have

produced at all, or which it must have produced at a greater expense of

capital and labour than the cost of the things which it exports to pay for them.

It thus obtains a more ample supply of the commodities it wants, for the same

labour and capital; or the same supply, for less labour and capital, leaving the

surplus disposable to produce other things. The vulgar theory disregards this

benefit, and deems the advantage of commerce to reside in the exports: as if

not what a country obtains, but what it parts with, by its foreign trade, was

supposed to constitute the gain to it. An extended market for its produce —

an abundant consumption for its goods — a vent for its surplus — are the

phrases by which it has been customary to designate the uses and

recommendations of commerce with foreign countries. This notion is

intelligible, when we consider that the authors and leaders of opinion on

mercantile questions have always hitherto been the selling class. It is in truth

a surviving relic of the Mercantile Theory, according to which, money being

the only wealth, selling, or in other words, exchanging goods for money, was

(to countries without mines of their own) the only way of growing rich —

and importation of goods, that is to say, parting with money, was so much

subtracted from the benefit.              The notion that money alone is wealth, has been long defunct, but it

has left many of its progeny behind it; and even its destroyer, Adam Smith,

retained some opinions which it is impossible to trace to any other origin.

Adam Smith’s theory of the benefit of foreign trade, was that it afforded an

outlet for the surplus produce of a country, and enabled a portion of the

capital of the country to replace itself with a profit. These expressions suggest

ideas inconsistent with a clear conception of the phenomena. The expression,

surplus produce, seems to imply that a country is under some kind of

necessity of producing the corn or cloth which it exports; so that the portion

which it does not itself consume, if not wanted and consumed elsewhere,

would either be produced in sheer waste, or if it were not produced, the

corresponding portion of capital would remain idle, and the mass of

productions in the country would be diminished by so much. Either of these

suppositions would be entirely erroneous. The country produces an

exportable article in excess of its own wants, from no inherent necessity, but

as the cheapest mode of supplying itself with other things. If prevented from

exporting this surplus, it would cease to produce it, and would no longer

import anything, being unable to give an equivalent; but the labour and

capital which had been employed in producing with a view to exportation,

would find employment in producing those desirable objects which were

previously brought from abroad: or, if some of them could not be produced,

in producing substitutes for them. These articles would of course be produced

at a greater cost than that of the things with which they had previously been

purchased from foreign countries. But the value and price of the articles

would rise in proportion; and the capital would just as much be replaced, with

the ordinary profit from the returns, as it was when employed in producing

for the foreign market. The only losers (after the temporary inconvenience of

the change) would be the consumers of the heretofore imported articles; who

would be obliged either to do without them, consuming in lieu of them

something which they did not like as well, or to pay a higher price for them

than before.

              There is much misconception in the common notion of what

commerce does for a country . When commerce is spoken of as a source of

national wealth, the imagination fixes itself upon the large fortunes acquired

by merchants, rather than upon the saving of price to consumers. But the

gains of merchants, when they enjoy no exclusive privilege, are no greater

than the profits obtained by the employment of capital in the country itself. Ifit be said that the capital now employed in foreign trade could not find

employment in supplying the home market, I might reply, that this is the

fallacy of general over-production, discussed in a former chapter : but the

thing is in this particular case too evident, to require an appeal to any general

theory. We not only see that the capital of the merchant would find

employment, but we see what employment. There would be employment

created, equal to that which would be taken away. Exportation ceasing,

importation to an equal value would cease also, and all that part of the

income of the country which had been expended in imported commodities,

would be ready to expend itself on the same things produced at home, or on

others instead of them. Commerce is virtually a mode of cheapening

production; and in all such cases the consumer is the person ultimately

benefited; the dealer, in the end, is sure to get his profit, whether the buyer

obtains much or little for his money. This is said without prejudice to the

effect (already touched upon, and to be hereafter fully discussed) which the

cheapening of commodities may have in raising profits; in the case when the

commodity cheapened, being one of those consumed by labourers, enters into

the cost of labour, by which the rate of profits is determined.

              5. Such, then, is the direct economical advantage of foreign trade.

But there are, besides, indirect effects, which must be counted as benefits of a

high order. One is, the tendency of every extension of the market to improve

the processes of production. A country which produces for a larger market

than its own, can introduce a more extended division of labour, can make

greater use of machinery, and is more likely to make inventions and

improvements in the processes of production. Whatever causes a greater

quantity of anything to be produced in the same place, tends to the general
                                                      204
increase of the productive powers of the world. There is another

consideration, principally applicable to an early stage of industrial

advancement. A people may be in a quiescent, indolent, uncultivated state,

with all their tastes either fully satisfied or entirely undeveloped, and they

may fail to put forth the whole of their productive energies for want of any

sufficient object of desire. The opening of a foreign trade, by making them

acquainted with new objects, or tempting them by the easier acquisition of

things which they had not previously thought attainable, sometimes works a

sort of industrial revolution in a country whose resources were previously

undeveloped for want of energy and ambition in the people: inducing those

who were satisfied with scanty comforts and little work, to work harder forthe gratification of their new tastes, and even to save, and accumulate capital,

for the still more complete satisfaction of those tastes at a future time.

              But the economical advantages of commerce are surpassed in

importance by those of its effects which are intellectual and moral. It is hardy

possible to overrate the value, in the present low state of human

improvement, of placing human beings in contact with persons dissimilar to

themselves, and with modes of thought and action unlike those with which

they are familiar. Commerce is now what war once was, the principal source

of this contact. Commercial adventurers from more advanced countries have

generally been the first civilizers of barbarians. And commerce is the purpose

of the far greater part of the communication which takes place between

civilized nations. Such communication has always been, and is peculiarly in

the present age, one of the primary sources of progress. To human beings,

who, as hitherto educated, can scarcely cultivate even a good quality without

running it into a fault, it is indispensable to be perpetually comparing their

own notions and customs with the experience and example of persons in

different circumstances from themselves: and there is no nation which does

not need to borrow from others, not merely particular arts or practices, but

essential points of character in which its own type is inferior. Finally,

commerce first taught nations to see with good will the wealth and prosperity

of one another. Before, the patriot, unless sufficiently advanced in culture to

feel the world his country, wished all countries weak, poor, and ill-governed,

but his own: he now sees in their wealth and progress a direct source of

wealth and progress to his own country. It is commerce which is rapidly

rendering war obsolete, by strengthening and multiplying the personal

interests which are in natural opposition to it. And it may be said without

exaggeration that the great extent and rapid increase of international trade, in

being the principal guarantee of the peace of the world, is the great permanent

security for the uninterrupted progress of the ideas, the institutions, and the

character of the human race.

        193
               Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy, Essay

I.

        194
               I at one time believed Mr Ricardo to have been the sole author of

the doctrine now universally received by political economists, on the nature

and measure of the benefit which a country derives from foreign trade. But

Colonel Torrens, by the republication of one of his early writings, “TheEconomists Refuted,” has established at least a joint claim with Mr Ricardo

to the origination of the doctrine, and an exclusive one to its earliest

publication.

        195
               Third ed. p. 120.

        196
               Vide supra, book i. chap.ix, sect. 1.

 

 

                       Chapter 18 – Of International Trade

 

 

              1. The values of commodities produced at the same place, or in

places sufficiently adjacent for capital to move freely between them — let us

say, for simplicity, of commodities produced in the same country — depend

(temporary fluctuations apart) upon their cost of production. But the value of

a commodity brought from a distant place, especially from a foreign country,

does not depend on its cost of production in the place from whence it comes.

On what, then, does it depend? The value of a thing in any place, depends on

the cost of its acquisition in that place; which in the case of an imported

article, means the cost of production of the thing which is exported to pay for

it.

              Since all trade is in reality barter, money being a mere instrument for

exchanging things against one another, we will, for simplicity, begin by

supposing the international trade to be in form, what it always is in reality, an

actual trucking of one commodity against another. As far as we have hitherto

proceeded, we have found all the laws of interchange to be essentially the

same, whether money is used or not; money never governing, but always

obeying, those general laws.

              If, then, England imports wine from Spain, giving for every pipe of

wine a bale of cloth, the exchange value of a pipe of wine in England will not

depend upon what the production of the wine may have cost in Spain, but

upon what the production of the cloth has cost in England. Though the wine

may have cost in Spain the equivalent of only ten days’ labour, yet, if the

cloth costs in England twenty days’ labour, the wine, when brought to

England, will exchange for the produce of twenty days’ English labour, plus

the cost of carriage; including the usual profit on the importer’s capital,

during the time it is locked up, and withheld from other employment.

              The value, then, in any country, of a foreign commodity, depends on

the quantity of home produce which must be given to the foreign country in

exchange for it. In other words, the values of foreign commodities depend on

the terms of international exchange. What, then, do these depend upon? What

is it, which, in the case supposed, causes a pipe of wine from Spain to beexchanged with England for exactLy that quantity of cloth? We have seen

that it is not their cost of production. If the cloth and the wine were both

made in Spain, they would exchange at their cost of production in Spain; if

they were both made in England, they would exchange at their cost of

production in England: but all the cloth being made in England, and all the

wine in Spain, they are in circumstances to which we have already

determined that the law of cost of production is not applicable. We must

accordingly, as we have done before in a similar embarrassment, fall back

upon an antecedent law, that of supply and demand: and in this we shall again

find the solution of our difficulty.

              I have discussed this question in a separate Essay, already once

referred to; and a quotation of part of the exposition then given, will she the

best introduction to my present view of the subjects. I must give notice that

we are now in the region of the most complicated questions which political

economy affords; that the subject is one which cannot possibly, and that a

more continuous effort of attention than be made elementary; has yet been

required, will be necessary to follow the series of deductions. The thread,

however, which we are about to take in hand, is in itself very simple and

manageable; the only difficulty is in following it through the windings and

entanglements of complex international transactions.

              2. “When the trade is established between the two countries, the two

commodities will exchange for each other at the same rate of interchange in

both countries — bating the cost of carriage, of which, for the present, it will

be more convenient to omit the consideration. Supposing, therefore, for the

sake of argument, that the carriage of the commodities from one country to

the other could be effected without labour and without cost, no sooner would

the trade be opened than the value of the two commodities, estimated in each

other, would come to a level in both countries.

              “Suppose that 10 yards of broadcloth cost in England as much labour

as 15 yards of linen, and in Germany as much as 20.” In common with most

of my predecessors, I find it advisable, in these intricate investigations, to

give distinctness and fixity to the conception by numerical examples. These

examples must sometimes, as in the present case, be purely supposititious. I

should have preferred real ones; but all that is essential is, that the numbers

should be such as admit of being easily followed through the subsequent

combinations into which they enter.              This supposition then being made, it would be the interest of

England to import linen from Germany, and of Germany to import cloth from

England. “When each country produced both commodities for itself, 10 yards

of cloth exchanged for 15 yards of linen in England, and for 20 in Germany.

They will now exchange for the same number of yards of linen in both. For

what number? If for 15 yards, England will be just as she was, and Germany

will gain all. If for 20 yards, Germany will be as before, and England will

derive the whole of the benefit. If for any number intermediate between 15

and 20, the advantage will be shared between the two countries. If, for

example, 10 yards of cloth exchange for 18 of linen, England will gain an

advantage of 3 yards on every 15, Germany will save 2 out of every 20. The

problem is, what are the causes which determine the proportion in which the

cloth of England and the linen of Germany will exchange for each other.

              “As exchange value, in this case as in every other, is proverbially

fluctuating, it does not matter what we suppose it to be when we begin: we

shall soon see whether there be any fixed point about which it oscillates,

which it has a tendency always to approach to, and to remain at. Let us

suppose, then, that by the effect of what Adam Smith calls the higgling of the

market, 10 yards of cloth in both countries, exchange for 17 yards of linen.

              “The demand for a commodity, that is, the quantity of it which can

find a purchaser, varies as we have before remarked, according to the price.

In Germany the price of 10 yards of cloth is now 17 yards of linen, or

whatever quantity of money is equivalent in Germany to 17 yards of linen.

Now, that being the price, there is some particular number of yards of cloth,

which will be in demand, or will find purchasers, at that price. There is some

given quantity of cloth, more than which could not be disposed of at that

price; less than which, at that price, would not fully satisfy the demand. Let

us suppose this quantity to be 1000 times 10 yards.

              “Let us now turn our attention to England. There, the price of 17

yards of linen is 10 yards of cloth, or whatever quantity of money is

equivalent in England to 10 yards of cloth. There is some particular number

of yards of linen which, at that price, will exactly satisfy the demand, and no

more. Let us suppose that this number is 1000 times 17 yards.

              “As 17 yards of linen are to 10 yards of cloth, so are 1000 times 17

yards to 1000 times 10 yards. At the existing exchange value, the linen whichEngland requires will exactly pay for the quantity of cloth which, on the same

terms of interchange, Germany requires. The demand on each side is

precisely sufficient to carry off the supply on the other. The conditions

required by the principle of demand and supply are fulfilled, and the two

commodities will continue to be interchanged, as we supposed them to be, in

the ratio of 17 yards of linen for 10 yards of cloth.

              “But our suppositions might have been different. Suppose that, at the

assumed rate of interchange, England has been disposed to consume no

greater quantity of linen than 800 times 17 yards: it is evident that, at the rate

supposed, this would not have sufficed to pay for the 1000 times 10 yards of

cloth which we have supposed Germany to require at the assumed value.

Germany would be able to procure no more than 800 times 10 yards at that

price. To procure the remaining 200, which she would have no means of

doing but by bidding higher for them, she would offer more than 17 yards of

linen in exchange for 10 yards of cloth: let us suppose her to offer 18. At this

price, perhaps, England would be inclined to purchase a greater quantity of

linen. She would consume, possibly, at that price, 900 times 18 yards. On the

other hand, cloth having risen in price, the demand of Germany for it would

probably have diminished. If, instead of 1000 times 10 yards, she is now

contented with 900 times 10 yards, these will exactly pay for the 900 times

18 yards of linen which England is willing to take at the altered price: the

demand on each side will again exactly suffice to take off the corresponding

supply; and 10 yards for 18 will be the rate at which, in both countries, cloth

will exchange for linen.

              “The converse of all this would have happened, if, instead of 800

times 17 yards, we had supposed that England, at the rate of 10 for 17, would

have taken 1200 times 17 yards of linen. In this case, it is England whose

demand is not fully supplied; it is England who, by bidding for more linen,

will alter the rate of interchange to her own disadvantage; and 10 yards of

cloth will fall, in both countries, below the value of 17 yards of linen. By this

fall of cloth, or what is the same thing, this rise of linen, the demand of

Germany for cloth will increase, and the demand of England for linen will

diminish, till the rate of interchange has so adjusted itself that the cloth and

the linen will exactly pay for one another; and when once this point is

attained, values will remain without further alteration. “It may he considered,

therefore, as established, that when two countries trade together in twocommodities, the exchange value of these commodities relatively to each

other will adjust itself to the inclinations and circumstances of the consumers

on both sides, in such manner that the quantities required by each country, of

the articles which it imports from its neighbour, shall be exactly sufficient to

pay for one another. As the inclinations and circumstances of consumers

cannot be reduced to any rule, so neither can the proportions in which the two

commodities will be interchanged. We know that the limits within which the

variation is confined, are the ratio between their costs of production in the

one country, and the ratio between their costs of production in the other. Ten

yards of cloth cannot exchange for more than 20 yards of linen, nor for less

than 15. But they may exchange for any intermediate number. The ratios,

therefore, in which the advantage of the trade may be divided between the

two nations, are various. The circumstances on which the proportionate share

of each country more remotely depends, admit only of a very general

indication.

              “It is even possible to conceive an extreme case, in which the whole

of the advantage resulting from the interchange would be reaped by one

party, the other country gaining nothing at all. There is no absurdity in the

hypothesis that, of some given commodity, a certain quantity is all that is

wanted at any price; and that, when that quantity is obtained, no fall in the

exchange value would induce other consumers to come forward, or those

who are already supplied, to take more. Let us suppose that this is the case in

Germany with cloth. Before her trade with England commenced, when 10

yards of cloth cost her as much labour as 20 yards of linen, she nevertheless

consumed as much cloth as she wanted under any circumstances, and, if she

could obtain it at the rate of 10 yards of cloth for 15 of linen, she would not

consume more. Let this fixed quantity be 1000 times 10 yards. At the rate,

however, of 10 for 20, England would want more linen than would be

equivalent to this quantity of cloth. She would consequently, offer a higher

value for linen; or, what is the same thing, she would offer her cloth at a

cheaper rate. But, as by no lowering of the value could she prevail on

Germany to take a greater quantity of cloth, there would be no limit to the

rise of linen or fall of cloth, until the demand of England for linen was

reduced by the rise of its value, to the quantity which 1000 times 10 yards of

cloth would purchase. It might be, that to produce this diminution of the

demand a less fall would not suffice than that which would make 10 yards of

cloth exchange for 15 of linen. Germany would then gain the whole of theadvantage, and England would be exactly as she was before the trade

commenced. It would be for the interest, however, of Germany herself to

keep her linen a little below the value at which it could be produced in

England, in order to keep herself from being supplanted by the home

producer. England, therefore, would always benefit in some degree by the

existence of the trade, though it might be a very fig one.”

              In this statement, I conceive, is contained the first elementary

principle of International Values. I have, as is indispensable in such abstract

and hypothetical cases, supposed the circumstances to be much less complex

than they really are: in the first place, by suppressing the cost of carriage;

next, by supposing that there are only two countries trading together; and

lastly, that they trade only in two commodities. To render the exposition of

the principle complete, it is necessary to restore the various circumstances

thus temporarily left out to simplify the argument. Those who are accustomed

to any kind of scientific investigation will probably see, without formal proof,

that the introduction of these circumstances cannot alter the theory of the

subject. Trade among any number of countries, and in any number of

commodities, must take place on the same essential principles as trade

between two countries and in two commodities. Introducing a greater number

of agents precisely similar, cannot change the law of their action, no more

than putting additional weights into the two scales of a balance alters the law

of gravitation. It alters nothing but the numerical results. For more complete

satisfaction, however, we will enter into the complex cases with the same

particularity with which we have stated the simpler one.

              3. First, let us introduce the element of cost of carriage. The chief

difference will then be, that the cloth and the linen will no longer exchange

for each other at precisely the same rate in both countries. Linen, having to be

carried to England, will be dearer there by its cost of carriage; and cloth will

be dearer in Germany by the cost of carrying it from England. Linen,

estimated in cloth, will be dearer in England than in Germany, by the cost of

carriage of both articles: and so will cloth in Germany, estimated in linen.

Suppose that the cost of carriage of each is equivalent to one yard of linen;

and suppose that, if they could have been carried without cost, the terms of

interchange would have been 10 yards of cloth for 17 of linen. It may seem at

first that each country will pay its own cost of carriage; that is, the carriage of

the article it Sports; that in Germany 10 yards of cloth will exchange for 18 oflinen, namely, the original 17, and 1 to cover the cost of carriage of the cloth;

while in England, 10 yards of cloth will only purchase 16 of linen, 1 yard

being deducted for the cost of carriage of the linen. This, however, cannot be

affirmed with certainty; it will only be true, if the linen which the English

consumers would take at the price of 10 for 16, exactly pays for the cloth

which the German consumers would take at 10 for 18. The values, whatever

they are, must establish this equilibrium. No absolute rule, therefore, can be

laid down for the division of the cost, no more than for the division of the

advantage: and it does not follow that in whatever ratio the one is divided, the

other will be divided in the same. It is impossible to say, if the cost of

carriage could be annihilated, whether the producing or the importing country

would be most benefited. This would depend on the play of international

demand. Cost of carriage has one effect more. But for it, every commodity

would (if trade be supposed free) be either regularly imported or regularly

exported. A country would make nothing for itself which it did not also make

for other countries. But in consequence of cost of carriage there are many

things, especially bulky articles, which every, or almost every country

produces within itself. After exporting the things in which it can employ itself

most advantageously, and importing those in which it is under the greatest

disadvantage, there are many lying between, of which the relative cost of

production in that and in other countries differs so little, that the cost of

carriage would absorb more than the whole saving in cost of production

which would be obtained by importing one and exporting another. This is the

case with numerous commodities of common consumption; including the

coarser qualities of many articles of food and manufacture, of which the finer

kinds are the subject of extensive international traffic.

              4. Let us now introduce a greater number of commodities than the

two we have hitherto supposed. Let cloth and linen, however, be still the

articles of which the comparative cost of production in England and in

Germany differs the most; so that if they were confined to two commodities,

these would be the two which it would be most their interest to exchange. We

will now again omit cost of carriage, which, having been shown not to affect

the essentials of the question, does but embarrass unnecessarily the statement

of it. Let us suppose, then, that the demand of England for linen is either so

much greater than that of Germany for cloth, or so much more extensible by

cheapness, that if England had no commodity but cloth which Germany

would take, the demand of England would force up the terms of interchangeto 10 yards of cloth for only 16 of linen, so that England would gain only the

difference between 15 and 16, Germany the difference between 16 and 20.

But let us now suppose that England has also another commodity, say iron,

which is in demand in Germany, and that the quantity of iron which is of

equal value in England with 10 yards of cloth, (let us call this quantity a

hundredweight) will, if produced in Germany, cost as much labour as 18

yards of linen, so that if offered by England for 17, it will undersell the

German producer. In these circumstances, linen will not be forced up to the

rate of 16 yards for 10 of cloth, but will stop, suppose at 17; for although, at

that rate of interchange, Germany will not take enough cloth to pay for all the

linen required by England, she will take iron for the reminder, and it is the

same thing to England whether she gives a hundredweight of iron or 10 yards

of cloth, both being made at the same cost. If we now superadd coals or

cottons on the side of England, and wine, or corn, or timber, on the side of

Germany, it will make no difference in the principle. The exports of each

country must exactly pay for the imports; meaning now the aggregate exports

and imports, not those of particular commodities taken singly. The produce of

fifty days’ English labour, whether in cloth, coals, iron, or any other exports,

will exchange for the produce of forty, or fifty, or sixty days’ German labour,

in linen, wine, corn, or timber, according to the international demand. There

is some proportion at which the demand of the two countries for each other’s

products will exactly correspond: so that the things supplied by England to

Germany will be completely paid for, and no more, by those supplied by

Germany to England. This accordingly will be the ratio in which the produce

of English and the produce of German labour will exchange for one another.

              If, therefore, it be asked what country draws to itself the greatest

share of the advantage of any trade it carries on, the answer is, the country for

whose productions there is in other countries the greatest demand, and a

demand the most susceptible of increase from additional cheapness. In so far

as the productions of any country possess this property, the country obtains

all foreign commodities at less cost. It gets its imports cheaper, the greater the

intensity of the demand in foreign countries for its exports. It also gets its

imports cheaper, the less the extent and intensity of its own demand for them.

The market is cheapest to those whose demand is small. A country which

desires few foreign productions, and only a limited quantity of them, while its

own commodities are in great request in foreign countries, will obtain its

limited imports at extremely small cost, that is, in exchange for the produceof a very small quantity of its labour and capital.

              Lastly, having introduced more than the original two commodities

into the hypothesis, let us also introduce more than the original two countries.

After the demand of England for the linen of Germany has raised the rate of

interchange to 10 yards of cloth for 16 of linen, suppose a trade opened

between England and some other country which also exports linen. And let us

suppose that if England had no trade but with this third country, the play of

international demand would enable her to obtain from it, for 10 yards of cloth

or its equivalent, 17 yards of linen. She evidently would not go on buying

linen from Germany at the former rate: Germany would be undersold, and

must consent to give 17 yards, like the other country. In this case, the

circumstances of production and of demand in the third country are supposed

to be in themselves more advantageous to England than the circumstances of

Germany; but this supposition is not necessary: we might suppose that if the

trade with Germany did not exist, England would be obliged to give to the

other country the same advantageous terms which she gives to Germany; 10

yards of cloth for 16, or even less than 16, of linen. Even so, the opening of

the third country makes a great difference in favour of England. There is now

a double market for English exports, while the demand of England for linen

is only what it was before. This necessarily obtains for England more

advantageous terms of interchange. The two countries, requiring much more

of her produce than was required by either alone, must, in order to obtain it,

force an increased demand for their exports, by offering them at a lower

value.

              It deserves notice, that this effect in favour of England from the

opening of another market for her exports, will equally be produced even

though the country from which the demand comes should have nothing to sell

which England is willing to take. Suppose that the third country, though

requiring cloth or iron from England, produces no linen, nor any other article

which is in demand there. She however produces exportable articles, or she

would have no means of paying for imports: her exports, though not suitable

to the English consumer, can find a market somewhere. As we are only

supposing three countries, we must assume her to find this market in

Germany, and to pay for what she imports from England by orders on her

German customers. Germany, therefore, besides having to pay for her own

imports, now owes a debt to England on account of the third country, and themeans for both purposes must be derived from her exportable produce. She

must therefore tender that produce to England on terms sufficiently

favourable to force a demand equivalent to this double debt. Everything will

take place precisely as if the third country had bought German produce with

her own goods, and offered that produce to England in exchange for hers.

There is an increased demand for English goods, for which German goods

have to furnish the payment; and this can only be done by forcing an

increased demand for them in England, that is, by lowering their value. Thus

an increase of demand for a country’s exports in any foreign country, enables

her to obtain more cheaply even those imports which she procures from other

quarters. And conversely, an increase of her own demand for any foreign

commodity compels her, caeteris paribus, to pay dearer for all foreign

commodities.

              The law which we have now illustrated, may be appropriately

named, the Equation of International Demand. It may be concisely stated as

follows. The produce of a country exchanges for the produce of other

countries, at such values as are required in order that the whole of her exports

may exactly pay for the whole of her imports. This law of International

Values is but an extension of the more general law of Value, which we called
                                          205
the Equation of Supply and Demand. We have seen that the value of a

commodity always so adjusts itself as to bring the demand to the exact level

of the supply. But all trade, either between nations or individuals, is an

interchange of commodities, in which the things that they respectively have

to sell, constitute also their means of purchase: the supply brought by the one

constitutes his demand for what is brought by the other. So that supply and

demand are but another expression for reciprocal demand: and to say that

value will adjust itself so as to equalize demand with supply, is in fact to say

that it will adjust itself so as to equalize the demand on one side with the

demand on the other.

              5. To trace the consequences of this law of International Values

through their wide ramifications, would occupy more space than can be here

devoted to such a purpose. But there is one of its applications which I will

notice, as being in itself not unimportant, as bearing on the question which

will occupy us in the next chapter, and especially as conducing to the more

full and clear understanding of the law itself.

              We have seen that the value at which a country purchases a foreigncommodity, does not conform to the cost of production in the country from

which the commodity comes. Suppose now a change in that cost of

production; an improvement, for example, in the process of manufacture.

Will the benefit of the improvement be fully participated in by other

countries? Will the commodity be sold as much cheaper to foreigners, as it is

produced cheaper at home? This question, and the considerations which must

be entered into in order to resolve it, are well adapted to try the worth of the

theory.

              Let us first suppose, that the improvement is of a nature to create a

new branch of export: to make foreigners resort to the country for a

commodity which they had previously produced at home. On this

supposition, the foreign demand for the productions of the country is

increased; which necessarily alters the international values to its advantage,

and to the disadvantage of foreign countries, who, therefore, though they

participate in the benefit of the new product, must purchase that benefit by

paying for all the other productions of the country at a dearer rate than before.

How much dearer, will depend on the degree necessary for re-establishing,

under these new conditions, the Equation of International Demand. These

consequences follow in a very obvious manner from the law of international

values, and I shall not occupy space in illustrating them, but shall pass to the

more frequent case, of an improvement which does not create a new article of

export, but lowers the cost of production of something which the country

already exported.

              It being advantageous, in discussions of this complicated nature, to

employ definite numerical amounts, we shall return to our original example.

Ten yards of cloth, if produced in Germany, would require the same amount

of labour and capital as twenty yards of linen; but by the play of international

demand, they can be obtained from England for seventeen. Suppose now, that

by a mechanical improvement made in Germany, and not capable of being

transferred to England, the same quantity of labour and capital which

produced twenty yards of linen, is enabled to produce thirty. Linen falls one-

third in value in the German market, as compared with other commodities

produced in Germany. Will it also fall one-third as compared with English

cloth, thus giving to England, in common with Germany, the full benefit of

the improvement? Or (ought we not rather to say), since the cost to England

of obtaining linen was not regulated by the cost to Germany of producing it,and since England, accordingly, did not get the entire benefit even of the

twenty yards which Germany could have given for ten yards of cloth, but

only obtained seventeen — why should she now obtain more, merely because

this theoretical limit is removed ten degrees further off?

              It is evident that in the outset, the improvement will lower the value

of linen in Germany, in relation to all other commodities in the German

market, including, among the rest, even the imported commodity, cloth. If 10

yards of cloth previously exchanged for 17 yards of linen, they will now

exchange for half as much more, or 25 1/2 yards. But whether they will

continue to do so, will depend on the effect which this increased cheapness of

linen produces on the international demand. The demand for linen in England

could scarcely fail to be increased. But it might be increased either in

proportion to the cheapness, or in a greater proportion than the cheapness, or

in a less proportion.

              If the demand was increased in the same proportion with the

cheapness, England would take as many times 25 1/2 yards of linen, as the

number of times 17 yards which she took previously. She would expend in

linen exactly as much of cloth, or of the equivalents of cloth, as much in short

of the collective income of her people, as she did before. Germany on her

part, would probably require, at that rate of interchange, the same quantity of

cloth as before, because it would in reality cost her exactly as much; 25 1/2

yards of linen being now of the same value in her market, as 17 yards were

before. In this case, therefore, 10 yards of cloth for 25 1/2 of linen is the rate

of interchange which under these new conditions would restore the equation

of international demand; and England would obtain linen one-third cheaper

than before, being the same advantage as was obtained by Germany.

              It might happen, however, that this great cheapening of linen would

increase the demand for it in England in a greater ratio than the increase of

cheapness; and that if she before wanted 1000 times 17 yards, she would now

require more than 1000 times 25 1/2 yards to satisfy her demand. If so, the

equation of international demand cannot establish itself at that rate of

interchange; to pay for the linen England must offer cloth on more

advantageous terms; say, for example, 10 yards for 21 of linen; so that

England will not have the full benefit of the improvement in the production

of linen, while Germany, in addition to that benefit, will also pay less for

cloth. But again, it is possible that England might not desire to increase herconsumption of linen in even so great a proportion as that of the increased

cheapness; she might not desire so great a quantity as 1000 times 25 1/2

yards: and in that case Germany must force a demand, by offering more than

25 1/2 yards of linen for 10 of cloth: linen will be cheapened in England in a

still greater degree than in Germany; while Germany will obtain cloth on

more unfavourable terms; and at a higher exchange value than before.

              After what has already been said, it is not necessary to particularize

the manner in which these results might be modified by introducing into the

hypothesis other countries and other commodities. There is a further

circumstance by which they may also be modified. In the case supposed the

consumers of Germany have had a part of their incomes set at liberty by the

increased cheapness of linen, which they may indeed expend in increasing

their consumption of that article, but which they may likewise expend in

other articles, and among others, in cloth or other imported commodities.

This would be an additional element in the international demand, and would

modify more or less the terms of interchange.

              Of the three possible varieties in the influence of cheapness on

demand, which is the more probable — that the demand would be increased

more than the cheapness, as much as the cheapness, or less than the

cheapness? This depends on the nature of the particular commodity, and on

the tastes of purchasers. When the commodity is one in general request, and

the fall of it price brings it within reach of a much larger class of incomes

than before, the demand is often increased in a greater ratio than the fall of

price, and a larger sum of money is on the whole expended in the article.

Such was the case with coffee, when its price was lowered by successive

reductions of taxation; and such would probably be the case with sugar, wine,

and a large class of commodities which, though not necessaries, are largely

consumed, and in which many consumers indulge when the articles are cheap

and economize when they are dear. But it more frequently happens that when

a commodity falls in price, less money is spent in it than before: a greater

quantity is consumed, but not so great a value. The consumer who saves

money by the cheapness of the article, will be likely to expend part of the

saving in increasing his consumption of other things: and unless the low price

attract a large class of new purchasers who were either not consumers of the

article at all, or only in small quantity and occasionally, a less aggregate sum

will be expended on it. Speaking generally, therefore, the third of our threecases is the most probable: and an improvement in an exportable article is

likely to be as beneficial (if not more beneficial) to foreign countries, as to

the country where the article is produced.

              6. Thus far had the theory of international values been carried in the

first and second editions of this work. But intelligent criticisms (chiefly those

of my friend Mr William Thornton), and subsequent further investigation,

have shown that the doctrine stated in the preceding pages, though correct as

far as it goes, is not yet the complete theory of the subject matter.

              It has been shown that the exports and imports between the two

countries (or, if we suppose more than two, between each country and the

world) must in the aggregate pay for each other, and must therefore be

exchanged for one another at such values as will be compatible with the

equation of international demand. That this, however, does not furnish the

complete law of the phenomenon, appears from the following consideration:

that several different rates of international value may all equally fulfil the

conditions of this law.

              The supposition was, that England could produce 10 yards of cloth

with the same labour as 15 of linen, and Germany with the same labour as 20

of linen; that a trade was opened between the two countries; that England

thenceforth confined her production to cloth, and Germany to linen; and, that

if 10 yards of cloth should thenceforth exchange for 17 of linen, England and

Germany would exactly supply each other’s demand: that, for instance, if

England wanted at that price 17,000 yards of linen, Germany would want

exactly the 10,000 yards of cloth, which, at that price, England would be

required to give for the linen. Under these suppositions it appeared, that 10

cloth for 17 linen, would be, in point of fact, the international values.

              But it is quite possible that some other rate, such as 10 cloth for 18

linen, might also fulfil the conditions of the equation of international demand.

Suppose that at this last rate, England would want more linen than at the rate

of 10 for 17, but not in the ratio of the cheapness; that she would not want the

18,000 which she could now buy with 10,000 yards of cloth, but would be

content with 17,500, for which she would pay (at the new rate of 10 for 18)

9722 yards of cloth. Germany, again, having to pay dearer for cloth than

when it could be bought at 10 for 17, would probably reduce her

consumption to an amount below 10,000 yards, perhaps to the very samenumber, 9722. Under these conditions the Equation of International Demand

would still exist. Thus, the rate of 10 for 17, and that of 10 for 18, would

equally satisfy the Equation of Demand: and many other rates of interchange

might satisfy it in like manner. It is conceivable that the conditions might be

equally satisfied by every numerical rate which could be supposed. There is

still therefore a portion of indeterminateness in the rate at which the

international values would adjust themselves; showing that the whole of the

influencing circumstances cannot yet have been taken into account.

              7. It will be found that to supply this deficiency, we must take into

consideration not only, as we have already done, the quantities demanded in

each country, of the imported commodities; but also the extent of the means

of supplying that demand, which are set at liberty in each country by the

change in the direction of its industry.

              To illustrate this point it will be necessary to choose more

convenient numbers than those which we have hitherto employed. Let it be

supposed that in England 100 yards of cloth, previously to the trade,

exchanged for 100 of linen, but that in Germany 100 of cloth exchanged for

200 of linen. When the trade was opened, England would supply cloth to

Germany, Germany linen to England, at an exchange value which would

depend partly on the element already discussed, viz. the comparative degree

in which, in the two countries, increased cheapness operates in increasing the

demand; and partly on some other element not yet taken into account. In

order to isolate this unknown element, it will be necessary to make some

definite and invariable supposition in regard to the known element. Let us

therefore assume, that the influence of cheapness on demand conforms to

some simple law, common to both countries and to both commodities. As the

simplest and most convenient, let us suppose that in both countries any given

increase of cheapness produces an exactly proportional increase of

consumption: or, in other words, that the value expended in the commodity,

the cost incurred for the sake of obtaining it, is always the same, whether that

cost affords a greater or a smaller quantity of the commodity.

              Let us now suppose that England, previously to the trade, required a

million of yards of linen, which were worth at the English cost of production,

a million yards of cloth. By turning all the labour and capital with which that

linen was produced, to the production of cloth, she would produce for

exportation a million yards of cloth. Suppose that this is the exact quantitywhich Germany is accustomed to consume. England can dispose of all this

cloth in Germany at the German price; she must consent indeed to take a little

less until she has driven the German producer from the market, but as soon as

this is effected, she can sell her million of cloth for two millions of linen;

being the quantity that the German clothiers are enabled to make, by

transferring their whole labour and capital from cloth to linen. Thus England

would gain the whole benefit of the trade, and Germany nothing. This would

be perfectly consistent with the equation of international demand: since

England (according to the hypothesis in the preceding paragraph) now

requires two millions of linen (being able to get them at the same cost at

which she previously obtained only one), while the prices in Germany not

being altered, Germany requires as before exactly a million of cloth, and can

obtain it by employing the labour and capital set at liberty from the

production of cloth, in producing the two millions of linen required by

England.

              Thus far we have supposed that the additional cloth which England

could make, by transferring to cloth the whole of the capital previously

employed in making linen, was exactly sufficient to supply the whole of

Germany’s existing demand. But suppose next that it is more than sufficient.

Suppose that while England could make with her liberated capital a million

yards of cloth for exportation, the cloth which Germany had heretofore

required was 800,000 yards only, equivalent at the German cost of production

to 1,600,000 yards of linen. England therefore could not dispose of a whole

million of cloth in Germany at the German prices. Yet she wants, whether

cheap or dear (by our supposition), as much linen as can be bought for a

million of cloth: and since this can only be obtained from Germany, or by the

more expensive process of production at home, the holders of the million of

cloth will be forced by each other’s competition to offer it to Germany on any

terms (short of the English cost of production) which will induce Germany to

take the whole. What terms these would be, the supposition we have made

enables us exactly to define. The 800,000 yards of cloth which Germany

consumed, cost her the equivalent of 1,600,000 linen, and that invariable cost

is what she is willing to expend in cloth, whether the quantity it obtains for

her be more or less. England therefore, to induce Germany to take a million

of cloth, must offer it for 1,600,000 of linen. The international values will

thus be 100 cloth for 160 linen, intermediate between the ratio of the costs of

production in England and that of the costs of production in Germany: andthe two countries will divide the benefit of the trade, England gaining in the

aggregate 600,000 yards of linen, and Germany being richer by 200,000

additional yards of cloth.

              Let us now stretch the last supposition still farther, and suppose that

the cloth previously consumed by Germany was not only less than the million

yards which England is enabled to furnish by discontinuing her production of

linen, but less in the full proportion of England’s advantage in the production,

that is, that Germany only required half a million. In this case, by ceasing

altogether to produce cloth, Germany can add a million, but a million only, to

her production of linen, and this million, being the equivalent of what the half

million previously cost her, is all that she can be induced by any degree of

cheapness to expend in cloth. England will be forced by her own competition

to give a whole million of cloth for this million of linen, just as she was

forced in the preceding case to give it for 1,600,000. But England could have

produced at the same cost a million yards of linen for herself. England

therefore derives, in this case, no advantage from the international trade.

Germany gains the whole; obtaining a million of cloth instead of half a

million, at what the half million previously cost her. Germany, in short, is in

this third case, exactly in the same situation as England was in the first case;

which may easily be verified by reversing the figures.

              As the general result of the three cases, it may be laid down as a

theorem, that under the supposition we have made of a demand exactly in

proportion to the cheapness, the law of international value will be as follows:

—

              The whole of the cloth which England can make with the capital

previously devoted to linen, will exchange for the whole of the linen which

Germany can make with the capital previously devoted to cloth.

              Or, still more generally,

              The whole of the commodities which the two countries can

respectively make for exportation, with the labour and capital thrown out of

employment by importation, will exchange against one another.

              This law, and the three different possibilities arising from it in

respect to the division of the advantage, may be conveniently generalized by

means of algebraical symbols, as follows:Let the quantity of cloth whichEngland can make with the labour and capital withdrawn from the production

of linen, be = n.

              Let the cloth previously required by Germany (at the German cost of

production) be = m.

              Then n of cloth will always exchange for exactly 2m of linen.

              Consequently if n = m, the whole advantage will be on the side of

England.

              If n = 2m, the whole advantage will be on the side of Germany.

              If n be greater than m, but less than 2m, the two countries will share

the advantage; England getting 2m of linen where she before got only n;

Germany getting n of cloth where she before got only m. It is almost

superfluous to observe that the figure 2 stands where it does, only because it

is the figure which expresses the advantage of Germany over England in

linen as estimated in cloth, and (what is the same thing) of England over

Germany in cloth as estimated in linen. If we had supposed that in Germany,

before the trade, 100 of cloth exchanged for 1000 instead of 200 of linen,

then n (after the trade commenced) would have exchanged for 10m instead of

2m. If instead of 1000 or 200 we had supposed only 150, n would have

exchanged for only 3/2 m. If (in fine) the cost value of cloth (as estimated in

linen) in Germany, exceeds the cost value similarly estimated in England, in

the ratio of p to q, then will n, after the opening of the trade, exchange for p/q
  206
m.

              8. We have now arrived at what seems a law of International Values,

of great simplicity and generality. But we have done so by setting out from a

purely arbitrary hypothesis respecting the relation between demand and

cheapness. We have assumed their relation to be fixed, though it is essentially

variable. We have supposed that every increase of cheapness produces an

exactly proportional extension of demand; in other words, that the same

invariable value is laid out in a commodity whether it be cheap or dear; and

the law which we have investigated holds good only on this hypothesis, or

some other practically equivalent to it. Let us now, therefore, combine the

two variable elements of the question, the variations of each of which we

have considered separately. Let us suppose the relation between demand and

cheapness to vary, and to become such as would prevent the rule ofinterchange laid down in the last theorem from satisfying the conditions of

the Equation of International Demand. Let it be supposed, for instance, that

the demand of England for linen is exactly proportional to the cheapness, but

that of Germany for cloth, not proportional. To revert to the second of our

three cases, the case in which England by discontinuing the production of

linen could produce for exportation a million yards of cloth, and Germany by

ceasing to produce cloth could produce an additional 1,600,000 yards of

linen. If the one of these quantities exactly exchanged for the other, the

demand of England would on our present supposition be exactly satisfied, for

she requires all the linen which can be got for a million yards of cloth: but

Germany perhaps, though she required 800,000 cloth at a cost equivalent to

1,600,000 linen, yet when she can get a million of cloth at the same cost, may

not require the whole million; or may require more than a million. First, let

her not require so much; but only as much as she can now buy for 1,500,000

linen. England will still offer a million for these 1,500,000; but even this may

not induce Germany to take so much as a million; and if England continues to

expend exactly the same aggregate cost on linen whatever be the price, she

will have to submit to take for her million of cloth any quantity of linen (not

less than a million) which may be requisite to induce Germany to take a

million of cloth. Suppose this to be 1,400,000 yards. England has now reaped

from the trade a gain not of 600,000 but only of 400,000 yards; while

Germany, besides having obtained an extra 200,000 yards of cloth, has

obtained it with only seven-eighths of the labour and capital which she

previously expended in supplying herself with cloth, and may expend the

remainder in increasing her own consumption of linen, or of any other

commodity.

              Suppose on the contrary that Germany, at the rate of a million cloth

for 1,600,000 linen, requires more than a million yards of cloth. England

having only a million which she can give without trenching upon the quantity

she previously reserved for herself, Germany must bid for the extra cloth at a

higher rate than 160 for 100, until she reaches a rate (say 170 for 100) which

will either bring down her own demand for cloth to the limit of a million, or

else tempt England to part with some of the cloth she previously consumed at

home.

              Let us next suppose that the proportionality of demand to cheapness,

instead of holding good in one country but not in the other, does not holdgood in either country, and that the deviation is of the same kind in both; that,

for instance, neither of the two increases its demand in a degree equivalent to

the increase of cheapness. On this supposition, at the rate of one million cloth

for 1,600,000 linen, England will not want so much as 1,600,000 linen, nor

Germany so much as a million cloth: and if they fall short of that amount in

exactly the same degree: if England only wants linen to the amount of nine-

tenths of 1,600,000 (1,440,000), and Germany only nine hundred thousand of

cloth, the interchange will continue to take place at the same rate. And so if

England wants a tenth more than 1,600,000, and Germany a tenth more than

a million. This coincidence (which, it is to be observed, supposes demand to
                                                                          207
extend cheapness in a corresponding, but not in an equal degree ) evidently

could not exist unless by mere accident: and in any other case, the equation of

international demand would require a different adjustment of international

values.

              The only general law, then, which can be laid down, is this. The

values at which a country exchanges its produce with foreign countries

depend on two things: first, on the amount and extensibility of their demand

for its commodities, compiled with its demand for theirs; and secondly, on

the capital which it has to spare, from the production of domestic

commodities for its own consumption. The more the foreign demand for its

commodities exceeds its demand for foreign commodities, and the less

capital it can spile to produce for foreign markets, compiled with what

foreigners spile to produce for its markets, the more favourable to it will be

the terms of interchange: that is, the more it will obtain of foreign

commodities in return for a given quantity of its own.

              But these two influencing circumstances are in reality reducible to

one: for the capital which a country has to spile from the production of

domestic commodities for its own use, is in proportion to its own demand for

foreign commodities: whatever proportion of its collective income it expends

in purchases from abroad, that same proportion of its capital is left without a

home market for its productions. The new element, therefore, which for the

sake of scientific correctness we have introduced into the theory of

international values, does not seem to make any very material difference in

the practical result. It still appears that the countries which carry on their

foreign trade on the most advantageous terms, are those whose commodities

are most in demand by foreign countries, and which have themselves the leastdemand for foreign commodities. From which, among other consequences, it

follows, that the richest countries, caeteris paribus, gain the least by a given

amount of foreign commerce: since, having a greater demand for

commodities generally, they are likely to have a greater demand for foreign

commodities, and thus modify the terms of interchange to their own

disadvantage. Their aggregate gains by foreign trade, doubtless, are generally

greater than those of poorer countries, since they carry on a greater amount of

such trade, and gain the benefit of cheapness on a larger consumption: but

their gain is less on each individual article consumed.

              9. We now pass to another essential part of the theory of the subject.

There are two senses in which a country obtains commodities cheaper by

foreign trade; in the sense of Value, and in the sense of Cost. It gets them

cheaper in the first sense, by their falling in value relatively to other things:

the same quantity of them exchanging, in the country, for a smaller quantity

than before of the other produce of the country. To revert to our original

figures; in England, all consumers of linen obtained, after the trade was

opened, 17 or some greater number of yards for the same quantity of all other

things for which they before obtained only 15. The degree of cheapness, in

this sense of the term, depends on the claws of International Demand, so

copiously illustrated in the preceding sections. But in the other sense, that of

Cost, a country gets a commodity cheaper when it obtains a greater quantity

of the commodity with the same expenditure of labour and capital. In this

sense of the term, cheapness in a great measure depends upon a cause of a

different nature: a country gets its imports cheaper, in proportion to the

general productiveness of its domestic industry; to the general efficiency of

its labour. The labour of one country may be, as a whole, much more efficient

than that of another: all or most of the commodities capable of being

produced in both, may be produced in one at less absolute cost than in the

other; which, as we have seen, will not necessity prevent the two countries

from exchanging commodities. The things which the more favoured country

will import from others, are of course those in which it is least superior; but

by importing them it acquires, even in those commodities, the same

advantage which it possesses in the articles it gives in exchange for them.

Thus the countries which obtain their own productions at least cost, also get

their imports at least cost.

              This will be made still more obvious if we suppose two competingcountries. England sends cloth to Germany, and gives 10 yards of it for 17

yards of linen, or for something else which in Germany is the equivalent of

those 17 yards. Another country, as for example France, does the same. The

one giving 10 yards of cloth for a certain quantity of German commodities,

so must the other: if, therefore, in England, these 10 yards are produced by

only half as much labour as that by which they are produced in France, the

linen or other commodities of Germany will cost to England only half the

amount of labour which they will cost to France. England would thus obtain

her imports at less cost than France, in the ratio of the greater efficiency of

her labour in the production of cloth: which might be taken, in the case

supposed, as an approximate estimate of the efficiency of her labour

generally; since France, as well as England, by selecting cloth as her article

of export, would have shown that with her also it was the commodity in

which labour was relatively the most efficient. It follows, therefore, that

every country gets its imports at less cost, in proportion to the general

efficiency of its labour.

              This proposition was first clearly seen and expounded by Mr.
      208
Senior, but only as applicable to the importation of the precious metals. I

think it important to point out that the proposition holds equally true of all

other imported commodities; and further, that it is only a portion of the truth.

For, in the case supposed, the cost to England of the linen which she pays for

with ten yards of cloth, does not depend solely upon the cost to herself of ten

yards of cloth, but partly also upon how many yards of linen she obtains in

exchange for them. What her imports cost to her is a function of two

variables; the quantity of her own commodities which she gives for them, and

the cost of those commodities. Of these, the last alone depends on the

efficiency of her labour: the first depends on the law of international values;

that is, on the intensity and extensibility of the foreign demand for her

commodities, compared with her demand for foreign commodities.

              In the case just now supposed, of a competition between England

and France, the state of international values affected both competitors alike,

since they were supposed to trade with the same country, and to export and

import the same commodities. The difference, therefore, in what their imports

cost them, depended solely on the other cause, the unequal efficiency of their

labour. They gave the same quantities; the difference could only be in the

cost of production. But if England traded to Germany with cloth, and Francewith iron, the comparative demand in Germany for those two commodities

would bear a share in determining the comparative cost, in labour and capital,

with which England and France would obtain German products. If iron were

more in demand in Germany than cloth, France would recover, through that

channel, part of her disadvantage; if less, her disadvantage would be

increased. The efficiency, therefore, of a country’s labour, is not the only

thing which determines even the cost at which that country obtains imported

commodities — while it has no share whatever in determining either their

exchange value, or, as we shall presently see, their price.

        197
               Supra, book iii, chap. ii. section 4.

        198
               It may be asked, why we have supposed the number n to have as

its extreme limits, m and 2m (or p/q m)? why may not n be less than m, or

greater than 2m; and if so, what will be the result?

              This we shall now examine, and when we do so it will appear that n

is always, practically speaking, coded within these limits.

              Suppose, for example, that n is less than m; or, reverting to our

former figures, that the million yards of cloth, which England can make, will

not satisfy the whole of Germany’s preexisting demand; that demand being

(let us suppose) for 1,200,000 yards. It would then, at first sight, appear that

England would supply Germany with cloth up to the extent of a million; that

Germany would continue to supply herself with the remaining 200,000 by

home production: that this portion of the supply would regulate the price of

the whole; that England therefore would be able permanently to sell her

million of cloth at the German cost of production (viz. for two millions of

linen) and would gain the whole advantage of the trade, Germany being no

better off than before.

              That such, however, would not be the practical result, will soon be

evident. The residuary demand of Germany for 200,000 yards of cloth

furnishes a resource to England for purposes of foreign trade of which it is

still her interest to avail herself; and though she has no more labour and

capital which she can withdraw from linen for the production of this extra

quantity of cloth, there must be some other commodities in which Germany

has a relative advantage over her (though perhaps not so great as in linen):

these she will now import, instead of producing, and the labour and capital

formerly employed in producing them will be transferred to cloth, until therequired amount is made up. If this transfer just makes up the 200,000 and no

more, this augmented n will now be equal to m; England will sell the whole

1,200,000 at the German values; and will still gain the whole advantage of

the trade. But if the transfer makes up more than the 200,000, England will

have more cloth than 1,200,000 yards to offer; n will become greater than m,

and England must part with enough of the advantage to induce Germany to

take the surplus. Thus the case which seemed at first sight to be beyond the

limits, is transformed practically into a case either coinciding with one of the

limits or between them. And so with every other case which can be supposed.

        199
               The increase of demand from 800,000 to 900,000, and that from a

million to 1,440,000, are neither equal in themselves, nor bear an equal

proportion to the increase of cheapness. Germany’s demand for cloth has

increased one-eighth, while the cheapness is increased one-fourth. England’s

demand for linen is creased 44 per cent, while the cheapness is increased 60

per cent.

        200
               Three Lectures on the Cost of Obtaining Money.

 

 

     Chapter 19 – Of Money, Considered as an Imported Commodity

 

 

              1. The degree of progress which we have now made in the theory of

Foreign Trade, puts it in our power to supply what was previously deficient

in our view of the theory of Money; and this, when completed, will in its turn

enable us to conclude the subject of Foreign Trade.

              Money, or the material of which it is composed, is, in Great Britain,

and in most other countries, a foreign commodity. Its value and distribution

must therefore be regulated, not by the law of value which obtains in adjacent

places, but by that which is applicable to imported commodities — the law of

International Values.

              In the discussion into which we are now about to enter, I shall use

the terms Money and the Precious Metals indiscriminately. This may be done

without leading to any error; it having been shown that the value of money,

when it consists of the precious metals, or of a paper currency convertible

into them on demand, is entirely governed by the value of the metals

themselves: from which it never permanently differs, except by the expense

of coinage when this is paid by the individual and not by the state.

              Money is brought into a country in two different ways. It is imported

(chiefly in the form of bullion) like any other merchandize, as being an

advantageous article of commerce. It is also imported in its other character of

a medium of exchange, to pay some debt due to the country, either for goods

exported or on any other account. There are other ways in which it may be

introduced casually; these are the two in which it is received in the ordinary

course of business, and which determine its value. The existence of these two

distinct modes in which money flows into a country, while other

commodities are habitually introduced only in the first of these modes,

occasions somewhat more of complexity and obscurity than exists in the case

of other commodities, and for this reason only is any special and minute

exposition necessary .

              2. In so far as the precious metals are imported in the ordinary way

of commerce, their value must depend on the same causes, and conform to

the same laws, as the value of any other foreign production. It is in this modechiefly that gold and silver diffuse themselves from the mining countries into

all other parts of the commercial world. They are the staple commodities of

those countries, or at least are among their great articles of regular export;

and are shipped on speculation, in the same manner as other exportable

commodities. The quantity, therefore, which a country (say England) will

give of its own produce, for a certain quantity of bullion, will depend, if we

suppose only two countries and two commodities, upon the demand in

England for bullion, compared with the demand in the mining country (which

we will call Brazil) for what England has to give. They must exchange in

such proportions as will leave no unsatisfied demand on either side, to alter

values by its competition. The bullion required by England must exactly pay

for the cottons or other English commodities required by Brazil. If, however,

we substitute for this simplicity the degree of complication which really

exists, the equation of international demand must be established not between

the bullion wanted in England and the cottons or broadcloth wanted in Brazil,

but between the whole of the imports of England and the whole of her

exports. The demand in foreign countries for English products, must be

brought into equilibrium with the demand in England for the products of

foreign countries; and all foreign commodities, billion among the rest, must

be exchanged against English products in such proportions, as will, by the

effect they produce on the demand, establish this equilibrium.

              There is nothing in the peculiar nature or uses of the precious metals,

which should make them an exception to the general principles of demand.

So far as they are wanted for purposes of luxury or the arts, the demand

increases with the cheapness, in the same irregular way as the demand for

any other commodity. So far as they are required for money, the demand

increases with the cheapness in a perfectly regular way, the quantity needed

being always in inverse proportion to the value. This is the only real

difference, in respect to demand, between money and other things; and for

the present purpose it is a difference altogether immaterial.

              Money, then, if imported solely as a merchandize, will, like other

imported commodities, be of lowest value in the countries for whose exports

there is the greatest foreign demand, and which have themselves the least

demand for foreign commodities. To these two circumstances it is however

necessary to add two others, which produce their effect through cost of

carriage. The cost of obtaining bullion is compounded of two elements; thegoods given to purchase it, and the expense of transport: of which last, the

bullion countries will bear a part, (though an uncertain part,) in the

adjustment of international values. The expense of transport is partly that of

carrying the goods to the bullion countries, and partly that of bringing back

the bullion; both these items are influenced by the distance from the mines;

and the former is also much affected by the bulkiness of the goods. Countries

whose exportable produce consists of the finer manufactures, obtain bullion,

as well as all other foreign articles, caeteris paribus, at less expense than

countries which export nothing but bulky raw produce.

              To be quite accurate, therefore, we must say — The countries whose

exportable productions are most in demand abroad, and contain greatest value

in smallest bulk, which are nearest to the mines, and which have least

demand for foreign productions, are those in which money will be of lowest

value, or in other words, in which prices will habitually range the highest. If

we are speaking not of the value of money, but of its cost, (that is, the

quantity of the country’s labour which must be expended to obtain it,) we

must add to these four conditions of cheapness a fifth condition, namely,

“whose productive industry is the most efficient.” This last, however, does

not at all affect the value of money, estimated in commodities: it affects the

general abundance and facility with which all things, money and

commodities together, can be obtained.

              Although, therefore, Mr Senior is right in pointing out the great

efficiency of English labour as the chief cause why the precious metals are

obtained at less cost by England than by most other countries, I cannot admit

that it at all accounts for their being of less value; for their going less far in

the purchase of commodities. This, in so far as it is a fact, and not an illusion,

must be occasioned by the great demand in foreign countries for the staple

commodities of England, and the generally unbulky character of those

commodities, compared with the corn, wine, timber, sugar, wool, hides,

tallow, hemp, flax, tobacco, raw cotton, &c., which form the exports of other

commercial countries. These two causes will account for a somewhat higher

range of general prices in England than elsewhere, notwithstanding the

counteracting influence of her own great demand for foreign commodities. I

am, however, strongly of opinion that the high prices of commodities, and

low purchasing power of money in England, are more apparent than real.

Food, indeed, is somewhat dearer; and food composes so large a portion ofthe expenditure when the income is small and the family large, that to such

families England is a dear country. Services, also, of most descriptions, are

dearer than in the other countries of Europe, from the less costly mode of

living of the poorer classes on the Continent. But manufactured commodities

(except most of those in which good taste is required) are decidedly cheaper;

or would be so, if buyers would be content with the same quality of material

and of workmanship. What is called the dearness of living in England, is

mainly an affair not of necessity but of foolish custom; it being thought

imperative by all classes in England above the condition of a day-labourer,

that the things they consume should either be of the same quality with those

used by much richer people, or at least should be as nearly as possible

undistinguishable from them in outward appearance.

              3. From the preceding considerations, it appears that those are

greatly in error who contend that the value of money, in countries where it is

an imported commodity, must be entirely regulated by its value in the

countries which produce it; and cannot be raised or lowered in any permanent

manner unless some change has taken place in the cost of production at the

mines. On the contrary, any circumstance which disturbs the equation of

international demand with respect to a particular country, not only may, but

must, affect the value of money in that country — its value at the mines

remaining the same. The opening of a new branch of export trade from

England; an increase in the foreign demand for English products, either by

the natural course of events, or by the abrogation of duties; a check to the

demand in England for foreign commodities, by the laying on of import

duties in England or of export duties elsewhere; these and all other events of

similar tendency, would make the imports of England (bullion and other

things taken together) no longer an equivalent for the exports; and the

countries which take her exports would be obliged to offer their commodities,

and bullion among the rest, on cheaper terms, in order to re-establish the

equation of demand: and thus England would obtain money cheaper, and

would acquire a generally higher range of prices. Incidents the reverse of

these would produce effects the reverse — would reduce prices; or, in other

words, raise the value of the precious metals. It must be observed, however,

that money would be thus raised in value only with respect to home

commodities: in relation to all imported articles it would remain as before,

since their values would be affected in the same way and in the same degree

with its own. A country which, from any of the causes mentioned, getsmoney cheaper, obtains all its other imports cheaper likewise.

              It is by no means necessary that the increased demand for English

commodities: which enables England to supply herself with bullion at a

cheaper rate, should be a demand in the mining countries. England might

export nothing whatever to those countries, and yet might be the country

which obtained bullion from them on the lowest terms, provided there were a

sufficient intensity of demand in other foreign countries for English goods,

which would be paid for circuitously, with gold and silver from the mining

countries. The whole of its exports are what a country exchanges against the

whole of its imports, and not its exports and imports to and from any one

country; and the general foreign demand for its productions will determine

what equivalent it must give for imported goods, in order to establish an

equilibrium between its sales and purchases generally; without regard to the

maintenance of a similar equilibrium between it and any country singly.

 

 

                     Chapter 20 – Of the Foreign Exchanges

 

 

              1. We have thus far considered the precious metals as a commodity,

imported like other commodities in the common course of trade, and have

examined what are the circumstances which would in that case determine

their value. But those metals are also imported in another character, that

which belongs to them as a medium of exchange; not as an article of

commerce, to he sold for money, but as themselves money, to pay a debt, or

effect a transfer of property. It remains to consider whether the liability of

gold and silver to be transported from country to country for such purposes,

in any way modifies the conclusions we have already arrived at, or places

those metals under a different law of value from that to which, in common

with all other imported commodities, they would be subject if international

trade were an affair of direct barter.

              Money is sent from one country to another for various purposes:

such as the payment of tributes or subsidies; remittances of revenue to or

from dependencies, or of rents or other incomes to their absent owners;

emigration of capital, or transmission of it for foreign investment. The most

usual purpose, however, is that of payment for goods. To show in what

circumstances money actually passes from country to country for this or any

of the other purposes mentioned, it is necessary briefly to state the nature of

the mechanism by which international trade is carried on, when it takes place

not by barter but through the medium of money.

              2. In practice, the exports and imports of a country not only are not

exchanged directly against each other, but often do not even pass through the

same hands. Each is separately bought and paid for with money. We have

seen, however, that, even in the same country, money does not actually pass

from hand to hand each time that purchases are made with it, and still less

does this happen between different countries. The habitual mode of paying

and receiving payment for commodities, between country and country, is by

bills of exchange.

              A merchant in England, A, has exported English commodities,

consigning them to his correspondent B in France. Another merchant inFrance, C, has exported French commodities, suppose of equivalent value, to

a merchant D in England. It is evidently unnecessary that B in France should

send money to A in England, and that D in England should send an equal

sum of money to C in France. The one debt may be applied to the payment of

the other, and the double cost and risk of carriage be thus saved. A draws a

bill on B for the amount which B owes to him: D, having an equal amount to

pay in France, buys this bill from A, and sends it to C, who, at the expiration

of the number of days which the bill has to run, presents it to B for payment.

Thus the debt due from France to England, and the debt due from England to

France, are both paid without sending an ounce of gold or silver from one

country to the other.

              In this statement, however, it is supposed, that the sum of the debts

due from France to England, and the sum of those due from England to

France, are equal; that each country has exactly the same number of ounces

of gold or silver to pay and to receive. This implies (if we exclude for the

present any other international payments than those occurring in the course of

commerce), that the exports and imports exactly pay for one another, or in

other words, that the equation of international demand is established. When

such is the fact, the international transactions are liquidated without the

passage of any money from one country to the other. But if there is a greater

sum due from England to France, than is due from France to England, or vice

versa, the debts cannot be simply written off against one another. After the

one has been applied, as far as it will go, towards covering the other, the

balance must be transmitted in the precious metals. In point of fact, the

merchant who has the amount to pay, will even then pay for it by a bill.

When a person has a remittance to make to a foreign country, he does not

himself search for some one who has money to receive from that country, and

ask him for a bill of exchange. In this as in other branches of business, there

is a class of middlemen or brokers, who bring buyers and sellers together, or

stand between them, buying bills from those who have money to receive, and

selling bills to those who have money to pay. When a customer comes to a

broker for a bill on Paris or Amsterdam, the broker sells to him, perhaps the

bill he may himself have bought that morning from a merchant, perhaps a bill

on his own correspondent in the foreign city: and to enable his correspondent

to pay, when due, all the bills he has granted, he remits to him all those which

he haS bought and has not resold. In this manner these brokers take upon

themselves the whole settlement of the pecuniary transactions betweendistant places, being remunerated by a small commission or percentage on

the amount of each bill which they either sell or buy. Now, if the brokers find

that they are asked for bills on the one part, to a greater amount than bills are

offered to them on the other, they do not on this account refuse to give them;

but since, in that case, they have no means of enabling the correspondents on

whom their bills are drawn, to pay them when due, except by transmitting

part of the amount in gold or silver, they require from those to whom they

sell bills an additional price, sufficient to cover the freight and insurance of

the gold and silver, with a profit sufficient to compensate them for their

trouble and for the temporary occupation of a portion of their capital. This

premium (as it is called) the buyers are willing to pay, because they must

otherwise go to the expense of remitting the precious metals themselves, and

it is done cheaper by those who make doing it a part of their especial

business. But though only some of those who have a debt to pay would have

actually to remit money, all will be obliged, by each other’s competition, to

pay the premium; and the brokers are for the same reason obliged to pay it to

those whose bills they buy. The reverse of all this happens, if on the

comparison of exports and imports, the country, instead of having a balance

to pay, has a balance to receive. The brokers find more bills offered to them,

than are sufficient to cover those which they are required to grant. Bills on

foreign countries consequently fall to a discount; and the competition among

the brokers, which is exceedingly active, prevents them from retaining this

discount as a profit for themselves, and obliges them to give the benefit of it

to those who buy the bills for purposes of remittance.

              Let us suppose that all countries had the same currency, as in the

progress of political improvement they one day will have: and, as the most

familiar to the reader, though not the best, let us suppose this currency to be

the English. When England had the same number of pounds sterling to pay to

France, which France had to pay to her, one set of merchants in England

would want bills, and another set would have bills to dispose of, for the very

same number of pounds sterling; and consequently a bill on France for 100l.

would sell for exactly 100l., or, in the phraseology of merchants, the

exchange would be at par. As France also, on this supposition, would have an

equal number of pounds sterling to pay and to receive, bills on England

would be at par in France, whenever bills on France were at par in England.

              If, however, England had a larger sum to pay to France than toreceive from her, there would be persons requiring bills on France for a

greater number of pounds sterling than there were bills drawn by persons to

whom money was due. A bill on France for 100l. would then sell for more

than 100l., and biLls would be said to be at a premium. The premium,

however, could not exceed the cost and risk of making the remittance in gold,

together with a trifling profit; because if it did, the debtor wouLd send the

gold itself, in preference to buying the bill.

              If, on the contrary, England had more money to receive from France

than to pay, there would be bills offered for a greater number of pounds than

were wanted for remittance, and the price of bills would fall below par: a bill

for 100l. might be bought for somewhat less than 100l., and bills would be

said to be at a discount.

              When England has more to pay than to receive, France has more to

receive than to pay, and vice versa. When, therefore, in England, bills on

France bear a premium, then, in France, bills on England are at a discount:

and when bills on France are at a discount in England, bills on England are at

a premium in France. If they are at par in either country, they are so, as we

have already seen, in both.

              Thus do matters stand between countries, or places, which have the

same currency. So much of barbarism, however, still remains in the

transactions of the most civilized nations, that almost all independent

countries choose to assert their nationality by having, to their own

inconvenience and that of their neighbours, a peculiar currency of their own.

To our present purpose this makes no other difference, than that instead of

speaking of equal sums of money, we have to speak of equivalent sums. By

equivalent sums, when both currencies are composed of the same metal, are

meant sums which contain exactly the same quantity of the metal, in weight

and fineness; but when, as in the case of France and England, the metals are

different, what is meant is that the quantity of gold in the one sum, and the

quantity of silver in the other, are of the same value in the general market of

the world: there being no material difference between one place and another

in the relative value of these metals. Suppose 25 francs to be (as within a

trifling fraction it is) the equivalent of a pound sterling. The debts and credits

of the two countries would be equal, when the one owed as many times 25

francs, as the other owed pounds. When this was the case, a bill on France for

2500 francs would be worth in England 100l., and a bill on England for 100l.would be worth in France 2500 francs. The exchange is then said to be at par:
                                                            209
and 25 francs (in reality 25 francs and a trifle more)  is called the par of

exchange with France. When England owed to France more than the

equivalent of what France owed to her, a bill for 2500 francs would be at a

premium, that is, would be worth more than 100l. When France owed to

England more than the equivalent of what England owed to France, a bill for

2500 francs would be worth less than 100l., or would be at a discount.

              When bills on foreign countries are at a premium, it is customary to

say that the exchanges are against the country, or unfavourable to it. In order

to understand these phrases, we must take notice of what “the exchange,” in

the language of merchants, really means. It means the power which the

money of the country has of purchasing the money of other countries.

Supposing 25 francs to be the exact par of exchange, then when it requires

more than 100l. to buy a bill for 2500 francs, 100l. of English money are

worth less than their real equivalent of French money: and this is called an

exchange unfavourable to England. The only persons in England, however, to

whom it is really unfavourable, are those who have money to pay in France;

for they come into the bill market as buyers, and have to pay a premium : but

to those who have money to receive in France, the same state of things is

favourable; for they come as sellers, and receive the premium. The premium,

however, indicates that a balance is due by England, which might have to be

eventually liquidated in the precious metals: and since, according to the old

theory, the benefit of a trade consisted in bringing money into the country,

this prejudice introduced the practice of calling the exchange favourable

when it indicated a balance to receive, and unfavourable when it indicated

one to pay: and the phrases in turn tended to maintain the prejudice.

              3. It might be supposed at first sight that when the exchange is

unfavourable, or in other words, when bills are at a premium, the premium

must alWays amount to a full equivalent for the cost of transmitting money:

since, as there is really a balance to pay, and as the full cost must therefore be

incurred by some of those who have remittances to make, their competition

will compel all to submit to an equivalent sacrifice. And such would certainly

be the case, if it were always necessary that whatever is destined to be paid

should be paid immediately. The expectation of great and immediate foreign
                                                                                    210
payments sometimes produces a most startling effect on the exchanges. But

a small excess of imports above exports, or any other small amount of debt tobe paid to foreign countries, does not usually affect the exchanges to the full

extent of the cost and risk of transporting bullion. The length of credit

allowed, generally permits, on the part of some of the debtors, a

postponement of payment, and in the mean time the balance may turn the

other way, and restore the equality of debts and credits without any actual

transmission of the metals. And this is the more likely to happen, as there is a

self-adjusting power in the variations of the exchange itself. Bills are at a

premium because a greater money value has been imported than exported.

But the premium is itself an extra profit to those who export. Besides the

price they obtain for their goods, they draw for the amount and gain the

premium. It is, on the other hand, a diminution of profit to those who import.

Besides the price of the goods, they have to pay a premium for remittance. So

that what is called an unfavourable exchange is an encouragement to export,

and a discouragement to import. And if the balance due is of small amount,

and is the consequence of some merely casual disturbance in the ordinary

course of trade, it is soon liquidated in commodities, and the account adjusted

by means of bills, without the transmission of any bullion. Not so, however,

when the excess of imports above exports, which has made the exchange

unfavourable, arises from a permanent cause. In that case, what disturbed the

equilibrium must have been the state of prices, and it can only be restored by

acting on prices. It is impossible that prices should be such as to invite to an

excess of imports, and yet that the exports should be kept permanently up to

the imports by the extra profit on exportation derived from the premium on

bills; for if the exports were kept up to the imports, bills would not be at a

premium, and the extra profit would not exist. It is through the prices of

commodities that the correction must be administered.

              Disturbances, therefore, of the equilibrium of imports and exports,

and consequent disturbances of the exchange, may be considered as of two

classes; the one casual or accidental, which, if not on too large a scale, correct

themselves through the premium on bills, without any transmission of the

precious metals; the other arising from the general state of prices, which

cannot be corrected without the subtraction of actual money from the

circulation of one of the counties, or an annihilation of credit equivalent to it;

since the mere transmission of bullion (as distinguished from money), not

having any effect on prices, is of no avail to abate the cause from which the

disturbance proceeded.              It remains to observe, that the exchanges do not depend on the

balance of debts and credits with each country separately, but with all

counties taken together. England may owe a balance of payments to France;

but it does not follow that the exchange with France will be against England,

and that bills on France will be at a premium; because a balance may be due

to England from Holland or Hamburg, and she may pay her debts to France

with bills on those places; which is technically called arbitration of exchange.

There is some little additional expense, partly commission and partly loss of

interest, in settling debts in this circuitous manner, and to the extent of that

small difference the exchange with one country may vary apart from that with

others; but in the main, the exchanges with all foreign countries vary

together, according as the country has a balance to receive or to pay on the

general result of its foreign transactions.

        201
               Written before the change in the relative value of the two metals

produced by the gold discoveries. The par of exchange between gold and

silver currencies is now variable, and no one can foresee at what point it will

ultimately rest.

        202
               On the news of Bonaparte’s landing from Elba, the price of bills

advanced in one day as much as ten per cent. Of course this premium was not

a mere equivalent for cost of carriage, since the freight of such an article as

gold, even with the addition of war insurance, could never have amounted to

so much. This great price was an equivalent not for the difficulty of sending

gold, but for the anticipated difficulty of procuring it to send; the expectation

being that there would be such immense remittances to the Continent in

subsidies and for the support of armies, as would press hard on the stock of

bullion in the country (which was then entirely denuded of specie), and this,

too, in a shorter time than would allow of its being replenished. Accordingly

the price of bullion rose likewise, with the same suddenness. It is hardly

necessary to say that this took place during the Bank restriction. In a

convertible state of the currency, no such thing could have occurred until the

Bank stopped payment.

 

 

   Chapter 21 – Of the Distribution of the Precious Metals Through the

                                  Commercial World

 

 

              1. Having now examined the mechanism by which the commercial

transactions between nations are actually conducted, we have next to inquire

whether this mode of conducting them makes any difference in the

conclusions respecting international values, which we previously arrived at

on the hypothesis of barter.

              The nearest analogy would lead us to presume the negative. We did

not find that the intervention of money and its substitutes made any

difference in the law of value as applied to adjacent places. Things which

would have been equal in value if the mode of exchange had been by barter,

are worth equal sums of money. The introduction of money is a mere

addition of one more commodity, of which the value is regulated by the same

laws as that of all other commodities. We shall not be surprised, therefore, if

we find that international values also are determined by the same causes

under a money and bill system, as they would be under a system of barter;

and that money has little to do in the matter, except to furnish a convenient

mode of comparing values.

              All interchange is, in substance and effect, barter: whoever sells

commodities for money, and with that money buys other goods, really buys

those goods with his own commodities. And so of nations: their trade is a

mere exchange of exports for imports: and whether money is employed or

not, things are only in their permanent state when the exports and imports

exactly pay for each other. When this is the case, equal sums of money are

due from each country to the other, the debts are settled by bills, and there is

no balance to be paid in the precious metals. The trade is in a state like that

which is called in mechanics a condition of stable equilibrium.

              But the process by which things are brought back to this state when

they happen to deviate from it, is, at least outwardly, not the same in a barter

system and in a money system. Under the first, the country which wants more

imports than its exports will pay for, must offer its exports at a cheaper rate,

as the sole means of creating a demand for them sufficient to re-establish theequilibrium. When money is used, the country seems to do a thing totally

different. She takes the additional imports at the same price as before, and as

she exports no equivalent, the balance of payments turns against her; the

exchange becomes unfavourable, and the difference has to be paid in money.

This is in appearance a very distinct operation from the former. Let us see if it

differs in its essence, or only in its mechanism.

              Let the country which has the balance to pay be England, and the

country which receives it, France. By this transmission of the precious

metals, the quantity of the currency is diminished in England, and increased

in France. This I am at liberty to assume. As we shall see hereafter, it would

be a very erroneous assumption if made in regard to all payments of

international balances. A balance which has only to be paid once, such as the

payment made for an extra importation of corn in a season of dearth, may be

paid from hoards, or from the reserves of bankers, without acting on the

circulation. But we are now supposing that there is an excess of imports over

exports, arising from the fact that the equation of international demand is not

yet established: that there is at the ordinary prices a permanent demand in

England for more French goods than the English goods required in France at

the ordinary prices will pay for. When this is the case, if a change were not

made in the prices, there would be a perpetually renewed balance to be paid

in money. The imports require to be permanently diminished, or the exports

to be increased; which can only be accomplished through prices; and hence,

even if the balances are at first paid from hoards, or by the exportation of

bullion, they will reach the circulation at last, for until they do, nothing can

stop the drain.

              When, therefore, the state of prices is such that the equation of

international demand cannot establish itself, the country requiring more

imports than can be paid for by the exports; it is a sign that the country has

more of the precious metals or their substitutes, in circulation, than can

permanently circulate, and must necessarily part with some of them before

the balance can be restored. The currency is accordingly contracted: prices

fall, and among the rest, the prices of exportable articles; for which,

accordingly, there arises, in foreign countries, a greater demand: while

imported commodities have possibly risen in price, from the influx of money

into foreign countries, and at all events have not participated in the general

fall. But until the increased cheapness of English goods induces foreigncountries to take a greater pecuniary value, or until the increased dearness

(positive or comparative) of foreign goods makes England take a less

pecuniary value, the exports of England will be no nearer to paying for the

imports than before, and the stream of the precious metals which had begun

to flow out of England, will still flow on. This efflux will continue, until the

fall of prices in England brings within reach of the foreign market some

commodity which England did not previously send thither; or until the

reduced price of the things which she did send, has forced a demand abroad

for a sufficient quantity to pay for the imports, aided, perhaps, by a reduction

of the English demand for foreign goods, through their enhanced price, either

positive or comparative.

              Now this is the very process which took place on our original

supposition of barter. Not only, therefore, does the trade between nations tend

to the same equilibrium between exports and imports, whether money is

employed or not, but the means by which this equilibrium is established are

essentially the same. The country whose exports are not sufficient to pay for

her imports, offers them on cheaper terms, until she succeeds in forcing the

necessary demand: in other words, the Equation of International Demand,

under a money system as well as under a barter system, is the law of

international trade. Every country exports and imports the very same things,

and in the very same quantity, under the one system as under the other. In a

barter system, the trade gravitates to the point at which the sum of the imports

exactly exchanges for the sum of the exports: in a money system, it gravitates

to the point at which the sum of the imports and the sum of the exports

exchange for the same quantity of money. And since things which are equal

to the same thing are equal to one another, the exports and imports which are

equal in money price, would, if money were not used, precisely exchange for
              211
one another. 

              2. It thus appears that the law of international values, and,

consequently, the division of the advantages of trade among the nations

which carry it on, are the same, on the supposition of money, as they would

be in a state of barter. In international, as in ordinary domestic interchanges,

money is to commerce only what oil is to machinery, or railways to

locomotion-a contrivance to diminish friction. In order still further to test

these conclusions, let us proceed to re-examine, on the supposition of money,

a question which we have already investigated on the hypothesis of barter,namely, to what extent the benefit of an improvement in the production of an

exportable article, is participated in by the countries importing it.

              The improvement may either consist in the cheapening of some

article which was already a staple production of the country, or in the

establishment of some new branch of industry, or of some process rendering

an article exportable which had not till then been exported at all. It will be

convenient to begin with the case of a new export, as being somewhat the

simpler of the two.

              The first effect is that the article falls in price, and a demand arises

for it abroad. This new exportation disturbs the balance, turns the exchanges,

money flows into the country (which we shall suppose to be England), and

continues to flow until prices rise. This higher range of prices will somewhat

check the demand in foreign countries for the new article of export; and

diminish the demand which existed abroad for the other things which

England was in the habit of exporting. The exports will thus be diminished;

while at the same time the English public, having more money, will have a

greater power of purchasing foreign commodities. If they make use of this

increased power of purchase, there will be an increase of imports: and by this,

and the check to exportation, the equilibrium of imports and exports will be

restored. The result to foreign countries will be, that they have to pay dearer

than before for their other imports, and obtain the new commodity cheaper

than before, but not so much cheaper as England herself does. I say this,

being well aware that the article would be actually at the very same price

(cost of carriage excepted) in England and in other countries. The cheapness,

however, of the article is not measured solely by the money-price, but by that

price compared with the money incomes of the consumers. The price is the

same to the English and to the foreign consumers; but the former pay that

price from money incomes which have been increased by the new

distribution of the precious metals; while the latter have had their money

incomes probably diminished by the same cause. The trade, therefore, has not

imparted to the foreign consumer the whole, but only a portion, of the benefit

which the English consumer has derived from the improvement; while

England has also benefited in the prices of foreign commodities. Thus, then,

any industrial improvement which leads to the opening of a new branch of

export trade, benefits a country not only by the cheapness of the article in

which the improvement has taken place, but by a general cheapening of allimported products.

              Let us now change the hypothesis, and suppose that the

improvement, instead of creating a new export from England, cheapens an

existing one. When we examined this case on the supposition of barter, it

appeared to us that the foreign consumers might either obtain the same

benefit from the improvement as England herself, or a less benefit, or even a

greater benefit, according to the degree in which the consumption of the

cheapened article is calculated to extend itself as the article diminishes in

price. The same conclusions will be found true on the supposition of money.

              Let the commodity in which there is an improvement, be cloth. The

first effect of the improvement is that its price falls, and there is an increased

demand for it in the foreign market. But this demand is of uncertain amount.

Suppose the foreign consumers to increase their purchases in the exact ratio

of the cheapness, or in other words, to lay out in cloth the same sum of

money as before, the same aggregate payment as before will be due from

foreign countries to England; the equilibrium of exports and imports will

remain undisturbed, and foreigners will obtain the full advantage of the

increased cheapness of cloth. But if the foreign demand for cloth is of such a

character as to increase in a greater ratio than the cheapness, a larger sum

than formerly will be due to England for cloth, and when paid will raise

English prices, the price of cloth included; this rise, however, will affect only

the foreign purchaser, English incomes being raised in a corresponding

proportion; and the foreign consumer will thus derive a less advantage than

England from the improvement. If, on the contrary, the cheapening of cloth

does not extend the foreign demand for it in a proportional degree, a less sum

of debts than before will be due to England for cloth, while there will be the

usual sum of debts due from England to foreign countries; the balance of

trade will turn against England, money will be exported, prices (that of cloth

included) will fall, and cloth will eventually be cheapened to the foreign

purchaser in a still greater ratio, than the improvement has cheapened it to

England. These are the very conclusions which we deduced on the hypothesis

of barter.

              The result of the preceding discussion cannot be better summed up
                                212
than in the words of Ricardo. “Gold and silver having been chosen for the

general medium of circulation, they are, by the competition of commerce,

distributed in such proportions amongst the different countries of the world asto accommodate themselves to the natural traffic which would take place if

no such metals existed, and the trade between countries were purely a trade of

barter.” Of this principle, so fertile in consequences, previous to which the

theory of foreign trade was an unintelligible chaos, Mr. Ricardo, though he

did not pursue it into its ramifications, was the real originator. No writer who

preceded him appears to have had a glimpse of it: and few are those who

even since his time have had an adequate conception of its scientific value.

              3. It is now necessary to inquire, in what manner this law of the

distribution of the precious metals by means of the exchanges, affects the

exchange value of money itself; and how it tallies with the law by which we

found that the value of money is regulated when imported as a mere article of

merchandize. For there is here a semblance of contradiction, which has, I

think, contributed more than anything else to make some distinguished

political economists resist the evidence of the preceding doctrines. Money,

they justly think, is no exception to the general laws of value; it is a

commodity like any other, and its average or natural value must depend on

the cost of producing, or at least of obtaining it. That its distribution through

the world, therefore, and its different value in different places, should be

liable to be altered, not by causes affecting itself, but by a hundred causes

unconnected with it; by everything which affects the trade in other

commodities, so as to derange the equilibrium of exports and imports;

appears to these thinkers a doctrine altogether inadmissible.

              But the supposed anomaly exists only in semblance. The causes

which bring money into or carry it out of a country through the exchanges, to

restore the equilibrium of trade, and which thereby raise its value in some

countries and lower it in others, are the very same causes on which the local

value of money would depend, if it were never imported except as a

merchandize, and never except directly from the mines. When the value of

money in a country is permanently lowered by an influx of it through the

balance of trade, the cause, if it is not diminished cost of production, must be

one of those causes which compel a new adjustment, more favourable to the

country, of the equation of international demand: namely, either an increased

demand abroad for her commodities, or a diminished demand on her part for

those of foreign countries. Now an increased foreign demand for the

commodities of a country, or a diminished demand in the country for

imported commodities, are the very causes which, on the general principlesof trade, enable a country to purchase all imports, and consequently the

precious metals, at a lower value. There is therefore no contradiction, but the

most perfect accordance in the results of the two different modes in which the

precious metals may be obtained. When money flows from country to

country in consequence of changes in the international demand for

commodities, and by so doing alters its own local value, it merely realizes, by

a more rapid process, the effect which would otherwise take place more

slowly, by an alteration in the relative breadth of the streams by which the

precious metals flow into different regions of the earth from the mining

countries. As therefore we before saw that the use of money as a medium of

exchange does not in the least alter the law on which the values of other

things, either in the same country or internationally, depend, so neither does it

alter the law of the value of the precious metal itself: and there is in the whole

doctrine of international values as now laid down, a unity and harmony which

is a strong collateral presumption of truth.

              4. Before closing this discussion, it is fitting to point out in what

manner and degree the preceding conclusions are affected by the existence of

international payments not originating in commerce, and for which no

equivalent in either money or commodities is expected or received; such as a

tribute, or remittances of rent to absentee landlords, or of interest to foreign

creditors, or a government expenditure abroad, such as England incurs in the

management of some of her colonial dependencies.

              To begin with the case of barter. The supposed annual remittances

being made in commodities, and being exports for which there is to be no

return, it is no longer requisite that the imports and exports should pay for

one another: on the contrary, there must be an annual excess of exports over

imports, equal to the value of the remittance. If, before the country became

liable to the annual payment, foreign commerce was in its natural state of

equilibrium, it will now be necessary for the purpose of effecting the

remittance, that foreign countries should be induced to take a greater quantity

of exports than before: which can only be done by offering those exports on

cheaper terms, or in other words, by paying dearer for foreign commodities.

The international values will so adjust themselves that either by greater

exports, or smaller imports, or both, the requisite excess on the side of

exports will be brought about; and this excess will become the permanent

state. The result is that a country which makes regular payments to foreigncountries, besides losing what it pays, loses also something more, by the less

advantageous terms on which it is forced to exchange its productions for

foreign commodities.

              The same results follow on the supposition of money. Commerce

being supposed to be in a state of equilibrium when the obligatory

remittances begin, the first remittance is necessarily made in money. This

lowers prices in the remitting country, and rises them in the receiving. The

natural effect is that more commodities are exported than before, and fewer

imported, and that, on the score of commerce alone, a balance of money will

be constantly due from the receiving to the paying country. When the debt

thus annually due to the tributary country becomes equal to the annual tribute

or other regular payment due from it, no further transmission of money takes

place; the equilibrium of exports and imports will no longer exist, but that of

payments will; the exchange will be at par, the two debts will be set off

against one another, and the tribute or remittance will be virtually paid in

goods. The result to the interest of the two countries will be as already

pointed out: the paying country will give a higher price for all that it buys

from the receiving country, while the latter, besides receiving the tribute,

obtains the exportable produce of the tributary country at a lower price.

        203
               The subjoined extract from the separate Essay previously referred

to, will give some assistance in following the course of the phenomena. It is

adapted to the imaginary case used for frustration throughout that Essay, the

case of a trade between England and Germany in cloth and linen.

              “We may, at first, make whatever supposition we will with respect to

the value of money. Let us suppose, therefore, that before the opening of the

trade, the price of cloth is the same in both countries, namely, six shillings

per yard. As ten yards of cloth were supposed to exchange in England for 15

yards of linen, in Germany for 20, we must suppose that linen is sold in

England at four shillings per yard, in Germany at three. Cost of carriage and

importer’s profit are left, as before, out of consideration.

              “In this state of prices, cloth, it is evident, cannot yet be exported

from England into Germany: but linen can be imported from Germany into

England. It will be so; and, in the first instance, the linen will be paid for in

money.

              “The efflux of money from England, and its influx into Germany,will raise money prices in the latter country, and lower them in the former.

Linen will rise in Germany above three shillings per yard, and cloth above six

shillings. Linen in England, being imported from Germany, will (since cost

of carriage is not reckoned) sink to the same price as in that country, while

cloth will fall below six shillings. As soon as the price of cloth is lower in

England than in Germany, it will begin to be exported, and the price of cloth

in Germany will fall to what it is in England. As long as the cloth exported

does not suffice to pay for the linen imported, money will continue to flow

from England into Germany, and prices generally will continue to fall in

England and rise in Germany. By the fall, however, of cloth in England, cloth

will fall in Germany also, and the demand for it will increase. By the rise of

linen in Germany, linen must rise in England also, and the demand for it will

diminish. As cloth fell in price and linen rose, there would be some particular

price of both articles at which the cloth exported and the linen imported

would exactly pay for each other. At this point prices would remain, because

money would then cease to move out of England into Germany. What this

point might be, would entirely depend upon the circumstances and

inclinations of the purchasers on both sides. If the fall of cloth did not much

increase the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen did not diminish

very rapidly the demand for it in England, much money must pass before the

equilibrium is restored; cloth would fall very much, and linen would rise,

until England, perhaps, had to pay nearly as much for it as when she

produced it for herself. But if, on the contrary, the fall of cloth caused a very

rapid increase of the demand for it in Germany, and the rise of linen in

Germany reduced very rapidly the demand in England from what it was

under the influence of the first cheapness produced by the opening of the

trade; the cloth would very soon suffice to pay for the linen, little money

would pass between the two countries, and England would derive a large

portion of the benefit of the trade. We have thus arrived at precisely the same

conclusion, in supposing the employment of money, which we found to hold

under the supposition of barter.

              “In what shape the benefit accrues to the two nations from the trade

is clear enough. Germany, before the commencement of the trade, paid six

shillings per yard for broadcloth: she now obtains it at a lower price. This,

however, is not the whole of her advantage. As the money-prices of all her

other commodities have risen, the money-incomes of all her producers have

increased. This is no advantage to them in buying from each other, because