equals. A whole and the sum of its parts are equals. The sums of equal things

are equals. The differences of equal things are equals. There are no other

original formulæ to prove equality. For inferring inequality we have the

following: A whole and its parts are unequals. The sums of equal things and

unequal things are unequals. The differences of equal things and unequal

things are unequals. In all, eight formulæ. The angles at the base of an

isosceles triangle do not obviously come within any of these. The formulæ

specify certain marks of equality and of inequality, but the angles can not be

perceived intuitively to have any of those marks. On examination it appears

that they have; and we ultimately succeed in bringing them within the

formula, “The differences of equal things are equal.” Whence comes the

difficulty of recognizing these angles as the differences of equal things?

Because each of them is the difference not of one pair only, but of

innumerable pairs of angles; and out of these we had to imagine and select

two, which could either be intuitively perceived to be equals, or possessed

some of the marks of equality set down in the various formulæ. By an

exercise of ingenuity, which, on the part of the first inventor, deserves to be

regarded as considerable, two pairs of angles were hit upon, which united

these requisites. First, it could be perceived intuitively that their differences

were the angles at the base; and, secondly, they possessed one of the marks of

equality, namely, coincidence when applied to one another. This coincidence,

however, was not perceived intuitively, but inferred, in conformity to another

formula.

              For greater clearness, I subjoin an analysis of the demonstration.

Euclid, it will be remembered, demonstrates his fifth proposition by means of

the fourth. This it is not allowable for us to do, because we are undertaking to

trace deductive truths not to prior deductions, but to their original inductive

foundation. We must, therefore, use the premises of the fourth proposition

instead of its conclusion, and prove the fifth directly from first principles. To

do so requires six formulas. (We presuppose an equilateral triangle, whose

vertices are A, D, E, with point B on the side AD, and point C on the side

AE, such that BC is parallel to DE. We must begin, as in Euclid, by

prolonging the equal sides AB, AC, to equal distances, and joining the

extremities BE, DC.)

              FIRST FORMULA. — The sums of equals are equal.

              AD and AE are sums of equals by the supposition. Having that markof equality, they are concluded by this formula to be equal.

              SECOND FORMULA. — Equal straight lines or angles, being

applied to one another, coincide.

              AC, AB, are within this formula by supposition; AD, AE, have been

brought within it by the preceding step. The angle at A considered as an angle

of the triangle ABE, and the same angle considered as an angle of the triangle

ACD, are of course within the formula. All these pairs, therefore, possess the

property which, according to the second formula, is a mark that when applied

to one another they will coincide. Conceive them, then, applied to one

another, by turning over the triangle ABE, and laying it on the triangle ACD

in such a manner that AB of the one shall lie upon AC of the other. Then, by

the equality of the angles, AE will lie on AD. But AB and AC, AE and AD

are equals; therefore they will coincide altogether, and of course at their

extremities, D, E, and B, C.

              THIRD FORMULA. — Straight lines, having their extremities

coincident, coincide.

              BE and CD have been brought within this formula by the preceding

induction; they will, therefore, coincide.

              FOURTH FORMULA. — Angles, having their sides coincident,

coincide.

              The third induction having shown that BE and CD coincide, and the

second that AB, AC, coincide, the angles ABE and ACD are thereby brought

within the fourth formula, and accordingly coincide.

              FIFTH FORMULA. — Things which coincide are equal.

              The angles ABE and ACD are brought within this formula by the

induction immediately preceding. This train of reasoning being also

applicable, mutatis mutandis , to the angles EBC, DCB, these also are

brought within the fifth formula. And, finally,

              SIXTH FORMULA. — The differences of equals are equal.

              The angle ABC being the difference of ABE, CBE, and the angle

ACB being the difference of ACD, DCB; which have been proved to be

equals; ABC and ACB are brought within the last formula by the whole of

the previous process.              The difficulty here encountered is chiefly that of figuring to

ourselves the two angles at the base of the triangle ABC as remainders made

by cutting one pair of angles out of another, while each pair shall be

corresponding angles of triangles which have two sides and the intervening

angle equal. It is by this happy contrivance that so many different inductions

are brought to bear upon the same particular case. And this not being at all an

obvious thought, it may be seen from an example so near the threshold of

mathematics, how much scope there may well be for scientific dexterity in

the higher branches of that and other sciences, in order so to combine a few

simple inductions, as to bring within each of them innumerable cases which

are not obviously included in it; and how long, and numerous, and

complicated may be the processes necessary for bringing the inductions

together, even when each induction may itself be very easy and simple. All

the inductions involved in all geometry are comprised in those simple ones,

the formulæ of which are the Axioms, and a few of the so-called Definitions.

The remainder of the science is made up of the processes employed for

bringing unforeseen cases within these inductions; or (in syllogistic language)

for proving the minors necessary to complete the syllogisms; the majors

being the definitions and axioms. In those definitions and axioms are laid

down the whole of the marks, by an artful combination of which it has been

found possible to discover and prove all that is proved in geometry. The

marks being so few, and the inductions which furnish them being so obvious

and familiar; the connecting of several of them together, which constitutes

Deductions, or Trains of Reasoning, forms the whole difficulty of the

science, and, with a trifling exception, its whole bulk; and hence Geometry is

a Deductive Science.

                                          67
              § 5. It will be seen hereafter that there are weighty scientific

reasons for giving to every science as much of the character of a Deductive

Science as possible; for endeavoring to construct the science from the fewest

and the simplest possible inductions, and to make these, by any combinations

however complicated, suffice for proving even such truths, relating to

complex cases, as could be proved, if we chose, by inductions from specific

experience. Every branch of natural philosophy was originally experimental;

each generalization rested on a special induction, and was derived from its

own distinct set of observations and experiments. From being sciences of

pure experiment, as the phrase is, or, to speak more correctly, sciences in

which the reasonings mostly consist of no more than one step, and areexpressed by single syllogisms, all these sciences have become to some

extent, and some of them in nearly the whole of their extent, sciences of pure

reasoning; whereby multitudes of truths, already known by induction from as

many different sets of experiments, have come to be exhibited as deductions

or corollaries from inductive propositions of a simpler and more universal

character. Thus mechanics, hydrostatics, optics, acoustics, thermology, have

successively been rendered mathematical; and astronomy was brought by

Newton within the laws of general mechanics. Why it is that the substitution

of this circuitous mode of proceeding for a process apparently much easier

and more natural, is held, and justly, to be the greatest triumph of the

investigation of nature, we are not, in this stage of our inquiry, prepared to

examine. But it is necessary to remark, that although, by this progressive

transformation, all sciences tend to become more and more Deductive, they

are not, therefore, the less Inductive; every step in the Deduction is still an

Induction. The opposition is not between the terms Deductive and Inductive,

but between Deductive and Experimental. A science is experimental, in

proportion as every new case, which presents any peculiar features, stands in

need of a new set of observations and experiments — a fresh induction. It is

deductive, in proportion as it can draw conclusions, respecting cases of a new

kind, by processes which bring those cases under old inductions; by

ascertaining that cases which can not be observed to have the requisite marks,

have, however, marks of those marks.

              We can now, therefore, perceive what is the generic distinction

between sciences which can be made Deductive, and those which must as yet

remain Experimental. The difference consists in our having been able, or not

yet able, to discover marks of marks. If by our various inductions we have

been able to proceed no further than to such propositions as these, a a mark

of b , or a and b marks of one another, c a mark of d , or c and d marks of one

another, without any thing to connect a or b with c or d ; we have a science of

detached and mutually independent generalizations, such as these, that acids

redden vegetable blues, and that alkalies color them green; from neither of

which propositions could we, directly or indirectly, infer the other: and a

science, so far as it is composed of such propositions, is purely experimental.

Chemistry, in the present state of our knowledge, has not yet thrown off this

character. There are other sciences, however, of which the propositions are of

this kind: a a mark of b, b a mark of c, c of d, d of e , etc. In these sciences

we can mount the ladder from a to e by a process of ratiocination; we canconclude that a is a mark of e , and that every object which has the mark a

has the property e , although, perhaps, we never were able to observe a and e

together, and although even d , our only direct mark of e , may not be

perceptible in those objects, but only inferable. Or, varying the first

metaphor, we may be said to get from a to e underground: the marks b , c , d ,

which indicate the route, must all be possessed somewhere by the objects

concerning which we are inquiring; but they are below the surface: a is the

only mark that is visible, and by it we are able to trace in succession all the

rest.

              § 6. We can now understand how an experimental may transform

itself into a deductive science by the mere progress of experiment. In an

experimental science, the inductions, as we have said, lie detached, as, a a

mark of b, c a mark of d , e a mark of f , and so on: now, a new set of

instances, and a consequent new induction, may at any time bridge over the

interval between two of these unconnected arches; b , for example, may be

ascertained to be a mark of c , which enables us thenceforth to prove

deductively that a is a mark of c . Or, as sometimes happens, some

comprehensive induction may raise an arch high in the air, which bridges

over hosts of them at once; b , d , f , and all the rest, turning out to be marks

of some one thing, or of things between which a connection has already been

traced. As when Newton discovered that the motions, whether regular or

apparently anomalous, of all the bodies of the solar system (each of which

motions had been inferred by a separate logical operation, from separate

marks), were all marks of moving round a common centre, with a centripetal

force varying directly as the mass, and inversely as the square of the distance

from that centre. This is the greatest example which has yet occurred of the

transformation, at one stroke, of a science which was still to a great degree

merely experimental, into a deductive science.

              Transformations of the same nature, but on a smaller scale,

continually take place in the less advanced branches of physical knowledge,

without enabling them to throw off the character of experimental sciences.

Thus with regard to the two unconnected propositions before cited, namely,

Acids redden vegetable blues, Alkalies make them green; it is remarked by

Liebig, that all blue coloring matters which are reddened by acids (as well as,

reciprocally, all red coloring matters which are rendered blue by alkalies)

contain nitrogen: and it is quite possible that this circumstance may one dayfurnish a bond of connection between the two propositions in question, by

showing that the antagonistic action of acids and alkalies in producing or

destroying the color blue, is the result of some one, more general, law.

Although this connecting of detached generalizations is so much gain, it

tends but little to give a deductive character to any science as a whole;

because the new courses of observation and experiment, which thus enable us

to connect together a few general truths, usually make known to us a still

greater number of unconnected new ones. Hence chemistry, though similar

extensions and simplifications of its generalizations are continually taking

place, is still in the main an experimental science; and is likely so to continue

unless some comprehensive induction should be hereafter arrived at, which,

like Newton’s, shall connect a vast number of the smaller known inductions

together, and change the whole method of the science at once. Chemistry has

already one great generalization, which, though relating to one of the

subordinate aspects of chemical phenomena, possesses within its limited

sphere this comprehensive character; the principle of Dalton, called the

atomic theory, or the doctrine of chemical equivalents: which by enabling us

to a certain extent to foresee the proportions in which two substances will

combine, before the experiment has been tried, constitutes undoubtedly a

source of new chemical truths obtainable by deduction, as well as a

connecting principle for all truths of the same description previously obtained

by experiment.

              § 7. The discoveries which change the method of a science from

experimental to deductive, mostly consist in establishing, either by deduction

or by direct experiment, that the varieties of a particular phenomenon

uniformly accompany the varieties of some other phenomenon better known.

Thus the science of sound, which previously stood in the lowest rank of

merely experimental science, became deductive when it was proved by

experiment that every variety of sound was consequent on, and therefore a

mark of, a distinct and definable variety of oscillatory motion among the

particles of the transmitting medium. When this was ascertained, it followed

that every relation of succession or co-existence which obtained between

phenomena of the more known class, obtained also between the phenomena

which correspond to them in the other class. Every sound, being a mark of a

particular oscillatory motion, became a mark of every thing which, by the

laws of dynamics, was known to be inferable from that motion; and every

thing which by those same laws was a mark of any oscillatory motion amongthe particles of an elastic medium, became a mark of the corresponding

sound. And thus many truths, not before suspected, concerning sound,

become deducible from the known laws of the propagation of motion through

an elastic medium; while facts already empirically known respecting sound,

become an indication of corresponding properties of vibrating bodies,

previously undiscovered.

              But the grand agent for transforming experimental into deductive

sciences, is the science of number. The properties of number, alone among all

known phenomena, are, in the most rigorous sense, properties of all things

whatever. All things are not colored, or ponderable, or even extended; but all

things are numerable. And if we consider this science in its whole extent,

from common arithmetic up to the calculus of variations, the truths already

ascertained seem all but infinite, and admit of indefinite extension.

              These truths, though affirmable of all things whatever, of course

apply to them only in respect of their quantity. But if it comes to be

discovered that variations of quality in any class of phenomena, correspond

regularly to variations of quantity either in those same or in some other

phenomena; every formula of mathematics applicable to quantities which

vary in that particular manner, becomes a mark of a corresponding general

truth, respecting the variations in quality which accompany them: and the

science of quantity being (as far as any science can be) altogether deductive,

the theory of that particular kind of qualities becomes, to this extent,

deductive likewise.

              The most striking instance in point which history affords (though not

an example of an experimental science rendered deductive, but of an

unparalleled extension given to the deductive process in a science which was

deductive already), is the revolution in geometry which originated with

Descartes, and was completed by Clairaut. These great mathematicians

pointed out the importance of the fact, that to every variety of position in

points, direction in lines, or form in curves or surfaces (all of which are

Qualities), there corresponds a peculiar relation of quantity between either

two or three rectilineal co-ordinates; insomuch that if the law were known

according to which those co-ordinates vary relatively to one another, every

other geometrical property of the line or surface in question, whether relating

to quantity or quality, would be capable of being inferred. Hence it followed

that every geometrical question could be solved, if the correspondingalgebraical one could; and geometry received an accession (actual or

potential) of new truths, corresponding to every property of numbers which

the progress of the calculus had brought, or might in future bring, to light. In

the same general manner, mechanics, astronomy, and in a less degree, every

branch of natural philosophy commonly so called, have been made

algebraical. The varieties of physical phenomena with which those sciences

are conversant, have been found to answer to determinable varieties in the

quantity of some circumstance or other; or at least to varieties of form or

position, for which corresponding equations of quantity had already been, or

were susceptible of being, discovered by geometers.

              In these various transformations, the propositions of the science of

number do but fulfill the function proper to all propositions forming a train of

reasoning, viz., that of enabling us to arrive in an indirect method, by marks

of marks, at such of the properties of objects as we can not directly ascertain

(or not so conveniently) by experiment. We travel from a given visible or

tangible fact, through the truths of numbers, to the facts sought. The given

fact is a mark that a certain relation subsists between the quantities of some of

the elements concerned; while the fact sought presupposes a certain relation

between the quantities of some other elements: now, if these last quantities

are dependent in some known manner upon the former, or vicè versa , we can

argue from the numerical relation between the one set of quantities, to

determine that which subsists between the other set; the theorems of the

calculus affording the intermediate links. And thus one of the two physical

facts becomes a mark of the other, by being a mark of a mark of a mark of it.

 

 

           Chapter V. – Of Demonstration, And Necessary Truths.

 

 

              § 1. If, as laid down in the two preceding chapters, the foundation of

all sciences, even deductive or demonstrative sciences, is Induction; if every

step in the ratiocinations even of geometry is an act of induction; and if a

train of reasoning is but bringing many inductions to bear upon the same

subject of inquiry, and drawing a case within one induction by means of

another; wherein lies the peculiar certainty always ascribed to the sciences

which are entirely, or almost entirely, deductive? Why are they called the

Exact Sciences? Why are mathematical certainty, and the evidence of

demonstration, common phrases to express the very highest degree of

assurance attainable by reason? Why are mathematics by almost all

philosophers, and (by some) even those branches of natural philosophy

which, through the medium of mathematics, have been converted into

deductive sciences, considered to be independent of the evidence of

experience and observation, and characterized as systems of Necessary

Truth?

              The answer I conceive to be, that this character of necessity, ascribed

to the truths of mathematics, and (even with some reservations to be hereafter

made) the peculiar certainty attributed to them, is an illusion; in order to

sustain which, it is necessary to suppose that those truths relate to, and

express the properties of, purely imaginary objects. It is acknowledged that

the conclusions of geometry are deduced, partly at least, from the so-called

Definitions, and that those definitions are assumed to be correct

representations, as far as they go, of the objects with which geometry is

conversant. Now we have pointed out that, from a definition as such, no

proposition, unless it be one concerning the meaning of a word, can ever

follow; and that what apparently follows from a definition, follows in reality

from an implied assumption that there exists a real thing conformable thereto.

This assumption, in the case of the definitions of geometry, is not strictly

true: there exist no real things exactly conformable to the definitions. There

exist no points without magnitude; no lines without breadth, nor perfectly

straight; no circles with all their radii exactly equal, nor squares with all their

angles perfectly right. It will perhaps be said that the assumption does notextend to the actual, but only to the possible, existence of such things. I

answer that, according to any test we have of possibility, they are not even

possible. Their existence, so far as we can form any judgment, would seem to

be inconsistent with the physical constitution of our planet at least, if not of

the universe. To get rid of this difficulty, and at the same time to save the

credit of the supposed system of necessary truth, it is customary to say that

the points, lines, circles, and squares which are the subject of geometry, exist

in our conceptions merely, and are part of our minds; which minds, by

working on their own materials, construct an a priori science, the evidence of

which is purely mental, and has nothing whatever to do with outward

experience. By howsoever high authorities this doctrine may have been

sanctioned, it appears to me psychologically incorrect. The points, lines,

circles, and squares which any one has in his mind, are (I apprehend) simply

copies of the points, lines, circles, and squares which he has known in his

experience. Our idea of a point, I apprehend to be simply our idea of the

minimum visibile , the smallest portion of surface which we can see. A line,

as defined by geometers, is wholly inconceivable. We can reason about a line

as if it had no breadth; because we have a power, which is the foundation of

all the control we can exercise over the operations of our minds; the power,

when a perception is present to our senses, or a conception to our intellects,

of attending to a part only of that perception or conception, instead of the

whole. But we can not conceive a line without breadth; we can form no

mental picture of such a line: all the lines which we have in our minds are

lines possessing breadth. If any one doubts this, we may refer him to his own

experience. I much question if any one who fancies that he can conceive what

is called a mathematical line, thinks so from the evidence of his

consciousness: I suspect it is rather because he supposes that unless such a

conception were possible, mathematics could not exist as a science: a

supposition which there will be no difficulty in showing to be entirely

groundless.

              Since, then, neither in nature, nor in the human mind, do there exist

any objects exactly corresponding to the definitions of geometry, while yet

that science can not be supposed to be conversant about nonentities; nothing

remains but to consider geometry as conversant with such lines, angles, and

figures, as really exist; and the definitions, as they are called, must be

regarded as some of our first and most obvious generalizations concerning

those natural objects. The correctness of those generalizations, asgeneralizations, is without a flaw: the equality of all the radii of a circle is

true of all circles, so far as it is true of any one: but it is not exactly true of

any circle; it is only nearly true; so nearly that no error of any importance in

practice will be incurred by feigning it to be exactly true. When we have

occasion to extend these inductions, or their consequences, to cases in which

the error would be appreciable — to lines of perceptible breadth or thickness,

parallels which deviate sensibly from equidistance, and the like — we correct

our conclusions, by combining with them a fresh set of propositions relating

to the aberration; just as we also take in propositions relating to the physical

or chemical properties of the material, if those properties happen to introduce

any modification into the result; which they easily may, even with respect to

figure and magnitude, as in the case, for instance, of expansion by heat. So

long, however, as there exists no practical necessity for attending to any of

the properties of the object except its geometrical properties, or to any of the

natural irregularities in those, it is convenient to neglect the consideration of

the other properties and of the irregularities, and to reason as if these did not

exist: accordingly, we formally announce in the definitions, that we intend to

proceed on this plan. But it is an error to suppose, because we resolve to

confine our attention to a certain number of the properties of an object, that

we therefore conceive, or have an idea of, the object, denuded of its other

properties. We are thinking, all the time, of precisely such objects as we have

seen and touched, and with all the properties which naturally belong to them;

but, for scientific convenience, we feign them to be divested of all properties,

except those which are material to our purpose, and in regard to which we

design to consider them.

              The peculiar accuracy, supposed to be characteristic of the first

principles of geometry, thus appears to be fictitious. The assertions on which

the reasonings of the science are founded, do not, any more than in other

sciences, exactly correspond with the fact; but we suppose that they do so, for

the sake of tracing the consequences which follow from the supposition. The

opinion of Dugald Stewart respecting the foundations of geometry, is, I

conceive, substantially correct; that it is built on hypotheses; that it owes to

this alone the peculiar certainty supposed to distinguish it; and that in any

science whatever, by reasoning from a set of hypotheses, we may obtain a

body of conclusions as certain as those of geometry, that is, as strictly in

accordance with the hypotheses, and as irresistibly compelling assent, on
                                              68
condition that those hypotheses are true.              When, therefore, it is affirmed that the conclusions of geometry are

necessary truths, the necessity consists in reality only in this, that they

correctly follow from the suppositions from which they are deduced. Those

suppositions are so far from being necessary, that they are not even true; they

purposely depart, more or less widely, from the truth. The only sense in

which necessity can be ascribed to the conclusions of any scientific

investigation, is that of legitimately following from some assumption, which,

by the conditions of the inquiry, is not to be questioned. In this relation, of

course, the derivative truths of every deductive science must stand to the

inductions, or assumptions, on which the science is founded, and which,

whether true or untrue, certain or doubtful in themselves, are always

supposed certain for the purposes of the particular science. And therefore the

conclusions of all deductive sciences were said by the ancients to be

necessary propositions. We have observed already that to be predicated

necessarily was characteristic of the predicable Proprium, and that a proprium

was any property of a thing which could be deduced from its essence, that is,

from the properties included in its definition.

              § 2. The important doctrine of Dugald Stewart, which I have

endeavored to enforce, has been contested by Dr. Whewell, both in the

dissertation appended to his excellent Mechanical Euclid , and in his

elaborate work on the Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences ; in which last he

also replies to an article in the Edinburgh Review (ascribed to a writer of

great scientific eminence), in which Stewart’s opinion was defended against

his former strictures. The supposed refutation of Stewart consists in proving

against him (as has also been done in this work) that the premises of

geometry are not definitions, but assumptions of the real existence of things

corresponding to those definitions. This, however, is doing little for Dr.

Whewell’s purpose; for it is these very assumptions which are asserted to be

hypotheses, and which he, if he denies that geometry is founded on

hypotheses, must show to be absolute truths. All he does, however, is to

observe, that they, at any rate, are not arbitrary hypotheses; that we should

not be at liberty to substitute other hypotheses for them; that not only “a

definition, to be admissible, must necessarily refer to and agree with some

conception which we can distinctly frame in our thoughts,” but that the

straight lines, for instance, which we define, must be “those by which angles

are contained, those by which triangles are bounded, those of which
                                                    69
parallelism may be predicated, and the like.” And this is true; but this hasnever been contradicted. Those who say that the premises of geometry are

hypotheses, are not bound to maintain them to be hypotheses which have no

relation whatever to fact. Since an hypothesis framed for the purpose of

scientific inquiry must relate to something which has real existence (for there

can be no science respecting nonentities), it follows that any hypothesis we

make respecting an object, to facilitate our study of it, must not involve any

thing which is distinctly false, and repugnant to its real nature: we must not

ascribe to the thing any property which it has not; our liberty extends only to

slightly exaggerating some of those which it has (by assuming it to be

completely what it really is very nearly), and suppressing others, under the

indispensable obligation of restoring them whenever, and in as far as, their

presence or absence would make any material difference in the truth of our

conclusions. Of this nature, accordingly, are the first principles involved in

the definitions of geometry. That the hypotheses should be of this particular

character, is, however, no further necessary, than inasmuch as no others could

enable us to deduce conclusions which, with due corrections, would be true

of real objects: and in fact, when our aim is only to illustrate truths, and not to

investigate them, we are not under any such restriction. We might suppose an

imaginary animal, and work out by deduction, from the known laws of

physiology, its natural history; or an imaginary commonwealth, and from the

elements composing it, might argue what would be its fate. And the

conclusions which we might thus draw from purely arbitrary hypotheses,

might form a highly useful intellectual exercise: but as they could only teach

us what would be the properties of objects which do not really exist, they

would not constitute any addition to our knowledge of nature: while, on the

contrary, if the hypothesis merely divests a real object of some portion of its

properties, without clothing it in false ones, the conclusions will always

express, under known liability to correction, actual truth.

              § 3. But though Dr. Whewell has not shaken Stewart’s doctrine as to

the hypothetical character of that portion of the first principles of geometry

which are involved in the so-called definitions, he has, I conceive, greatly the

advantage of Stewart on another important point in the theory of geometrical

reasoning; the necessity of admitting, among those first principles, axioms as

well as definitions. Some of the axioms of Euclid might, no doubt, be

exhibited in the form of definitions, or might be deduced, by reasoning, from

propositions similar to what are so called. Thus, if instead of the axiom,

Magnitudes which can be made to coincide are equal, we introduce adefinition, “Equal magnitudes are those which may be so applied to one

another as to coincide;” the three axioms which follow (Magnitudes which

are equal to the same are equal to one another — If equals are added to

equals, the sums are equal — If equals are taken from equals, the remainders

are equal), may be proved by an imaginary superposition, resembling that by

which the fourth proposition of the first book of Euclid is demonstrated. But

though these and several others may be struck out of the list of first

principles, because, though not requiring demonstration, they are susceptible

of it; there will be found in the list of axioms two or three fundamental truths,

not capable of being demonstrated: among which must be reckoned the

proposition that two straight lines can not inclose a space (or its equivalent,

Straight lines which coincide in two points coincide altogether), and some

property of parallel lines, other than that which constitutes their definition:

one of the most suitable for the purpose being that selected by Professor

Playfair: “Two straight lines which intersect each other can not both of them
                                        70
be parallel to a third straight line.”

              The axioms, as well those which are indemonstrable as those which

admit of being demonstrated, differ from that other class of fundamental

principles which are involved in the definitions, in this, that they are true

without any mixture of hypothesis. That things which are equal to the same

thing are equal to one another, is as true of the lines and figures in nature, as

it would be of the imaginary ones assumed in the definitions. In this respect,

however, mathematics are only on a par with most other sciences. In almost

all sciences there are some general propositions which are exactly true, while

the greater part are only more or less distant approximations to the truth.

Thus in mechanics, the first law of motion (the continuance of a movement

once impressed, until stopped or slackened by some resisting force) is true

without qualification or error. The rotation of the earth in twenty-four hours,

of the same length as in our time, has gone on since the first accurate

observations, without the increase or diminution of one second in all that

period. These are inductions which require no fiction to make them be

received as accurately true: but along with them there are others, as for

instance the propositions respecting the figure of the earth, which are but

approximations to the truth; and in order to use them for the further

advancement of our knowledge, we must feign that they are exactly true,

though they really want something of being so.              § 4. It remains to inquire, what is the ground of our belief in axioms

— what is the evidence on which they rest? I answer, they are experimental

truths; generalizations from observation. The proposition, Two straight lines

can not inclose a space — or, in other words, Two straight lines which have

once met, do not meet again, but continue to diverge — is an induction from

the evidence of our senses.

              This opinion runs counter to a scientific prejudice of long standing

and great strength, and there is probably no proposition enunciated in this

work for which a more unfavorable reception is to be expected. It is,

however, no new opinion; and even if it were so, would be entitled to be

judged, not by its novelty, but by the strength of the arguments by which it

can be supported. I consider it very fortunate that so eminent a champion of

the contrary opinion as Dr. Whewell has found occasion for a most elaborate

treatment of the whole theory of axioms, in attempting to construct the

philosophy of the mathematical and physical sciences on the basis of the

doctrine against which I now contend. Whoever is anxious that a discussion

should go to the bottom of the subject, must rejoice to see the opposite side of

the question worthily represented. If what is said by Dr. Whewell, in support

of an opinion which he has made the foundation of a systematic work, can be

shown not to be conclusive, enough will have been done, without going

elsewhere in quest of stronger arguments and a more powerful adversary.

              It is not necessary to show that the truths which we call axioms are

originally suggested by observation, and that we should never have known

that two straight lines can not inclose a space if we had never seen a straight

line: thus much being admitted by Dr. Whewell, and by all, in recent times,

who have taken his view of the subject. But they contend, that it is not

experience which proves the axiom; but that its truth is perceived a priori , by

the constitution of the mind itself, from the first moment when the meaning

of the proposition is apprehended; and without any necessity for verifying it

by repeated trials, as is requisite in the case of truths really ascertained by

observation.

              They can not, however, but allow that the truth of the axiom, Two

straight lines can not inclose a space, even if evident independently of

experience, is also evident from experience. Whether the axiom needs

confirmation or not, it receives confirmation in almost every instant of our

lives; since we can not look at any two straight lines which intersect oneanother, without seeing that from that point they continue to diverge more

and more. Experimental proof crowds in upon us in such endless profusion,

and without one instance in which there can be even a suspicion of an

exception to the rule, that we should soon have stronger ground for believing

the axiom, even as an experimental truth, than we have for almost any of the

general truths which we confessedly learn from the evidence of our senses.

Independently of a priori evidence, we should certainly believe it with an

intensity of conviction far greater than we accord to any ordinary physical

truth: and this too at a time of life much earlier than that from which we date

almost any part of our acquired knowledge, and much too early to admit of

our retaining any recollection of the history of our intellectual operations at

that period. Where then is the necessity for assuming that our recognition of

these truths has a different origin from the rest of our knowledge, when its

existence is perfectly accounted for by supposing its origin to be the same?

when the causes which produce belief in all other instances, exist in this

instance, and in a degree of strength as much superior to what exists in other

cases, as the intensity of the belief itself is superior? The burden of proof lies

on the advocates of the contrary opinion: it is for them to point out some fact,

inconsistent with the supposition that this part of our knowledge of nature is
                                                          71
derived from the same sources as every other part.

              This, for instance, they would be able to do, if they could prove

chronologically that we had the conviction (at least practically) so early in

infancy as to be anterior to those impressions on the senses, upon which, on

the other theory, the conviction is founded. This, however, can not be proved:

the point being too far back to be within the reach of memory, and too

obscure for external observation. The advocates of the a priori theory are

obliged to have recourse to other arguments. These are reducible to two,

which I shall endeavor to state as clearly and as forcibly as possible.

              § 5. In the first place it is said, that if our assent to the proposition

that two straight lines can not inclose a space, were derived from the senses,

we could only be convinced of its truth by actual trial, that is, by seeing or

feeling the straight lines; whereas, in fact, it is seen to be true by merely

thinking of them. That a stone thrown into water goes to the bottom, may be

perceived by our senses, but mere thinking of a stone thrown into the water

would never have led us to that conclusion: not so, however, with the axioms

relating to straight lines: if I could be made to conceive what a straight line is,without having seen one, I should at once recognize that two such lines can
                                                              72
not inclose a space. Intuition is “imaginary looking;” but experience must

be real looking: if we see a property of straight lines to be true by merely

fancying ourselves to be looking at them, the ground of our belief can not be

the senses, or experience; it must be something mental.

              To this argument it might be added in the case of this particular

axiom (for the assertion would not be true of all axioms), that the evidence of

it from actual ocular inspection is not only unnecessary, but unattainable.

What says the axiom? That two straight lines can not inclose a space; that

after having once intersected, if they are prolonged to infinity they do not

meet, but continue to diverge from one another. How can this, in any single

case, be proved by actual observation? We may follow the lines to any

distance we please; but we can not follow them to infinity: for aught our

senses can testify, they may, immediately beyond the farthest point to which

we have traced them, begin to approach, and at last meet. Unless, therefore,

we had some other proof of the impossibility than observation affords us, we

should have no ground for believing the axiom at all.

              To these arguments, which I trust I can not be accused of

understating, a satisfactory answer will, I conceive, be found, if we advert to

one of the characteristic properties of geometrical forms — their capacity of

being painted in the imagination with a distinctness equal to reality: in other

words, the exact resemblance of our ideas of form to the sensations which

suggest them. This, in the first place, enables us to make (at least with a little

practice) mental pictures of all possible combinations of lines and angles,

which resemble the realities quite as well as any which we could make on

paper; and in the next place, make those pictures just as fit subjects of

geometrical experimentation as the realities themselves; inasmuch as

pictures, if sufficiently accurate, exhibit of course all the properties which

would be manifested by the realities at one given instant, and on simple

inspection: and in geometry we are concerned only with such properties, and

not with that which pictures could not exhibit, the mutual action of bodies

one upon another. The foundations of geometry would therefore be laid in

direct experience, even if the experiments (which in this case consist merely

in attentive contemplation) were practiced solely upon what we call our ideas,

that is, upon the diagrams in our minds, and not upon outward objects. For in

all systems of experimentation we take some objects to serve asrepresentatives of all which resemble them; and in the present case the

conditions which qualify a real object to be the representative of its class, are

completely fulfilled by an object existing only in our fancy. Without denying,

therefore, the possibility of satisfying ourselves that two straight lines can not

inclose a space, by merely thinking of straight lines without actually looking

at them; I contend, that we do not believe this truth on the ground of the

imaginary intuition simply, but because we know that the imaginary lines

exactly resemble real ones, and that we may conclude from them to real ones

with quite as much certainty as we could conclude from one real line to

another. The conclusion, therefore, is still an induction from observation.

And we should not be authorized to substitute observation of the image in our

mind, for observation of the reality, if we had not learned by long-continued

experience that the properties of the reality are faithfully represented in the

image; just as we should be scientifically warranted in describing an animal

which we have never seen, from a picture made of it with a daguerreotype;

but not until we had learned by ample experience, that observation of such a

picture is precisely equivalent to observation of the original.

              These considerations also remove the objection arising from the

impossibility of ocularly following the lines in their prolongation to infinity.

For though, in order actually to see that two given lines never meet, it would

be necessary to follow them to infinity; yet without doing so we may know

that if they ever do meet, or if, after diverging from one another, they begin

again to approach, this must take place not at an infinite, but at a finite

distance. Supposing, therefore, such to be the case, we can transport

ourselves thither in imagination, and can frame a mental image of the

appearance which one or both of the lines must present at that point, which

we may rely on as being precisely similar to the reality. Now, whether we fix

our contemplation upon this imaginary picture, or call to mind the

generalizations we have had occasion to make from former ocular

observation, we learn by the evidence of experience, that a line which, after

diverging from another straight line, begins to approach to it, produces the

impression on our senses which we describe by the expression, “a bent line,”
                                            73
not by the expression, “a straight line.”

              The preceding argument, which is, to my mind unanswerable,

merges, however, in a still more comprehensive one, which is stated most

clearly and conclusively by Professor Bain. The psychological reason whyaxioms, and indeed many propositions not ordinarily classed as such, may be

learned from the idea only without referring to the fact, is that in the process

of acquiring the idea we have learned the fact. The proposition is assented to

as soon as the terms are understood, because in learning to understand the

terms we have acquired the experience which proves the proposition to be
                                        74
true. “We required,” says Mr. Bain, “concrete experience in the first

instance, to attain to the notion of whole and part; but the notion, once arrived

at, implies that the whole is greater. In fact, we could not have the notion

without an experience tantamount to this conclusion.... When we have

mastered the notion of straightness, we have also mastered that aspect of it

expressed by the affirmation that two straight lines can not inclose a space.

No intuitive or innate powers or perceptions are needed in such case.... We

can not have the full meaning of Straightness, without going through a

comparison of straight objects among themselves, and with their opposites,

bent or crooked objects. The result of this comparison is, inter alia , that

straightness in two lines is seen to be incompatible with inclosing a space; the

inclosure of space involves crookedness in at least one of the lines.” And
                                                    75
similarly, in the case of every first principle, “the same knowledge that

makes it understood, suffices to verify it.” The more this observation is

considered the more (I am convinced) it will be felt to go to the very root of

the controversy.

              § 6. The first of the two arguments in support of the theory that

axioms are a priori truths, having, I think, been sufficiently answered; I

proceed to the second, which is usually the most relied on. Axioms (it is

asserted) are conceived by us not only as true, but as universally and

necessarily true. Now, experience can not possibly give to any proposition

this character. I may have seen snow a hundred times, and may have seen that

it was white, but this can not give me entire assurance even that all snow is

white; much less that snow must be white. “However many instances we may

have observed of the truth of a proposition, there is nothing to assure us that

the next case shall not be an exception to the rule. If it be strictly true that

every ruminant animal yet known has cloven hoofs, we still can not be sure

that some creature will not hereafter be discovered which has the first of

these attributes, without having the other.... Experience must always consist

of a limited number of observations; and, however numerous these may be,

they can show nothing with regard to the infinite number of cases in which

the experiment has not been made.” Besides, Axioms are not only universal,they are also necessary. Now “experience can not offer the smallest ground

for the necessity of a proposition. She can observe and record what has

happened; but she can not find, in any case, or in any accumulation of cases,

any reason for what must happen. She may see objects side by side; but she

can not see a reason why they must ever be side by side. She finds certain

events to occur in succession; but the succession supplies, in its occurrence,

no reason for its recurrence. She contemplates external objects; but she can

not detect any internal bond, which indissolubly connects the future with the

past, the possible with the real. To learn a proposition by experience, and to

see it to be necessarily true, are two altogether different processes of
          76
thought.” And Dr. Whewell adds, “If any one does not clearly comprehend

this distinction of necessary and contingent truths, he will not be able to go

along with us in our researches into the foundations of human knowledge;
                                                                              77
nor, indeed, to pursue with success any speculation on the subject.”

              In the following passage, we are told what the distinction is, the non-

recognition of which incurs this denunciation. “Necessary truths are those in

which we not only learn that the proposition is true, but see that it must be

true; in which the negation of the truth is not only false, but impossible; in

which we can not, even by an effort of imagination, or in a supposition,

conceive the reverse of that which is asserted. That there are such truths can

not be doubted. We may take, for example, all relations of number. Three and

Two added together make Five. We can not conceive it to be otherwise. We
                                                                                      78
can not, by any freak of thought, imagine Three and Two to make Seven.”

              Although Dr. Whewell has naturally and properly employed a

variety of phrases to bring his meaning more forcibly home, he would, I

presume, allow that they are all equivalent; and that what he means by a

necessary truth, would be sufficiently defined, a proposition the negation of

which is not only false but inconceivable. I am unable to find in any of his

expressions, turn them what way you will, a meaning beyond this, and I do

not believe he would contend that they mean any thing more.

              This, therefore, is the principle asserted: that propositions, the

negation of which is inconceivable, or in other words, which we can not

figure to ourselves as being false, must rest on evidence of a higher and more

cogent description than any which experience can afford.

              Now I can not but wonder that so much stress should be laid on thecircumstance of inconceivableness, when there is such ample experience to

show, that our capacity or incapacity of conceiving a thing has very little to

do with the possibility of the thing in itself; but is in truth very much an affair

of accident, and depends on the past history and habits of our own minds.

There is no more generally acknowledged fact in human nature, than the

extreme difficulty at first felt in conceiving any thing as possible, which is in

contradiction to long established and familiar experience; or even to old

familiar habits of thought. And this difficulty is a necessary result of the

fundamental laws of the human mind. When we have often seen and thought

of two things together, and have never in any one instance either seen or

thought of them separately, there is by the primary law of association an

increasing difficulty, which may in the end become insuperable, of

conceiving the two things apart. This is most of all conspicuous in

uneducated persons, who are in general utterly unable to separate any two

ideas which have once become firmly associated in their minds; and if

persons of cultivated intellect have any advantage on the point, it is only

because, having seen and heard and read more, and being more accustomed

to exercise their imagination, they have experienced their sensations and

thoughts in more varied combinations, and have been prevented from

forming many of these inseparable associations. But this advantage has

necessarily its limits. The most practiced intellect is not exempt from the

universal laws of our conceptive faculty. If daily habit presents to any one for

a long period two facts in combination, and if he is not led during that period

either by accident or by his voluntary mental operations to think of them

apart, he will probably in time become incapable of doing so even by the

strongest effort; and the supposition that the two facts can be separated in

nature, will at last present itself to his mind with all the characters of an
                                79
inconceivable phenomenon. There are remarkable instances of this in the

history of science: instances in which the most instructed men rejected as

impossible, because inconceivable, things which their posterity, by earlier

practice and longer perseverance in the attempt, found it quite easy to

conceive, and which every body now knows to be true. There was a time

when men of the most cultivated intellects, and the most emancipated from

the dominion of early prejudice, could not credit the existence of antipodes;

were unable to conceive, in opposition to old association, the force of gravity

acting upward instead of downward. The Cartesians long rejected the

Newtonian doctrine of the gravitation of all bodies toward one another, on thefaith of a general proposition, the reverse of which seemed to them to be

inconceivable — the proposition that a body can not act where it is not. All

the cumbrous machinery of imaginary vortices, assumed without the smallest

particle of evidence, appeared to these philosophers a more rational mode of

explaining the heavenly motions, than one which involved what seemed to
                              80
them so great an absurdity.

              And they no doubt found it as impossible to conceive that a body

should act upon the earth from the distance of the sun or moon, as we find it

to conceive an end to space or time, or two straight lines inclosing a space.

Newton himself had not been able to realize the conception, or we should not

have had his hypothesis of a subtle ether, the occult cause of gravitation; and

his writings prove, that though he deemed the particular nature of the

intermediate agency a matter of conjecture, the necessity of some such

agency appeared to him indubitable.

              If, then, it be so natural to the human mind, even in a high state of

culture, to be incapable of conceiving, and on that ground to believe

impossible, what is afterward not only found to be conceivable but proved to

be true; what wonder if in cases where the association is still older, more

confirmed, and more familiar, and in which nothing ever occurs to shake our

conviction, or even suggest to us any conception at variance with the

association, the acquired incapacity should continue, and be mistaken for a

natural incapacity? It is true, our experience of the varieties in nature enables

us, within certain limits, to conceive other varieties analogous to them. We

can conceive the sun or moon falling; for though we never saw them fall, nor

ever, perhaps, imagined them falling, we have seen so many other things fall,

that we have innumerable familiar analogies to assist the conception; which,

after all, we should probably have some difficulty in framing, were we not

well accustomed to see the sun and moon move (or appear to move), so that

we are only called upon to conceive a slight change in the direction of

motion, a circumstance familiar to our experience. But when experience

affords no model on which to shape the new conception, how is it possible

for us to form it? How, for example, can we imagine an end to space or time?

We never saw any object without something beyond it, nor experienced any

feeling without something following it. When, therefore, we attempt to

conceive the last point of space, we have the idea irresistibly raised of other

points beyond it. When we try to imagine the last instant of time, we can nothelp conceiving another instant after it. Nor is there any necessity to assume,

as is done by a modern school of metaphysicians, a peculiar fundamental law

of the mind to account for the feeling of infinity inherent in our conceptions

of space and time; that apparent infinity is sufficiently accounted for by

simpler and universally acknowledged laws.

              Now, in the case of a geometrical axiom, such, for example, as that

two straight lines can not inclose a space — a truth which is testified to us by

our very earliest impressions of the external world — how is it possible

(whether those external impressions be or be not the ground of our belief)

that the reverse of the proposition could be otherwise than inconceivable to

us? What analogy have we, what similar order of facts in any other branch of

our experience, to facilitate to us the conception of two straight lines

inclosing a space? Nor is even this all. I have already called attention to the

peculiar property of our impressions of form, that the ideas or mental images

exactly resemble their prototypes, and adequately represent them for the

purposes of scientific observation. From this, and from the intuitive character

of the observation, which in this case reduces itself to simple inspection, we

can not so much as call up in our imagination two straight lines, in order to

attempt to conceive them inclosing a space, without by that very act repeating

the scientific experiment which establishes the contrary. Will it really be

contended that the inconceivableness of the thing, in such circumstances,

proves any thing against the experimental origin of the conviction? Is it not

clear that in whichever mode our belief in the proposition may have

originated, the impossibility of our conceiving the negative of it must, on

either hypothesis, be the same? As, then, Dr. Whewell exhorts those who

have any difficulty in recognizing the distinction held by him between

necessary and contingent truths, to study geometry — a condition which I can

assure him I have conscientiously fulfilled — I, in return, with equal

confidence, exhort those who agree with him, to study the general laws of

association; being convinced that nothing more is requisite than a moderate

familiarity with those laws, to dispel the illusion which ascribes a peculiar

necessity to our earliest inductions from experience, and measures the

possibility of things in themselves, by the human capacity of conceiving

them.

              I hope to be pardoned for adding, that Dr. Whewell himself has both

confirmed by his testimony the effect of habitual association in giving to anexperimental truth the appearance of a necessary one, and afforded a striking

instance of that remarkable law in his own person. In his Philosophy of the

Inductive Sciences he continually asserts, that propositions which not only are

not self-evident, but which we know to have been discovered gradually, and

by great efforts of genius and patience, have, when once established,

appeared so self-evident that, but for historical proof, it would have been

impossible to conceive that they had not been recognized from the first by all

persons in a sound state of their faculties. “We now despise those who, in the

Copernican controversy, could not conceive the apparent motion of the sun

on the heliocentric hypothesis; or those who, in opposition to Galileo, thought

that a uniform force might be that which generated a velocity proportional to

the space; or those who held there was something absurd in Newton’s

doctrine of the different refrangibility of differently colored rays; or those

who imagined that when elements combine, their sensible qualities must be

manifest in the compound; or those who were reluctant to give up the

distinction of vegetables into herbs, shrubs, and trees. We can not help

thinking that men must have been singularly dull of comprehension, to find a

difficulty in admitting what is to us so plain and simple. We have a latent

persuasion that we in their place should have been wiser and more clear-

sighted; that we should have taken the right side, and given our assent at once

to the truth. Yet in reality such a persuasion is a mere delusion. The persons

who, in such instances as the above, were on the losing side, were very far, in

most cases, from being persons more prejudiced, or stupid, or narrow-

minded, than the greater part of mankind now are; and the cause for which

they fought was far from being a manifestly bad one, till it had been so

decided by the result of the war.... So complete has been the victory of truth

in most of these instances, that at present we can hardly imagine the struggle

to have been necessary. The very essence of these triumphs is, that they lead
                                                                                  81
us to regard the views we reject as not only false but inconceivable. ”

              This last proposition is precisely what I contend for; and I ask no

more, in order to overthrow the whole theory of its author on the nature of the

evidence of axioms. For what is that theory? That the truth of axioms can not

have been learned from experience, because their falsity is inconceivable. But

Dr. Whewell himself says, that we are continually led, by the natural progress

of thought, to regard as inconceivable what our forefathers not only

conceived but believed, nay even (he might have added) were unable to

conceive the reverse of. He can not intend to justify this mode of thought: hecan not mean to say, that we can be right in regarding as inconceivable what

others have conceived, and as self-evident what to others did not appear

evident at all. After so complete an admission that inconceivableness is an

accidental thing, not inherent in the phenomenon itself, but dependent on the

mental history of the person who tries to conceive it, how can he ever call

upon us to reject a proposition as impossible on no other ground than its

inconceivableness? Yet he not only does so, but has unintentionally afforded

some of the most remarkable examples which can be cited of the very illusion

which he has himself so clearly pointed out. I select as specimens, his

remarks on the evidence of the three laws of motion, and of the atomic

theory.

              With respect to the laws of motion, Dr. Whewell says: “No one can

doubt that, in historical fact, these laws were collected from experience. That

such is the case, is no matter of conjecture. We know the time, the persons,
                                                                        82
the circumstances, belonging to each step of each discovery.” After this

testimony, to adduce evidence of the fact would be superfluous. And not only

were these laws by no means intuitively evident, but some of them were

originally paradoxes. The first law was especially so. That a body, once in

motion, would continue forever to move in the same direction with

undiminished velocity unless acted upon by some new force, was a

proposition which mankind found for a long time the greatest difficulty in

crediting. It stood opposed to apparent experience of the most familiar kind,

which taught that it was the nature of motion to abate gradually, and at last

terminate of itself. Yet when once the contrary doctrine was firmly

established, mathematicians, as Dr. Whewell observes, speedily began to

believe that laws, thus contradictory to first appearances, and which, even

after full proof had been obtained, it had required generations to render

familiar to the minds of the scientific world, were under “a demonstrable

necessity, compelling them to be such as they are and no other;” and he

himself, though not venturing “absolutely to pronounce” that all these laws
                                                                                      83
“can be rigorously traced to an absolute necessity in the nature of things,”

does actually so think of the law just mentioned; of which he says: “Though

the discovery of the first law of motion was made, historically speaking, by

means of experiment, we have now attained a point of view in which we see

that it might have been certainly known to be true, independently of
            84
experience.” Can there be a more striking exemplification than is here

afforded, of the effect of association which we have described? Philosophers,for generations, have the most extraordinary difficulty in putting certain ideas

together; they at last succeed in doing so; and after a sufficient repetition of

the process, they first fancy a natural bond between the ideas, then experience

a growing difficulty, which at last, by the continuation of the same progress,

becomes an impossibility, of severing them from one another. If such be the

progress of an experimental conviction of which the date is of yesterday, and

which is in opposition to first appearances, how must it fare with those which

are conformable to appearances familiar from the first dawn of intelligence,

and of the conclusiveness of which, from the earliest records of human

thought, no skeptic has suggested even a momentary doubt?

              The other instance which I shall quote is a truly astonishing one, and

may be called the reductio ad absurdum of the theory of inconceivableness.
                                                                              85
Speaking of the laws of chemical composition, Dr. Whewell says: “That

they could never have been clearly understood, and therefore never firmly

established, without laborious and exact experiments, is certain; but yet we

may venture to say, that being once known, they possess an evidence beyond

that of mere experiment. For how in fact can we conceive combinations,

otherwise than as definite in kind and quality? If we were to suppose each

element ready to combine with any other indifferently, and indifferently in

any quantity, we should have a world in which all would be confusion and

indefiniteness. There would be no fixed kinds of bodies. Salts, and stones,

and ores, would approach to and graduate into each other by insensible

degrees. Instead of this, we know that the world consists of bodies

distinguishable from each other by definite differences, capable of being

classified and named, and of having general propositions asserted concerning

them. And as we can not conceive a world in which this should not be the

case , it would appear that we can not conceive a state of things in which the

laws of the combination of elements should not be of that definite and

measured kind which we have above asserted.”

              That a philosopher of Dr. Whewell’s eminence should gravely assert

that we can not conceive a world in which the simple elements should

combine in other than definite proportions; that by dint of meditating on a

scientific truth, the original discoverer of which was still living, he should

have rendered the association in his own mind between the idea of

combination and that of constant proportions so familiar and intimate as to be

unable to conceive the one fact without the other; is so signal an instance ofthe mental law for which I am contending, that one word more in illustration

must be superfluous.

              In the latest and most complete elaboration of his metaphysical

system (the Philosophy of Discovery ), as well as in the earlier discourse on

the Fundamental Antithesis of Philosophy , reprinted as an appendix to that

work, Dr. Whewell, while very candidly admitting that his language was

open to misconception, disclaims having intended to say that mankind in

general can now perceive the law of definite proportions in chemical

combination to be a necessary truth. All he meant was that philosophical

chemists in a future generation may possibly see this. “Some truths may be

seen by intuition, but yet the intuition of them may be a rare and a difficult
            86
attainment.” And he explains that the inconceivableness which, according to

his theory, is the test of axioms, “depends entirely upon the clearness of the

Ideas which the axioms involve. So long as those ideas are vague and

indistinct, the contrary of an axiom may be assented to, though it can not be

distinctly conceived. It may be assented to, not because it is possible, but

because we do not see clearly what is possible. To a person who is only

beginning to think geometrically, there may appear nothing absurd in the

assertion that two straight lines may inclose a space. And in the same manner,

to a person who is only beginning to think of mechanical truths, it may not

appear to be absurd, that in mechanical processes, Reaction should be greater

or less than Action; and so, again, to a person who has not thought steadily

about Substance, it may not appear inconceivable, that by chemical

operations, we should generate new matter, or destroy matter which already
      87
exists.” Necessary truths, therefore, are not those of which we can not
                                                                                        88
conceive, but “those of which we can not distinctly conceive, the contrary.”

So long as our ideas are indistinct altogether, we do not know what is or is

not capable of being distinctly conceived; but, by the ever increasing

distinctness with which scientific men apprehend the general conceptions of

science, they in time come to perceive that there are certain laws of nature,

which, though historically and as a matter of fact they were learned from

experience, we can not, now that we know them, distinctly conceive to be

other than they are.

              The account which I should give of this progress of the scientific

mind is somewhat different. After a general law of nature has been

ascertained, men’s minds do not at first acquire a complete facility offamiliarly representing to themselves the phenomena of nature in the

character which that law assigns to them. The habit which constitutes the

scientific cast of mind, that of conceiving facts of all descriptions

conformably to the laws which regulate them — phenomena of all

descriptions according to the relations which have been ascertained really to

exist between them; this habit, in the case of newly-discovered relations,

comes only by degrees. So long as it is not thoroughly formed, no necessary

character is ascribed to the new truth. But in time, the philosopher attains a

state of mind in which his mental picture of nature spontaneously represents

to him all the phenomena with which the new theory is concerned, in the

exact light in which the theory regards them: all images or conceptions

derived from any other theory, or from the confused view of the facts which

is anterior to any theory, having entirely disappeared from his mind. The

mode of representing facts which results from the theory, has now become, to

his faculties, the only natural mode of conceiving them. It is a known truth,

that a prolonged habit of arranging phenomena in certain groups, and

explaining them by means of certain principles, makes any other arrangement

or explanation of these facts be felt as unnatural: and it may at last become as

difficult to him to represent the facts to himself in any other mode, as it often

was, originally, to represent them in that mode.

              But, further (if the theory is true, as we are supposing it to be), any

other mode in which he tries, or in which he was formerly accustomed, to

represent the phenomena, will be seen by him to be inconsistent with the

facts that suggested the new theory — facts which now form a part of his

mental picture of nature. And since a contradiction is always inconceivable,

his imagination rejects these false theories, and declares itself incapable of

conceiving them. Their inconceivableness to him does not, however, result

from any thing in the theories themselves, intrinsically and a priori repugnant

to the human faculties; it results from the repugnance between them and a

portion of the facts; which facts as long as he did not know, or did not

distinctly realize in his mental representations, the false theory did not appear

other than conceivable; it becomes inconceivable, merely from the fact that

contradictory elements can not be combined in the same conception.

Although, then, his real reason for rejecting theories at variance with the true

one, is no other than that they clash with his experience, he easily falls into

the belief, that he rejects them because they are inconceivable, and that he

adopts the true theory because it is self-evident, and does not need theevidence of experience at all.

              This I take to be the real and sufficient explanation of the

paradoxical truth, on which so much stress is laid by Dr. Whewell, that a

scientifically cultivated mind is actually, in virtue of that cultivation, unable

to conceive suppositions which a common man conceives without the

smallest difficulty. For there is nothing inconceivable in the suppositions

themselves; the impossibility is in combining them with facts inconsistent

with them, as part of the same mental picture; an obstacle of course only felt

by those who know the facts, and are able to perceive the inconsistency. As

far as the suppositions themselves are concerned, in the case of many of Dr.

Whewell’s necessary truths the negative of the axiom is, and probably will be

as long as the human race lasts, as easily conceivable as the affirmative.

There is no axiom (for example) to which Dr. Whewell ascribes a more

thorough character of necessity and self-evidence, than that of the

indestructibility of matter. That this is a true law of nature I fully admit; but I

imagine there is no human being to whom the opposite supposition is

inconceivable — who has any difficulty in imagining a portion of matter

annihilated: inasmuch as its apparent annihilation, in no respect

distinguishable from real by our unassisted senses, takes place every time that

water dries up, or fuel is consumed. Again, the law that bodies combine

chemically in definite proportions is undeniably true; but few besides Dr.

Whewell have reached the point which he seems personally to have arrived at

(though he only dares prophesy similar success to the multitude after the

lapse of generations), that of being unable to conceive a world in which the

elements are ready to combine with one another “indifferently in any

quantity;” nor is it likely that we shall ever rise to this sublime height of

inability, so long as all the mechanical mixtures in our planet, whether solid,

liquid, or aëriform, exhibit to our daily observation the very phenomenon

declared to be inconceivable.

              According to Dr. Whewell, these and similar laws of nature can not

be drawn from experience, inasmuch as they are, on the contrary, assumed in

the interpretation of experience. Our inability to “add to or diminish the

quantity of matter in the world,” is a truth which “neither is nor can be

derived from experience; for the experiments which we make to verify it

presuppose its truth.... When men began to use the balance in chemical

analysis, they did not prove by trial, but took for granted, as self-evident, thatthe weight of the whole must be found in the aggregate weight of the
          89
elements.” True, it is assumed; but, I apprehend, no otherwise than as all

experimental inquiry assumes provisionally some theory or hypothesis, which

is to be finally held true or not, according as the experiments decide. The

hypothesis chosen for this purpose will naturally be one which groups

together some considerable number of facts already known. The proposition

that the material of the world, as estimated by weight, is neither increased nor

diminished by any of the processes of nature or art, had many appearances in

its favor to begin with. It expressed truly a great number of familiar facts.

There were other facts which it had the appearance of conflicting with, and

which made its truth, as a universal law of nature, at first doubtful. Because it

was doubtful, experiments were devised to verify it. Men assumed its truth

hypothetically, and proceeded to try whether, on more careful examination,

the phenomena which apparently pointed to a different conclusion, would not

be found to be consistent with it. This turned out to be the case; and from that

time the doctrine took its place as a universal truth, but as one proved to be

such by experience. That the theory itself preceded the proof of its truth —

that it had to be conceived before it could be proved, and in order that it

might be proved — does not imply that it was self-evident, and did not need

proof. Otherwise all the true theories in the sciences are necessary and self-

evident; for no one knows better than Dr. Whewell that they all began by

being assumed, for the purpose of connecting them by deductions with those
                                                                                90
facts of experience on which, as evidence, they now confessedly rest.

 

 

                   Chapter VI. – The Same Subject Continued.

 

 

              § 1. In the examination which formed the subject of the last chapter,

into the nature of the evidence of those deductive sciences which are

commonly represented to be systems of necessary truth, we have been led to

the following conclusions. The results of those sciences are indeed necessary,

in the sense of necessarily following from certain first principles, commonly

called axioms and definitions; that is, of being certainly true if those axioms

and definitions are so; for the word necessity, even in this acceptation of it,

means no more than certainty. But their claim to the character of necessity in

any sense beyond this, as implying an evidence independent of and superior

to observation and experience, must depend on the previous establishment of

such a claim in favor of the definitions and axioms themselves. With regard

to axioms, we found that, considered as experimental truths, they rest on

superabundant and obvious evidence. We inquired, whether, since this is the

case, it be imperative to suppose any other evidence of those truths than

experimental evidence, any other origin for our belief of them than an

experimental origin. We decided, that the burden of proof lies with those who

maintain the affirmative, and we examined, at considerable length, such

arguments as they have produced. The examination having led to the

rejection of those arguments, we have thought ourselves warranted in

concluding that axioms are but a class, the most universal class, of inductions

from experience; the simplest and easiest cases of generalization from the

facts furnished to us by our senses or by our internal consciousness.

              While the axioms of demonstrative sciences thus appeared to be

experimental truths, the definitions, as they are incorrectly called, in those

sciences, were found by us to be generalizations from experience which are

not even, accurately speaking, truths; being propositions in which, while we

assert of some kind of object, some property or properties which observation

shows to belong to it, we at the same time deny that it possesses any other

properties, though in truth other properties do in every individual instance

accompany, and in almost all instances modify, the property thus exclusively

predicated. The denial, therefore, is a mere fiction, or supposition, made for

the purpose of excluding the consideration of those modifying circumstances,when their influence is of too trifling amount to be worth considering, or

adjourning it, when important to a more convenient moment.

              From these considerations it would appear that Deductive or

Demonstrative Sciences are all, without exception, Inductive Sciences; that

their evidence is that of experience; but that they are also, in virtue of the

peculiar character of one indispensable portion of the general formulæ

according to which their inductions are made, Hypothetical Sciences. Their

conclusions are only true on certain suppositions, which are, or ought to be,

approximations to the truth, but are seldom, if ever, exactly true; and to this

hypothetical character is to be ascribed the peculiar certainty, which is

supposed to be inherent in demonstration.

              What we have now asserted, however, cannot be received as

universally true of Deductive or Demonstrative Sciences, until verified by

being applied to the most remarkable of all those sciences, that of Numbers;

the theory of the Calculus; Arithmetic and Algebra. It is harder to believe of

the doctrines of this science than of any other, either that they are not truths a

priori , but experimental truths, or that their peculiar certainty is owing to

their being not absolute but only conditional truths. This, therefore, is a case

which merits examination apart; and the more so, because on this subject we

have a double set of doctrines to contend with; that of the a priori

philosophers on one side; and on the other, a theory the most opposite to

theirs, which was at one time very generally received, and is still far from

being altogether exploded, among metaphysicians.

              § 2. This theory attempts to solve the difficulty apparently inherent

in the case, by representing the propositions of the science of numbers as

merely verbal, and its processes as simple transformations of language,

substitutions of one expression for another. The proposition, Two and one is

equal to three, according to these writers, is not a truth, is not the assertion of

a really existing fact, but a definition of the word three; a statement that

mankind have agreed to use the name three as a sign exactly equivalent to

two and one; to call by the former name whatever is called by the other more

clumsy phrase. According to this doctrine, the longest process in algebra is

but a succession of changes in terminology, by which equivalent expressions

are substituted one for another; a series of translations of the same fact, from

one into another language; though how, after such a series of translations, the

fact itself comes out changed (as when we demonstrate a new geometricaltheorem by algebra), they have not explained; and it is a difficulty which is

fatal to their theory.

              It must be acknowledged that there are peculiarities in the processes

of arithmetic and algebra which render the theory in question very plausible,

and have not unnaturally made those sciences the stronghold of Nominalism.

The doctrine that we can discover facts, detect the hidden processes of nature,

by an artful manipulation of language, is so contrary to common sense, that a

person must have made some advances in philosophy to believe it: men fly to

so paradoxical a belief to avoid, as they think, some even greater difficulty,

which the vulgar do not see. What has led many to believe that reasoning is a

mere verbal process, is, that no other theory seemed reconcilable with the

nature of the Science of Numbers. For we do not carry any ideas along with

us when we use the symbols of arithmetic or of algebra. In a geometrical

demonstration we have a mental diagram, if not one on paper; AB, AC, are

present to our imagination as lines, intersecting other lines, forming an angle

with one another, and the like; but not so a and b . These may represent lines

or any other magnitudes, but those magnitudes are never thought of; nothing

is realized in our imagination but a and b . The ideas which, on the particular

occasion, they happen to represent, are banished from the mind during every

intermediate part of the process, between the beginning, when the premises

are translated from things into signs, and the end, when the conclusion is

translated back from signs into things. Nothing, then, being in the reasoner’s

mind but the symbols, what can seem more inadmissible than to contend that

the reasoning process has to do with any thing more? We seem to have come

to one of Bacon’s Prerogative Instances; an experimentum crucis on the

nature of reasoning itself.

              Nevertheless, it will appear on consideration, that this apparently so

decisive instance is no instance at all; that there is in every step of an

arithmetical or algebraical calculation a real induction, a real inference of

facts from facts; and that what disguises the induction is simply its

comprehensive nature, and the consequent extreme generality of the

language. All numbers must be numbers of something: there are no such

things as numbers in the abstract. Ten must mean ten bodies, or ten sounds, or

ten beatings of the pulse. But though numbers must be numbers of

something, they may be numbers of any thing. Propositions, therefore,

concerning numbers, have the remarkable peculiarity that they arepropositions concerning all things whatever; all objects, all existences of

every kind, known to our experience. All things possess quantity; consist of

parts which can be numbered; and in that character possess all the properties

which are called properties of numbers. That half of four is two, must be true

whatever the word four represents, whether four hours, four miles, or four

pounds weight. We need only conceive a thing divided into four equal parts

(and all things may be conceived as so divided), to be able to predicate of it

every property of the number four, that is, every arithmetical proposition in

which the number four stands on one side of the equation. Algebra extends

the generalization still farther: every number represents that particular

number of all things without distinction, but every algebraical symbol does

more, it represents all numbers without distinction. As soon as we conceive a

thing divided into equal parts, without knowing into what number of parts,

we may call it a or x , and apply to it, without danger of error, every

algebraical formula in the books. The proposition, 2 (a + b )= 2 a + 2 b , is a

truth co-extensive with all nature. Since then algebraical truths are true of all

things whatever, and not, like those of geometry, true of lines only or of

angles only, it is no wonder that the symbols should not excite in our minds

ideas of any things in particular. When we demonstrate the forty-seventh

proposition of Euclid, it is not necessary that the words should raise in us an

image of all right-angled triangles, but only of some one right-angled

triangle: so in algebra we need not, under the symbol a , picture to ourselves

all things whatever, but only some one thing; why not, then, the letter itself?

The mere written characters, a , b , x , y , z , serve as well for representatives

of Things in general, as any more complex and apparently more concrete

conception. That we are conscious of them, however, in their character of

things, and not of mere signs, is evident from the fact that our whole process

of reasoning is carried on by predicating of them the properties of things. In

resolving an algebraic equation, by what rules do we proceed? By applying at

each step to a , b , and x , the proposition that equals added to equals make

equals; that equals taken from equals leave equals; and other propositions

founded on these two. These are not properties of language, or of signs as

such, but of magnitudes, which is as much as to say, of all things. The

inferences, therefore, which are successively drawn, are inferences

concerning things, not symbols; though as any Things whatever will serve the

turn, there is no necessity for keeping the idea of the Thing at all distinct, and

consequently the process of thought may, in this case, be allowed withoutdanger to do what all processes of thought, when they have been performed

often, will do if permitted, namely, to become entirely mechanical. Hence the

general language of algebra comes to be used familiarly without exciting

ideas, as all other general language is prone to do from mere habit, though in

no other case than this can it be done with complete safety. But when we look

back to see from whence the probative force of the process is derived, we

find that at every single step, unless we suppose ourselves to be thinking and

talking of the things, and not the mere symbols, the evidence fails.

              There is another circumstance, which, still more than that which we

have now mentioned, gives plausibility to the notion that the propositions of

arithmetic and algebra are merely verbal. That is, that when considered as

propositions respecting Things, they all have the appearance of being

identical propositions. The assertion, Two and one is equal to three,

considered as an assertion respecting objects, as for instance, “Two pebbles

and one pebble are equal to three pebbles,” does not affirm equality between

two collections of pebbles, but absolute identity. It affirms that if we put one

pebble to two pebbles, those very pebbles are three. The objects, therefore,

being the very same, and the mere assertion that “objects are themselves”

being insignificant, it seems but natural to consider the proposition, Two and

one is equal to three, as asserting mere identity of signification between the

two names.

              This, however, though it looks so plausible, will not bear

examination. The expression “two pebbles and one pebble,” and the

expression “three pebbles,” stand indeed for the same aggregation of objects,

but they by no means stand for the same physical fact. They are names of the

same objects, but of those objects in two different states: though they de note

the same things, their con notation is different. Three pebbles in two separate

parcels, and three pebbles in one parcel, do not make the same impression on

our senses; and the assertion that the very same pebbles may by an alteration

of place and arrangement be made to produce either the one set of sensations

or the other, though a very familiar proposition, is not an identical one. It is a

truth known to us by early and constant experience: an inductive truth; and

such truths are the foundation of the science of Number. The fundamental

truths of that science all rest on the evidence of sense; they are proved by

showing to our eyes and our fingers that any given number of objects — ten

balls, for example — may by separation and re-arrangement exhibit to oursenses all the different sets of numbers the sums of which is equal to ten. All

the improved methods of teaching arithmetic to children proceed on a

knowledge of this fact. All who wish to carry the child’s mind along with

them in learning arithmetic; all who wish to teach numbers, and not mere

ciphers — now teach it through the evidence of the senses, in the manner we

have described.

              We may, if we please, call the proposition, “Three is two and one,” a

definition of the number three, and assert that arithmetic, as it has been

asserted that geometry, is a science founded on definitions. But they are

definitions in the geometrical sense, not the logical; asserting not the meaning

of a term only, but along with it an observed matter of fact. The proposition,

“A circle is a figure bounded by a line which has all its points equally distant

from a point within it,” is called the definition of a circle; but the proposition

from which so many consequences follow, and which is really a first

principle in geometry, is, that figures answering to this description exist. And

thus we may call “Three is two and one” a definition of three; but the

calculations which depend on that proposition do not follow from the

definition itself, but from an arithmetical theorem presupposed in it, namely,

that collections of objects exist, which while they impress the senses thus,

[Symbol: three circles, two above one], may be separated into two parts, thus,

[Symbol: two circles, a space, and a third circle]. This proposition being

granted, we term all such parcels Threes, after which the enunciation of the

above-mentioned physical fact will serve also for a definition of the word

Three.

              The Science of Number is thus no exception to the conclusion we

previously arrived at, that the processes even of deductive sciences are

altogether inductive, and that their first principles are generalizations from

experience. It remains to be examined whether this science resembles

geometry in the further circumstance, that some of its inductions are not

exactly true; and that the peculiar certainty ascribed to it, on account of which

its propositions are called Necessary Truths, is fictitious and hypothetical,

being true in no other sense than that those propositions legitimately follow

from the hypothesis of the truth of premises which are avowedly mere

approximations to truth.

              § 3. The inductions of arithmetic are of two sorts: first, those which

we have just expounded, such as One and one are two, Two and one arethree, etc., which may be called the definitions of the various numbers, in the

improper or geometrical sense of the word Definition; and secondly, the two

following axioms: The sums of equals are equal, The differences of equals

are equal. These two are sufficient; for the corresponding propositions

respecting unequals may be proved from these by a reductio ad absurdum .

              These axioms, and likewise the so-called definitions, are, as has

already been said, results of induction; true of all objects whatever, and, as it

may seem, exactly true, without the hypothetical assumption of unqualified

truth where an approximation to it is all that exists. The conclusions,

therefore, it will naturally be inferred, are exactly true, and the science of

number is an exception to other demonstrative sciences in this, that the

categorical certainty which is predicable of its demonstrations is independent

of all hypothesis.

              On more accurate investigation, however, it will be found that, even

in this case, there is one hypothetical element in the ratiocination. In all

propositions concerning numbers, a condition is implied, without which none

of them would be true; and that condition is an assumption which may be

false. The condition is, that 1=1; that all the numbers are numbers of the same

or of equal units. Let this be doubtful, and not one of the propositions of

arithmetic will hold true. How can we know that one pound and one pound

make two pounds, if one of the pounds may be troy, and the other

avoirdupois? They may not make two pounds of either, or of any weight.

How can we know that a forty-horse power is always equal to itself, unless

we assume that all horses are of equal strength? It is certain that 1 is always

equal in number to 1; and where the mere number of objects, or of the parts

of an object, without supposing them to be equivalent in any other respect, is

all that is material, the conclusions of arithmetic, so far as they go to that

alone, are true without mixture of hypothesis. There are such cases in

statistics; as, for instance, an inquiry into the amount of the population of any

country. It is indifferent to that inquiry whether they are grown people or

children, strong or weak, tall or short; the only thing we want to ascertain is

their number. But whenever, from equality or inequality of number, equality

or inequality in any other respect is to be inferred, arithmetic carried into such

inquiries becomes as hypothetical a science as geometry. All units must be

assumed to be equal in that other respect; and this is never accurately true, for

one actual pound weight is not exactly equal to another, nor one measuredmile’s length to another; a nicer balance, or more accurate measuring

instruments, would always detect some difference.

              What is commonly called mathematical certainty, therefore, which

comprises the twofold conception of unconditional truth and perfect

accuracy, is not an attribute of all mathematical truths, but of those only

which relate to pure Number, as distinguished from Quantity in the more

enlarged sense; and only so long as we abstain from supposing that the

numbers are a precise index to actual quantities. The certainty usually

ascribed to the conclusions of geometry, and even to those of mechanics, is

nothing whatever but certainty of inference. We can have full assurance of

particular results under particular suppositions, but we can not have the same

assurance that these suppositions are accurately true, nor that they include all

the data which may exercise an influence over the result in any given

instance.

              § 4. It appears, therefore, that the method of all Deductive Sciences

is hypothetical. They proceed by tracing the consequences of certain

assumptions; leaving for separate consideration whether the assumptions are

true or not, and if not exactly true, whether they are a sufficiently near

approximation to the truth. The reason is obvious. Since it is only in

questions of pure number that the assumptions are exactly true, and even

there only so long as no conclusions except purely numerical ones are to be

founded on them; it must, in all other cases of deductive investigation, form a

part of the inquiry, to determine how much the assumptions want of being

exactly true in the case in hand. This is generally a matter of observation, to

be repeated in every fresh case; or if it has to be settled by argument instead

of observation, may require in every different case different evidence, and

present every degree of difficulty, from the lowest to the highest. But the

other part of the process — namely, to determine what else may be concluded

if we find, and in proportion as we find, the assumptions to be true — may be

performed once for all, and the results held ready to be employed as the

occasions turn up for use. We thus do all beforehand that can be so done, and

leave the least possible work to be performed when cases arise and press for a

decision. This inquiry into the inferences which can be drawn from

assumptions, is what properly constitutes Demonstrative Science.

              It is of course quite as practicable to arrive at new conclusions from

facts assumed, as from facts observed; from fictitious, as from real,inductions. Deduction, as we have seen, consists of a series of inferences in

this form — a is a mark of b , b of c , c of d , therefore a is a mark of d ,

which last may be a truth inaccessible to direct observation. In like manner it

is allowable to say, suppose that a were a mark of b , b of c , and c of d , a

would be a mark of d , which last conclusion was not thought of by those

who laid down the premises. A system of propositions as complicated as

geometry might be deduced from assumptions which are false; as was done

by Ptolemy, Descartes, and others, in their attempts to explain synthetically

the phenomena of the solar system on the supposition that the apparent

motions of the heavenly bodies were the real motions, or were produced in

some way more or less different from the true one. Sometimes the same thing

is knowingly done, for the purpose of showing the falsity of the assumption;

which is called a reductio ad absurdum . In such cases, the reasoning is as

follows: a is a mark of b , and b of c ; now if c were also a mark of d, a would

be a mark of d ; but d is known to be a mark of the absence of a ;

consequently a would be a mark of its own absence, which is a contradiction;

therefore c is not a mark of d .

              § 5. It has even been held by some writers, that all ratiocination rests

in the last resort on a reductio ad absurdum ; since the way to enforce assent

to it, in case of obscurity, would be to show that if the conclusion be denied

we must deny some one at least of the premises, which, as they are all

supposed true, would be a contradiction. And in accordance with this, many

have thought that the peculiar nature of the evidence of ratiocination

consisted in the impossibility of admitting the premises and rejecting the

conclusion without a contradiction in terms. This theory, however, is

inadmissible as an explanation of the grounds on which ratiocination itself

rests. If any one denies the conclusion notwithstanding his admission of the

premises, he is not involved in any direct and express contradiction until he is

compelled to deny some premise; and he can only be forced to do this by a

reductio ad absurdum , that is, by another ratiocination: now, if he denies the

validity of the reasoning process itself, he can no more be forced to assent to

the second syllogism than to the first. In truth, therefore, no one is ever forced

to a contradiction in terms: he can only be forced to a contradiction (or rather

an infringement) of the fundamental maxim of ratiocination, namely, that

whatever has a mark, has what it is a mark of; or (in the case of universal

propositions), that whatever is a mark of any thing, is a mark of whatever else

that thing is a mark of. For in the case of every correct argument, as soon asthrown into the syllogistic form, it is evident without the aid of any other

syllogism, that he who, admitting the premises, fails to draw the conclusion,

does not conform to the above axiom.

              We have now proceeded as far in the theory of Deduction as we can

advance in the present stage of our inquiry. Any further insight into the

subject requires that the foundation shall have been laid of the philosophic

theory of Induction itself; in which theory that of Deduction, as a mode of

Induction, which we have now shown it to be, will assume spontaneously the

place which belongs to it, and will receive its share of whatever light may be

thrown upon the great intellectual operation of which it forms so important a

part.

 

 

     Chapter VII. – Examination Of Some Opinions Opposed To The

                                Preceding Doctrines.

 

 

              § 1. Polemical discussion is foreign to the plan of this work. But an

opinion which stands in need of much illustration, can often receive it most

effectually, and least tediously, in the form of a defense against objections.

And on subjects concerning which speculative minds are still divided, a

writer does but half his duty by stating his own doctrine, if he does not also

examine, and to the best of his ability judge, those of other thinkers.

              In the dissertation which Mr. Herbert Spencer has prefixed to his, in
                                                                  91
many respects, highly philosophical treatise on the Mind, he criticises some

of the doctrines of the two preceding chapters, and propounds a theory of his

own on the subject of first principles. Mr. Spencer agrees with me in

considering axioms to be “simply our earliest inductions from experience.”

But he differs from me “widely as to the worth of the test of

inconceivableness.” He thinks that it is the ultimate test of all beliefs. He

arrives at this conclusion by two steps. First, we never can have any stronger

ground for believing any thing, than that the belief of it “invariably exists.”

Whenever any fact or proposition is invariably believed; that is, if I

understand Mr. Spencer rightly, believed by all persons, and by one’s self at

all times; it is entitled to be received as one of the primitive truths, or original

premises of our knowledge. Secondly, the criterion by which we decide

whether any thing is invariably believed to be true, is our inability to

conceive it as false. “The inconceivability of its negation is the test by which

we ascertain whether a given belief invariably exists or not.” “For our

primary beliefs, the fact of invariable existence, tested by an abortive effort to

cause their non-existence, is the only reason assignable.” He thinks this the

sole ground of our belief in our own sensations. If I believe that I feel cold, I

only receive this as true because I can not conceive that I am not feeling cold.

“While the proposition remains true, the negation of it remains

inconceivable.” There are numerous other beliefs which Mr. Spencer

considers to rest on the same basis; being chiefly those, or a part of those,

which the metaphysicians of the Reid and Stewart school consider as truths

of immediate intuition. That there exists a material world; that this is the veryworld which we directly and immediately perceive, and not merely the

hidden cause of our perceptions; that Space, Time, Force, Extension, Figure,

are not modes of our consciousness, but objective realities; are regarded by

Mr. Spencer as truths known by the inconceivableness of their negatives. We

can not, he says, by any effort, conceive these objects of thought as mere

states of our mind; as not having an existence external to us. Their real

existence is, therefore, as certain as our sensations themselves. The truths

which are the subject of direct knowledge, being, according to this doctrine,

known to be truths only by the inconceivability of their negation; and the

truths which are not the object of direct knowledge, being known as

inferences from those which are; and those inferences being believed to

follow from the premises, only because we can not conceive them not to

follow; inconceivability is thus the ultimate ground of all assured beliefs.

              Thus far, there is no very wide difference between Mr. Spencer’s

doctrine and the ordinary one of philosophers of the intuitive school, from

Descartes to Dr. Whewell; but at this point Mr. Spencer diverges from them.

For he does not, like them, set up the test of inconceivability as infallible. On

the contrary, he holds that it may be fallacious, not from any fault in the test

itself, but because “men have mistaken for inconceivable things, some things

which were not inconceivable.” And he himself, in this very book, denies not

a few propositions usually regarded as among the most marked examples of

truths whose negations are inconceivable. But occasional failure, he says, is

incident to all tests. If such failure vitiates “the test of inconceivableness,” it

“must similarly vitiate all tests whatever. We consider an inference logically

drawn from established premises to be true. Yet in millions of cases men

have been wrong in the inferences they have thought thus drawn. Do we

therefore argue that it is absurd to consider an inference true on no other

ground than that it is logically drawn from established premises? No: we say

that though men may have taken for logical inferences, inferences that were

not logical, there nevertheless are logical inferences, and that we are justified

in assuming the truth of what seem to us such, until better instructed.

Similarly, though men may have thought some things inconceivable which

were not so, there may still be inconceivable things; and the inability to

conceive the negation of a thing, may still be our best warrant for believing

it.... Though occasionally it may prove an imperfect test, yet, as our most

certain beliefs are capable of no better, to doubt any one belief because we

have no higher guarantee for it, is really to doubt all beliefs.” Mr. Spencer’sdoctrine, therefore, does not erect the curable, but only the incurable

limitations of the human conceptive faculty, into laws of the outward

universe.

              § 2. The doctrine, that “a belief which is proved by the

inconceivableness of its negation to invariably exist, is true,” Mr. Spencer

enforces by two arguments, one of which may be distinguished as positive,

and the other as negative.

              The positive argument is, that every such belief represents the

aggregate of all past experience. “Conceding the entire truth of” the

“position, that during any phase of human progress, the ability or inability to

form a specific conception wholly depends on the experiences men have had;

and that, by a widening of their experiences, they may, by and by, be enabled

to conceive things before inconceivable to them, it may still be argued that as,

at any time, the best warrant men can have for a belief is the perfect

agreement of all pre-existing experience in support of it, it follows that, at

any time, the inconceivableness of its negation is the deepest test any belief

admits of.... Objective facts are ever impressing themselves upon us; our

experience is a register of these objective facts; and the inconceivableness of

a thing implies that it is wholly at variance with the register. Even were this

all, it is not clear how, if every truth is primarily inductive, any better test of

truth could exist. But it must be remembered that while many of these facts,

impressing themselves upon us, are occasional; while others again are very

general; some are universal and unchanging. These universal and unchanging

facts are, by the hypothesis, certain to establish beliefs of which the negations

are inconceivable; while the others are not certain to do this; and if they do,

subsequent facts will reverse their action. Hence if, after an immense

accumulation of experiences, there remain beliefs of which the negations are

still inconceivable, most, if not all of them, must correspond to universal

objective facts. If there be ... certain absolute uniformities in nature; if these

uniformities produce, as they must, absolute uniformities in our experience;

and if ... these absolute uniformities in our experience disable us from

conceiving the negations of them; then answering to each absolute uniformity

in nature which we can cognize, there must exist in us a belief of which the

negation is inconceivable, and which is absolutely true. In this wide range of

cases subjective inconceivableness must correspond to objective

impossibility. Further experience will produce correspondence where it maynot yet exist; and we may expect the correspondence to become ultimately

complete. In nearly all cases this test of inconceivableness must be valid

now” (I wish I could think we were so nearly arrived at omniscience); “and

where it is not, it still expresses the net result of our experience up to the

present time; which is the most that any test can do.”

              To this I answer, first, that it is by no means true that the

inconceivability, by us, of the negative of a proposition proves all, or even

any, “pre-existing experience” to be in favor of the affirmative. There may

have been no such pre-existing experiences, but only a mistaken supposition

of experience. How did the inconceivability of antipodes prove that

experience had given any testimony against their possibility? How did the

incapacity men felt of conceiving sunset otherwise than as a motion of the

sun, represent any “net result” of experience in support of its being the sun

and not the earth that moves? It is not experience that is represented, it is only

a superficial semblance of experience. The only thing proved with regard to

real experience, is the negative fact, that men have not had it of the kind

which would have made the inconceivable proposition conceivable.

              Next: Even if it were true that inconceivableness represents the net

result of all past experience, why should we stop at the representative when

we can get at the thing represented? If our incapacity to conceive the negation

of a given supposition is proof of its truth, because proving that our

experience has hitherto been uniform in its favor, the real evidence for the

supposition is not the inconceivableness, but the uniformity of experience.

Now this, which is the substantial and only proof, is directly accessible. We

are not obliged to presume it from an incidental consequence. If all past

experience is in favor of a belief, let this be stated, and the belief openly

rested on that ground: after which the question arises, what that fact may be

worth as evidence of its truth? For uniformity of experience is evidence in

very different degrees: in some cases it is strong evidence, in others weak, in

others it scarcely amounts to evidence at all. That all metals sink in water,

was a uniform experience, from the origin of the human race to the discovery

of potassium in the present century by Sir Humphry Davy. That all swans are

white, was a uniform experience down to the discovery of Australia. In the

few cases in which uniformity of experience does amount to the strongest

possible proof, as with such propositions as these, Two straight lines can not

inclose a space, Every event has a cause, it is not because their negations areinconceivable, which is not always the fact; but because the experience,

which has been thus uniform, pervades all nature. It will be shown in the

following Book that none of the conclusions either of induction or of

deduction can be considered certain, except as far as their truth is shown to be

inseparably bound up with truths of this class.

              I maintain then, first, that uniformity of past experience is very far

from being universally a criterion of truth. But secondly, inconceivableness is

still further from being a test even of that test. Uniformity of contrary

experience is only one of many causes of inconceivability. Tradition handed

down from a period of more limited knowledge, is one of the commonest.

The mere familiarity of one mode of production of a phenomenon often

suffices to make every other mode appear inconceivable. Whatever connects

two ideas by a strong association may, and continually does, render their

separation in thought impossible; as Mr. Spencer, in other parts of his

speculations, frequently recognizes. It was not for want of experience that the

Cartesians were unable to conceive that one body could produce motion in

another without contact. They had as much experience of other modes of

producing motion as they had of that mode. The planets had revolved, and

heavy bodies had fallen, every hour of their lives. But they fancied these

phenomena to be produced by a hidden machinery which they did not see,

because without it they were unable to conceive what they did see. The

inconceivableness, instead of representing their experience, dominated and

overrode their experience. Without dwelling further on what I have termed

the positive argument of Mr. Spencer in support of his criterion of truth, I

pass to his negative argument, on which he lays more stress.

              § 3. The negative argument is, that, whether inconceivability be

good evidence or bad, no stronger evidence is to be obtained. That what is

inconceivable can not be true, is postulated in every act of thought. It is the

foundation of all our original premises. Still more it is assumed in all

conclusions from those premises. The invariability of belief, tested by the

inconceivableness of its negation, “is our sole warrant for every

demonstration. Logic is simply a systematization of the process by which we

indirectly obtain this warrant for beliefs that do not directly possess it. To

gain the strongest conviction possible respecting any complex fact, we either

analytically descend from it by successive steps, each of which we

unconsciously test by the inconceivableness of its negation, until we reachsome axiom or truth which we have similarly tested; or we synthetically

ascend from such axiom or truth by such steps. In either case we connect

some isolated belief, with a belief which invariably exists, by a series of

intermediate beliefs which invariably exist.” The following passage sums up

the theory: “When we perceive that the negation of the belief is

inconceivable, we have all possible warrant for asserting the invariability of

its existence: and in asserting this, we express alike our logical justification of

it, and the inexorable necessity we are under of holding it.... We have seen

that this is the assumption on which every conclusion whatever ultimately

rests. We have no other guarantee for the reality of consciousness, of

sensations, of personal existence; we have no other guarantee for any axiom;

we have no other guarantee for any step in a demonstration. Hence, as being

taken for granted in every act of the understanding, it must be regarded as the

Universal Postulate.” But as this postulate, which we are under an

“inexorable necessity” of holding true, is sometimes false; as “beliefs that

once were shown by the inconceivableness of their negations to invariably

exist, have since been found untrue,” and as “beliefs that now possess this

character may some day share the same fate;” the canon of belief laid down

by Mr. Spencer is, that “the most certain conclusion” is that “which involves

the postulate the fewest times.” Reasoning, therefore, never ought to prevail

against one of the immediate beliefs (the belief in Matter, in the outward

reality of Extension, Space, and the like), because each of these involves the

postulate only once; while an argument, besides involving it in the premises,

involves it again in every step of the ratiocination, no one of the successive

acts of inference being recognized as valid except because we can not

conceive the conclusion not to follow from the premises.

              It will be convenient to take the last part of this argument first. In

every reasoning, according to Mr. Spencer, the assumption of the postulate is

renewed at every step. At each inference we judge that the conclusion follows

from the premises, our sole warrant for that judgment being that we can not

conceive it not to follow. Consequently if the postulate is fallible, the

conclusions of reasoning are more vitiated by that uncertainty than direct

intuitions; and the disproportion is greater, the more numerous the steps of

the argument.

              To test this doctrine, let us first suppose an argument consisting only

of a single step, which would be represented by one syllogism. This argumentdoes rest on an assumption, and we have seen in the preceding chapters what

the assumption is. It is, that whatever has a mark, has what it is a mark of.
                                                                    92
The evidence of this axiom I shall not consider at present; let us suppose it

(with Mr. Spencer) to be the inconceivableness of its reverse.

              Let us now add a second step to the argument: we require, what?

Another assumption? No: the same assumption a second time; and so on to a

third, and a fourth. I confess I do not see how, on Mr. Spencer’s own

principles, the repetition of the assumption at all weakens the force of the

argument. If it were necessary the second time to assume some other axiom,

the argument would no doubt be weakened, since it would be necessary to its

validity that both axioms should be true, and it might happen that one was

true and not the other: making two chances of error instead of one. But since

it is the same axiom, if it is true once it is true every time; and if the

argument, being of a hundred links, assumed the axiom a hundred times,

these hundred assumptions would make but one chance of error among them

all. It is satisfactory that we are not obliged to suppose the deductions of pure

mathematics to be among the most uncertain of argumentative processes,

which on Mr. Spencer’s theory they could hardly fail to be, since they are the

longest. But the number of steps in an argument does not subtract from its

reliableness, if no new premises , of an uncertain character, are taken up by
        93
the way.

              To speak next of the premises. Our assurance of their truth, whether

they be generalities or individual facts, is grounded, in Mr. Spencer’s

opinion, on the inconceivableness of their being false. It is necessary to

advert to a double meaning of the word inconceivable, which Mr. Spencer is

aware of, and would sincerely disclaim founding an argument upon, but from

which his case derives no little advantage notwithstanding. By

inconceivableness is sometimes meant, inability to form or get rid of an idea ;

sometimes, inability to form or get rid of a belief . The former meaning is the

most conformable to the analogy of language; for a conception always means

an idea, and never a belief. The wrong meaning of “inconceivable” is,

however, fully as frequent in philosophical discussion as the right meaning,

and the intuitive school of metaphysicians could not well do without either.

To illustrate the difference, we will take two contrasted examples. The early

physical speculators considered antipodes incredible, because inconceivable.

But antipodes were not inconceivable in the primitive sense of the word. Anidea of them could be formed without difficulty: they could be completely

pictured to the mental eye. What was difficult, and, as it then seemed,

impossible, was to apprehend them as believable. The idea could be put

together, of men sticking on by their feet to the under side of the earth; but

the belief would follow, that they must fall off. Antipodes were not

unimaginable, but they were unbelievable.

              On the other hand, when I endeavor to conceive an end to extension,

the two ideas refuse to come together. When I attempt to form a conception

of the last point of space, I can not help figuring to myself a vast space

beyond that last point. The combination is, under the conditions of our

experience, unimaginable. This double meaning of inconceivable it is very

important to bear in mind, for the argument from inconceivableness almost

always turns on the alternate substitution of each of those meanings for the

other.

              In which of these two senses does Mr. Spencer employ the term,

when he makes it a test of the truth of a proposition that its negation is

inconceivable? Until Mr. Spencer expressly stated the contrary, I inferred

from the course of his argument, that he meant unbelievable. He has,

however, in a paper published in the fifth number of the Fortnightly Review ,

disclaimed this meaning, and declared that by an inconceivable proposition

he means, now and always, “one of which the terms can not, by any effort, be

brought before consciousness in that relation which the proposition asserts

between them — a proposition of which the subject and predicate offer an

insurmountable resistance to union in thought.” We now, therefore, know

positively that Mr. Spencer always endeavors to use the word inconceivable

in this, its proper, sense: but it may yet be questioned whether his endeavor is

always successful; whether the other, and popular use of the word, does not

sometimes creep in with its associations, and prevent him from maintaining a

clear separation between the two. When, for example, he says, that when I

feel cold, I can not conceive that I am not feeling cold, this expression can

not be translated into “I can not conceive myself not feeling cold,” for it is

evident that I can: the word conceive, therefore, is here used to express the

recognition of a matter of fact — the perception of truth or falsehood; which I

apprehend to be exactly the meaning of an act of belief, as distinguished from

simple conception. Again, Mr. Spencer calls the attempt to conceive

something which is inconceivable “an abortive effort to cause the non-existence,” not of a conception or mental representation, but of a belief.

There is need, therefore, to revise a considerable part of Mr. Spencer’s

language, if it is to be kept always consistent with his definition of

inconceivability. But in truth the point is of little importance; since

inconceivability, in Mr. Spencer’s theory, is only a test of truth, inasmuch as

it is a test of believability. The inconceivableness of a supposition is the

extreme case of its unbelievability. This is the very foundation of Mr.

Spencer’s doctrine. The invariability of the belief is with him the real

guarantee. The attempt to conceive the negative is made in order to test the

inevitableness of the belief. It should be called, an attempt to believe the

negative. When Mr. Spencer says that while looking at the sun a man can not

conceive that he is looking into darkness, he should have said that a man can

not believe that he is doing so. For it is surely possible, in broad daylight, to
                                                94
imagine one’s self looking into darkness. As Mr. Spencer himself says,

speaking of the belief of our own existence, “That he might not exist, he can

conceive well enough; but that he does not exist, he finds it impossible to

conceive,” i.e. , to believe. So that the statement resolves itself into this: That

I exist, and that I have sensations, I believe, because I can not believe

otherwise. And in this case every one will admit that the impossibility is real.

Any one’s present sensations, or other states of subjective consciousness, that

one person inevitably believes. They are facts known per se : it is impossible

to ascend beyond them. Their negative is really unbelievable, and therefore

there is never any question about believing it. Mr. Spencer’s theory is not

needed for these truths.

              But according to Mr. Spencer there are other beliefs, relating to other

things than our own subjective feelings, for which we have the same

guarantee — which are, in a similar manner, invariable and necessary. With

regard to these other beliefs, they can not be necessary, since they do not

always exist. There have been, and are, many persons who do not believe the

reality of an external world, still less the reality of extension and figure as the

forms of that external world; who do not believe that space and time have an

existence independent of the mind — nor any other of Mr. Spencer’s

objective intuitions. The negations of these alleged invariable beliefs are not

unbelievable, for they are believed. It may be maintained, without obvious

error, that we can not imagine tangible objects as mere states of our own and

other people’s consciousness; that the perception of them irresistibly suggests

to us the idea of something external to ourselves: and I am not in a conditionto say that this is not the fact (though I do not think any one is entitled to

affirm it of any person besides himself). But many thinkers have believed,

whether they could conceive it or not, that what we represent to ourselves as

material objects, are mere modifications of consciousness; complex feelings

of touch and of muscular action. Mr. Spencer may think the inference correct

from the unimaginable to the unbelievable, because he holds that belief itself

is but the persistence of an idea, and that what we can succeed in imagining

we can not at the moment help apprehending as believable. But of what

consequence is it what we apprehend at the moment, if the moment is in

contradiction to the permanent state of our mind? A person who has been

frightened when an infant by stories of ghosts, though he disbelieves them in

after years (and perhaps never believed them), may be unable all his life to be

in a dark place, in circumstances stimulating to the imagination, without

mental discomposure. The idea of ghosts, with all its attendant terrors, is

irresistibly called up in his mind by the outward circumstances. Mr. Spencer

may say, that while he is under the influence of this terror he does not

disbelieve in ghosts, but has a temporary and uncontrollable belief in them.

Be it so; but allowing it to be so, which would it be truest to say of this man

on the whole — that he believes in ghosts, or that he does not believe in

them? Assuredly that he does not believe in them. The case is similar with

those who disbelieve a material world. Though they can not get rid of the

idea; though while looking at a solid object they can not help having the

conception, and therefore, according to Mr. Spencer’s metaphysics, the

momentary belief, of its externality; even at that moment they would

sincerely deny holding that belief: and it would be incorrect to call them other

than disbelievers of the doctrine. The belief therefore is not invariable; and

the test of inconceivableness fails in the only cases to which there could ever

be any occasion to apply it.

              That a thing may be perfectly believable, and yet may not have

become conceivable, and that we may habitually believe one side of an

alternative, and conceive only in the other, is familiarly exemplified in the

state of mind of educated persons respecting sunrise and sunset. All educated

persons either know by investigation, or believe on the authority of science,

that it is the earth and not the sun which moves: but there are probably few

who habitually conceive the phenomenon otherwise than as the ascent or

descent of the sun. Assuredly no one can do so without a prolonged trial; and

it is probably not easier now than in the first generation after Copernicus. Mr.Spencer does not say, “In looking at sunrise it is impossible not to conceive

that it is the sun which moves, therefore this is what every body believes, and

we have all the evidence for it that we can have for any truth.” Yet this would

be an exact parallel to his doctrine about the belief in matter.

              The existence of matter, and other Noumena, as distinguished from

the phenomenal world, remains a question of argument, as it was before; and

the very general, but neither necessary nor universal, belief in them, stands as

a psychological phenomenon to be explained, either on the hypothesis of its

truth, or on some other. The belief is not a conclusive proof of its own truth,

unless there are no such things as idola tribûs ; but being a fact, it calls on

antagonists to show, from what except the real existence of the thing

believed, so general and apparently spontaneous a belief can have originated.
                                                                          95
And its opponents have never hesitated to accept this challenge. The amount

of their success in meeting it will probably determine the ultimate verdict of

philosophers on the question.

              § 4. In the revision, or rather reconstruction, of his “Principles of

Psychology,” as one of the stages or platforms in the imposing structure of
                                                                                      96
his System of Philosophy, Mr. Spencer has resumed what he justly terms

the “amicable controversy that has been long pending between us;”

expressing at the same time a regret, which I cordially share, that “this

lengthened exposition of a single point of difference, unaccompanied by an

exposition of the numerous points of concurrence, unavoidably produces an

appearance of dissent very far greater than that which exists.” I believe, with

Mr. Spencer, that the difference between us, if measured by our conclusions,

is “superficial rather than substantial;” and the value I attach to so great an

amount of agreement, in the field of analytic psychology, with a thinker of

his force and depth, is such as I can hardly overstate. But I also agree with

him that the difference which exists in our premises is one of “profound

importance, philosophically considered;” and not to be dismissed while any

part of the case of either of us has not been fully examined and discussed.

              In his present statement of the Universal Postulate, Mr. Spencer has

exchanged his former expression, “beliefs which invariably exist,” for the

following: “cognitions of which the predicates invariably exist along with

their subjects.” And he says that “an abortive effort to conceive the negation

of a proposition, shows that the cognition expressed is one of which the

predicate invariably exists along with its subject; and the discovery that thepredicate invariably exists along with its subject, is the discovery that this

cognition is one we are compelled to accept.” Both these premises of Mr.

Spencer’s syllogism I am able to assent to, but in different senses of the

middle term. If the invariable existence of the predicate along with its subject,

is to be understood in the most obvious meaning, as an existence in actual

Nature, or in other words, in our objective, or sensational, experience, I of

course admit that this, once ascertained, compels us to accept the proposition:

but then I do not admit that the failure of an attempt to conceive the negative,

proves the predicate to be always co-existent with the subject in actual

Nature. If, on the other hand (which I believe to be Mr. Spencer’s meaning)

the invariable existence of the predicate along with the subject is to be

understood only of our conceptive faculty, i.e. , that the one is inseparable

from the other in our thoughts; then, indeed, the inability to separate the two

ideas proves their inseparable conjunction, here and now, in the mind which

has failed in the attempt; but this inseparability in thought does not prove a

corresponding inseparability in fact; nor even in the thoughts of other people,

or of the same person in a possible future.

              “That some propositions have been wrongly accepted as true,

because their negations were supposed inconceivable when they were not,”

does not, in Mr. Spencer’s opinion, “disprove the validity of the test;” not

only because any test whatever “is liable to yield untrue results, either from

incapacity or from carelessness in those who use it,” but because the

propositions in question “were complex propositions, not to be established by

a test applicable to propositions no further decomposable.” “A test

legitimately applicable to a simple proposition, the subject and predicate of

which are in direct relation, can not be legitimately applied to a complex

proposition, the subject and predicate of which are indirectly related through

the many simple propositions implied.” “That things which are equal to the

same thing are equal to one another, is a fact which can be known by direct

comparison of actual or ideal relations.... But that the square of the

hypothenuse of a right-angled triangle equals the sum of the squares of the

other two sides, can not be known immediately by comparison of two states

of consciousness: here the truth can be reached only mediately, through a

series of simple judgments respecting the likenesses or unlikenesses of

certain relations.” Moreover, even when the proposition admits of being

tested by immediate consciousness, people often neglect to do it. A school-

boy, in adding up a column of figures, will say “35 and 9 are 46,” though thisis contrary to the verdict which consciousness gives when 35 and 9 are really

called up before it; but this is not done. And not only school-boys, but men

and thinkers, do not always “distinctly translate into their equivalent states of

consciousness the words they use.”

              It is but just to give Mr. Spencer’s doctrine the benefit of the

limitation he claims — viz., that it is only applicable to propositions which

are assented to on simple inspection, without any intervening media of proof.

But this limitation does not exclude some of the most marked instances of

propositions now known to be false or groundless, but whose negative was

once found inconceivable: such as, that in sunrise and sunset it is the sun

which moves; that gravitation may exist without an intervening medium; and

even the case of antipodes. The distinction drawn by Mr. Spencer is real; but,

in the case of the propositions classed by him as complex, consciousness,

until the media of proof are supplied, gives no verdict at all: it neither

declares the equality of the square of the hypothenuse with the sum of the

squares of the sides to be inconceivable, nor their inequality to be

inconceivable. But in all the three cases which I have just cited, the

inconceivability seems to be apprehended directly; no train of argument was

needed, as in the case of the square of the hypothenuse, to obtain the verdict

of consciousness on the point. Neither is any of the three a case like that of

the school-boy’s mistake, in which the mind was never really brought into

contact with the proposition. They are cases in which one of two opposite

predicates, mero adspectu , seemed to be incompatible with the subject, and
                                                                  97
the other, therefore, to be proved always to exist with it.

              As now limited by Mr. Spencer, the ultimate cognitions fit to be

submitted to his test are only those of so universal and elementary a character

as to be represented in the earliest and most unvarying experience, or

apparent experience, of all mankind. In such cases the inconceivability of the

negative, if real, is accounted for by the experience: and why (I have asked)

should the truth be tested by the inconceivability, when we can go further

back for proof — namely, to the experience itself? To this Mr. Spencer

answers, that the experiences can not be all recalled to mind, and if recalled,

would be of unmanageable multitude. To test a proposition by experience

seems to him to mean that “before accepting as certain the proposition that

any rectilineal figure must have as many angles as it has sides,” I have “to

think of every triangle, square, pentagon, hexagon, etc., which I have everseen, and to verify the asserted relation in each case.” I can only say, with

surprise, that I do not understand this to be the meaning of an appeal to

experience. It is enough to know that one has been seeing the fact all one’s

life, and has never remarked any instance to the contrary, and that other

people, with every opportunity of observation, unanimously declare the same

thing. It is true, even this experience may be insufficient, and so it might be

even if I could recall to mind every instance of it; but its insufficiency,

instead of being brought to light, is disguised, if instead of sifting the

experience itself, I appeal to a test which bears no relation to the sufficiency

of the experience, but, at the most, only to its familiarity. These remarks do

not lose their force even if we believe, with Mr. Spencer, that mental

tendencies originally derived from experience impress themselves

permanently on the cerebral structure and are transmitted by inheritance, so

that modes of thinking which are acquired by the race become innate and a

priori in the individual, thus representing, in Mr. Spencer’s opinion, the

experience of his progenitors, in addition to his own. All that would follow

from this is, that a conviction might be really innate, i.e. , prior to individual

experience, and yet not be true, since the inherited tendency to accept it may

have been originally the result of other causes than its truth.

              Mr. Spencer would have a much stronger case, if he could really

show that the evidence of Reasoning rests on the Postulate, or, in other

words, that we believe that a conclusion follows from premises only because

we can not conceive it not to follow. But this statement seems to me to be of

the same kind as one I have previously commented on, viz., that I believe I

see light, because I can not, while the sensation remains, conceive that I am

looking into darkness. Both these statements seem to me incompatible with

the meaning (as very rightly limited by Mr. Spencer) of the verb to conceive.

To say that when I apprehend that A is B and that B is C, I can not conceive

that A is not C, is to my mind merely to say that I am compelled to believe

that A is C. If to conceive be taken in its proper meaning, viz., to form a

mental representation, I may be able to conceive A as not being C. After

assenting, with full understanding, to the Copernican proof that it is the earth

and not the sun that moves, I not only can conceive, or represent to myself,

sunset as a motion of the sun, but almost every one finds this conception of

sunset easier to form, than that which they nevertheless know to be the true

one.              § 5. Sir William Hamilton holds as I do, that inconceivability is no

criterion of impossibility. “There is no ground for inferring a certain fact to

be impossible, merely from our inability to conceive its possibility.” “Things

there are which may , nay must , be true, of which the understanding is
                                                          98
wholly unable to construe to itself the possibility.” Sir William Hamilton is,

however, a firm believer in the a priori character of many axioms, and of the

sciences deduced from them; and is so far from considering those axioms to

rest on the evidence of experience, that he declares certain of them to be true

even of Noumena — of the Unconditioned — of which it is one of the

principal aims of his philosophy to prove that the nature of our faculties

debars us from having any knowledge. The axioms to which he attributes this

exceptional emancipation from the limits which confine all our other

possibilities of knowledge; the chinks through which, as he represents, one

ray of light finds its way to us from behind the curtain which veils from us

the mysterious world of Things in themselves — are the two principles,

which he terms, after the school-men, the Principle of Contradiction, and the

Principle of Excluded Middle: the first, that two contradictory propositions

can not both be true; the second, that they can not both be false. Armed with

these logical weapons, we may boldly face Things in themselves, and tender

to them the double alternative, sure that they must absolutely elect one or the

other side, though we may be forever precluded from discovering which. To

take his favorite example, we can not conceive the infinite divisibility of

matter, and we can not conceive a minimum, or end to divisibility: yet one or

the other must be true.

              As I have hitherto said nothing of the two axioms in question, those

of Contradiction and of Excluded Middle, it is not unseasonable to consider

them here. The former asserts that an affirmative proposition and the

corresponding negative proposition can not both be true; which has generally

been held to be intuitively evident. Sir William Hamilton and the Germans

consider it to be the statement in words of a form or law of our thinking

faculty. Other philosophers, not less deserving of consideration, deem it to be

an identical proposition; an assertion involved in the meaning of terms; a

mode of defining Negation, and the word Not.

              I am able to go one step with these last. An affirmative assertion and

its negative are not two independent assertions, connected with each other

only as mutually incompatible. That if the negative be true, the affirmativemust be false, really is a mere identical proposition; for the negative

proposition asserts nothing but the falsity of the affirmative, and has no other

sense or meaning whatever. The Principium Contradictionis should therefore

put off the ambitious phraseology which gives it the air of a fundamental

antithesis pervading nature, and should be enunciated in the simpler form,

that the same proposition can not at the same time be false and true. But I can

go no further with the Nominalists; for I can not look upon this last as a

merely verbal proposition. I consider it to be, like other axioms, one of our

first and most familiar generalizations from experience. The original

foundation of it I take to be, that Belief and Disbelief are two different mental

states, excluding one another. This we know by the simplest observation of

our own minds. And if we carry our observation outward, we also find that

light and darkness, sound and silence, motion and quiescence, equality and

inequality, preceding and following, succession and simultaneousness, any

positive phenomenon whatever and its negative, are distinct phenomena,

pointedly contrasted, and the one always absent where the other is present. I

consider the maxim in question to be a generalization from all these facts.

              In like manner as the Principle of Contradiction (that one of two

contradictories must be false) means that an assertion can not be both true

and false, so the Principle of Excluded Middle, or that one of two

contradictories must be true, means that an assertion must be either true or

false: either the affirmative is true, or otherwise the negative is true, which

means that the affirmative is false. I can not help thinking this principle a

surprising specimen of a so-called necessity of Thought, since it is not even

true, unless with a large qualification. A proposition must be either true or

false, provided that the predicate be one which can in any intelligible sense be

attributed to the subject; (and as this is always assumed to be the case in

treatises on logic, the axiom is always laid down there as of absolute truth).

“Abracadabra is a second intention” is neither true nor false. Between the true

and the false there is a third possibility, the Unmeaning: and this alternative is

fatal to Sir William Hamilton’s extension of the maxim to Noumena. That

Matter must either have a minimum of divisibility or be infinitely divisible, is

more than we can ever know. For in the first place, Matter, in any other than

the phenomenal sense of the term, may not exist: and it will scarcely be said

that a nonentity must be either infinitely or finitely divisible. In the second

place, though matter, considered as the occult cause of our sensations, do

really exist, yet what we call divisibility may be an attribute only of oursensations of sight and touch, and not of their uncognizable cause.

Divisibility may not be predicable at all, in any intelligible sense, of Things

in themselves, nor therefore of Matter in itself; and the assumed necessity of

being either infinitely or finitely divisible, may be an inapplicable alternative.

              On this question I am happy to have the full concurrence of Mr.

Herbert Spencer, from whose paper in the Fortnightly Review I extract the

following passage. The germ of an idea identical with that of Mr. Spencer

may be found in the present chapter, on a preceding page; but in Mr. Spencer

it is not an undeveloped thought, but a philosophical theory.

              “When remembering a certain thing as in a certain place, the place

and the thing are mentally represented together; while to think of the non-

existence of the thing in that place implies a consciousness in which the place

is represented, but not the thing. Similarly, if instead of thinking of an object

as colorless, we think of its having color, the change consists in the addition

to the concept of an element that was before absent from it — the object can

not be thought of first as red and then as not red, without one component of

the thought being totally expelled from the mind by another. The law of the

Excluded Middle, then, is simply a generalization of the universal experience

that some mental states are directly destructive of other states. It formulates a

certain absolutely constant law, that the appearance of any positive mode of

consciousness can not occur without excluding a correlative negative mode;

and that the negative mode can not occur without excluding the correlative

positive mode: the antithesis of positive and negative being, indeed, merely

an expression of this experience. Hence it follows that if consciousness is not
                                                        99
in one of the two modes it must be in the other.”

              I must here close this supplementary chapter, and with it the Second

Book. The theory of Induction, in the most comprehensive sense of the term,

will form the subject of the Third.

 

 

                             Book III: Of induction.

 

 

              “According to the doctrine now stated, the highest, or rather the only

proper object of physics, is to ascertain those established conjunctions of

successive events, which constitute the order of the universe; to record the

phenomena which it exhibits to our observations, or which it discloses to our

experiments; and to refer these phenomena to their general laws.” — D.

STEWART, Elements of the Philosophy of the Human Mind , vol. ii., chap.

iv., sect. 1.

              “In such cases the inductive and deductive methods of inquiry may

be said to go hand in hand, the one verifying the conclusions deduced by the

other; and the combination of experiment and theory, which may thus be

brought to bear in such cases, forms an engine of discovery infinitely more

powerful than either taken separately. This state of any department of science

is perhaps of all others the most interesting, and that which promises the most

to research.” — SIR J. HERSCHEL, Discourse on the Study of Natural

Philosophy .

 

 

     Chapter I. – Preliminary Observations On Induction In General.

 

 

              § 1. The portion of the present inquiry upon which we are now about

to enter, may be considered as the principal, both from its surpassing in

intricacy all the other branches, and because it relates to a process which has

been shown in the preceding Book to be that in which the investigation of

nature essentially consists. We have found that all Inference, consequently all

Proof, and all discovery of truths not self-evident, consists of inductions, and

the interpretation of inductions: that all our knowledge, not intuitive, comes

to us exclusively from that source. What Induction is, therefore, and what

conditions render it legitimate, can not but be deemed the main question of

the science of logic — the question which includes all others. It is, however,

one which professed writers on logic have almost entirely passed over. The

generalities of the subject have not been altogether neglected by

metaphysicians; but, for want of sufficient acquaintance with the processes

by which science has actually succeeded in establishing general truths, their

analysis of the inductive operation, even when unexceptionable as to

correctness, has not been specific enough to be made the foundation of

practical rules, which might be for induction itself what the rules of the

syllogism are for the interpretation of induction: while those by whom

physical science has been carried to its present state of improvement — and

who, to arrive at a complete theory of the process, needed only to generalize,

and adapt to all varieties of problems, the methods which they themselves

employed in their habitual pursuits — never until very lately made any

serious attempt to philosophize on the subject, nor regarded the mode in

which they arrived at their conclusions as deserving of study, independently

of the conclusions themselves.

              § 2. For the purposes of the present inquiry, Induction may be

defined, the operation of discovering and proving general propositions. It is

true that (as already shown) the process of indirectly ascertaining individual

facts, is as truly inductive as that by which we establish general truths. But it

is not a different kind of induction; it is a form of the very same process:

since, on the one hand, generals are but collections of particulars, definite in

kind but indefinite in number; and on the other hand, whenever the evidencewhich we derive from observation of known cases justifies us in drawing an

inference respecting even one unknown case, we should on the same

evidence be justified in drawing a similar inference with respect to a whole

class of cases. The inference either does not hold at all, or it holds in all cases

of a certain description; in all cases which, in certain definable respects,

resemble those we have observed.

              If these remarks are just; if the principles and rules of inference are

the same whether we infer general propositions or individual facts; it follows

that a complete logic of the sciences would be also a complete logic of

practical business and common life. Since there is no case of legitimate

inference from experience, in which the conclusion may not legitimately be a

general proposition; an analysis of the process by which general truths are

arrived at, is virtually an analysis of all induction whatever. Whether we are

inquiring into a scientific principle or into an individual fact, and whether we

proceed by experiment or by ratiocination, every step in the train of

inferences is essentially inductive, and the legitimacy of the induction

depends in both cases on the same conditions.

              True it is that in the case of the practical inquirer, who is

endeavoring to ascertain facts not for the purposes of science but for those of

business, such, for instance, as the advocate or the judge, the chief difficulty

is one in which the principles of induction will afford him no assistance. It

lies not in making his inductions, but in the selection of them; in choosing

from among all general propositions ascertained to be true, those which

furnish marks by which he may trace whether the given subject possesses or

not the predicate in question. In arguing a doubtful question of fact before a

jury, the general propositions or principles to which the advocate appeals are

mostly, in themselves, sufficiently trite, and assented to as soon as stated: his

skill lies in bringing his case under those propositions or principles; in calling

to mind such of the known or received maxims of probability as admit of

application to the case in hand, and selecting from among them those best

adapted to his object. Success is here dependent on natural or acquired

sagacity, aided by knowledge of the particular subject, and of subjects allied

with it. Invention, though it can be cultivated, can not be reduced to rule;

there is no science which will enable a man to bethink himself of that which

will suit his purpose.

              But when he has thought of something, science can tell him whetherthat which he has thought of will suit his purpose or not. The inquirer or

arguer must be guided by his own knowledge and sagacity in the choice of

the inductions out of which he will construct his argument. But the validity of

the argument when constructed, depends on principles, and must be tried by

tests which are the same for all descriptions of inquiries, whether the result be

to give A an estate, or to enrich science with a new general truth. In the one

case and in the other, the senses, or testimony, must decide on the individual

facts; the rules of the syllogism will determine whether, those facts being

supposed correct, the case really falls within the formulæ of the different

inductions under which it has been successively brought; and finally, the

legitimacy of the inductions themselves must be decided by other rules, and

these it is now our purpose to investigate. If this third part of the operation be,

in many of the questions of practical life, not the most, but the least arduous

portion of it, we have seen that this is also the case in some great departments

of the field of science; in all those which are principally deductive, and most

of all in mathematics; where the inductions themselves are few in number,

and so obvious and elementary that they seem to stand in no need of the

evidence of experience, while to combine them so as to prove a given

theorem or solve a problem, may call for the utmost powers of invention and

contrivance with which our species is gifted.

              If the identity of the logical processes which prove particular facts

and those which establish general scientific truths, required any additional

confirmation, it would be sufficient to consider that in many branches of

science, single facts have to be proved, as well as principles; facts as

completely individual as any that are debated in a court of justice; but which

are proved in the same manner as the other truths of the science, and without

disturbing in any degree the homogeneity of its method. A remarkable

example of this is afforded by astronomy. The individual facts on which that

science grounds its most important deductions, such facts as the magnitudes

of the bodies of the solar system, their distances from one another, the figure

of the earth, and its rotation, are scarcely any of them accessible to our means

of direct observation: they are proved indirectly, by the aid of inductions

founded on other facts which we can more easily reach. For example, the

distance of the moon from the earth was determined by a very circuitous

process. The share which direct observation had in the work consisted in

ascertaining, at one and the same instant, the zenith distances of the moon, as

seen from two points very remote from one another on the earth’s surface.The ascertainment of these angular distances ascertained their supplements;

and since the angle at the earth’s centre subtended by the distance between

the two places of observation was deducible by spherical trigonometry from

the latitude and longitude of those places, the angle at the moon subtended by

the same line became the fourth angle of a quadrilateral of which the other

three angles were known. The four angles being thus ascertained, and two

sides of the quadrilateral being radii of the earth; the two remaining sides and

the diagonal, or, in other words, the moon’s distance from the two places of

observation and from the centre of the earth, could be ascertained, at least in

terms of the earth’s radius, from elementary theorems of geometry. At each

step in this demonstration a new induction is taken in, represented in the

aggregate of its results by a general proposition.

              Not only is the process by which an individual astronomical fact was

thus ascertained, exactly similar to those by which the same science

establishes its general truths, but also (as we have shown to be the case in all

legitimate reasoning) a general proposition might have been concluded

instead of a single fact. In strictness, indeed, the result of the reasoning is a

general proposition; a theorem respecting the distance, not of the moon in

particular, but of any inaccessible object; showing in what relation that

distance stands to certain other quantities. And although the moon is almost

the only heavenly body the distance of which from the earth can really be

thus ascertained, this is merely owing to the accidental circumstances of the

other heavenly bodies, which render them incapable of affording such data as

the application of the theorem requires; for the theorem itself is as true of
                            100
them as it is of the moon.

              We shall fall into no error, then, if in treating of Induction, we limit

our attention to the establishment of general propositions. The principles and

rules of Induction as directed to this end, are the principles and rules of all

Induction; and the logic of Science is the universal Logic, applicable to all

inquiries in which man can engage.            Chapter II. – Of Inductions Improperly So Called.

 

 

              § 1. Induction, then, is that operation of the mind, by which we infer

that what we know to be true in a particular case or cases, will be true in all

cases which resemble the former in certain assignable respects. In other

words, Induction is the process by which we conclude that what is true of

certain individuals of a class is true of the whole class, or that what is true at

certain times will be true in similar circumstances at all times.

              This definition excludes from the meaning of the term Induction,

various logical operations, to which it is not unusual to apply that name.

              Induction, as above defined, is a process of inference; it proceeds

from the known to the unknown; and any operation involving no inference,

any process in which what seems the conclusion is no wider than the

premises from which it is drawn, does not fall within the meaning of the

term. Yet in the common books of Logic we find this laid down as the most

perfect, indeed the only quite perfect, form of induction. In those books,

every process which sets out from a less general and terminates in a more

general expression — which admits of being stated in the form, “This and

that A are B, therefore every A is B” — is called an induction, whether any

thing be really concluded or not: and the induction is asserted not to be

perfect, unless every single individual of the class A is included in the

antecedent, or premise: that is, unless what we affirm of the class has already

been ascertained to be true of every individual in it, so that the nominal

conclusion is not really a conclusion, but a mere re-assertion of the premises.

If we were to say, All the planets shine by the sun’s light, from observation of

each separate planet, or All the Apostles were Jews, because this is true of

Peter, Paul, John, and every other apostle — these, and such as these, would,

in the phraseology in question, be called perfect, and the only perfect,

Inductions. This, however, is a totally different kind of induction from ours; it

is not an inference from facts known to facts unknown, but a mere short-hand

registration of facts known. The two simulated arguments which we have

quoted, are not generalizations; the propositions purporting to be conclusions

from them, are not really general propositions. A general proposition is onein which the predicate is affirmed or denied of an unlimited number of

individuals; namely, all, whether few or many, existing or capable of

existing, which possess the properties connoted by the subject of the

proposition. “All men are mortal” does not mean all now living, but all men

past, present, and to come. When the signification of the term is limited so as

to render it a name not for any and every individual falling under a certain

general description, but only for each of a number of individuals, designated

as such, and as it were counted off individually, the proposition, though it

may be general in its language, is no general proposition, but merely that

number of singular propositions, written in an abridged character. The

operation may be very useful, as most forms of abridged notation are; but it is

no part of the investigation of truth, though often bearing an important part in

the preparation of the materials for that investigation.

              As we may sum up a definite number of singular propositions in one

proposition, which will be apparently, but not really, general, so we may sum

up a definite number of general propositions in one proposition, which will

be apparently, but not really, more general. If by a separate induction applied

to every distinct species of animals, it has been established that each

possesses a nervous system, and we affirm thereupon that all animals have a

nervous system; this looks like a generalization, though as the conclusion

merely affirms of all what has already been affirmed of each, it seems to tell

us nothing but what we knew before. A distinction, however, must be made.

If in concluding that all animals have a nervous system, we mean the same

thing and no more as if we had said “all known animals,” the proposition is

not general, and the process by which it is arrived at is not induction. But if

our meaning is that the observations made of the various species of animals

have discovered to us a law of animal nature, and that we are in a condition to

say that a nervous system will be found even in animals yet undiscovered,

this indeed is an induction; but in this case the general proposition contains

more than the sum of the special propositions from which it is inferred. The

distinction is still more forcibly brought out when we consider, that if this

real generalization be legitimate at all, its legitimacy probably does not

require that we should have examined without exception every known

species. It is the number and nature of the instances, and not their being the

whole of those which happen to be known, that makes them sufficient

evidence to prove a general law: while the more limited assertion, which

stops at all known animals, can not be made unless we have rigorouslyverified it in every species. In like manner (to return to a former example) we

might have inferred, not that all the planets, but that all planets , shine by

reflected light: the former is no induction; the latter is an induction, and a bad

one, being disproved by the case of double stars — self-luminous bodies

which are properly planets, since they revolve round a centre.

              § 2. There are several processes used in mathematics which require

to be distinguished from Induction, being not unfrequently called by that

name, and being so far similar to Induction properly so called, that the

propositions they lead to are really general propositions. For example, when

we have proved with respect to the circle, that a straight line can not meet it

in more than two points, and when the same thing has been successively

proved of the ellipse, the parabola, and the hyperbola, it may be laid down as

a universal property of the sections of the cone. The distinction drawn in the

two previous examples can have no place here, there being no difference

between all known sections of the cone and all sections, since a cone

demonstrably can not be intersected by a plane except in one of these four

lines. It would be difficult, therefore, to refuse to the proposition arrived at,

the name of a generalization, since there is no room for any generalization

beyond it. But there is no induction, because there is no inference: the

conclusion is a mere summing up of what was asserted in the various

propositions from which it is drawn. A case somewhat, though not altogether,

similar, is the proof of a geometrical theorem by means of a diagram.

Whether the diagram be on paper or only in the imagination, the
                                          101
demonstration (as formerly observed ) does not prove directly the general

theorem; it proves only that the conclusion, which the theorem asserts

generally, is true of the particular triangle or circle exhibited in the diagram;

but since we perceive that in the same way in which we have proved it of that

circle, it might also be proved of any other circle, we gather up into one

general expression all the singular propositions susceptible of being thus

proved, and embody them in a universal proposition. Having shown that the

three angles of the triangle ABC are together equal to two right angles, we

conclude that this is true of every other triangle, not because it is true of

ABC, but for the same reason which proved it to be true of ABC. If this were

to be called Induction, an appropriate name for it would be, induction by

parity of reasoning. But the term can not properly belong to it; the

characteristic quality of Induction is wanting, since the truth obtained, though

really general, is not believed on the evidence of particular instances. We donot conclude that all triangles have the property because some triangles have,

but from the ulterior demonstrative evidence which was the ground of our

conviction in the particular instances.

              There are nevertheless, in mathematics, some examples of so-called

Induction, in which the conclusion does bear the appearance of a

generalization grounded on some of the particular cases included in it. A

mathematician, when he has calculated a sufficient number of the terms of an

algebraical or arithmetical series to have ascertained what is called the law of

the series, does not hesitate to fill up any number of the succeeding terms

without repeating the calculations. But I apprehend he only does so when it is

apparent from a priori considerations (which might be exhibited in the form

of demonstration) that the mode of formation of the subsequent terms, each

from that which preceded it, must be similar to the formation of the terms

which have been already calculated. And when the attempt has been hazarded

without the sanction of such general considerations, there are instances on

record in which it has led to false results.

              It is said that Newton discovered the binomial theorem by induction;

by raising a binomial successively to a certain number of powers, and

comparing those powers with one another until he detected the relation in

which the algebraic formula of each power stands to the exponent of that

power, and to the two terms of the binomial. The fact is not improbable: but a

mathematician like Newton, who seemed to arrive per saltum at principles

and conclusions that ordinary mathematicians only reached by a succession

of steps, certainly could not have performed the comparison in question

without being led by it to the a priori ground of the law; since any one who

understands sufficiently the nature of multiplication to venture upon

multiplying several lines of symbols at one operation, can not but perceive

that in raising a binomial to a power, the co-efficients must depend on the

laws of permutation and combination: and as soon as this is recognized, the

theorem is demonstrated. Indeed, when once it was seen that the law

prevailed in a few of the lower powers, its identity with the law of

permutation would at once suggest the considerations which prove it to

obtain universally. Even, therefore, such cases as these, are but examples of

what I have called Induction by parity of reasoning, that is, not really

Induction, because not involving inference of a general proposition from

particular instances.              § 3. There remains a third improper use of the term Induction, which

it is of real importance to clear up, because the theory of Induction has been,

in no ordinary degree, confused by it, and because the confusion is

exemplified in the most recent and elaborate treatise on the inductive

philosophy which exists in our language. The error in question is that of

confounding a mere description, by general terms, of a set of observed

phenomena, with an induction from them.

              Suppose that a phenomenon consists of parts, and that these parts are

only capable of being observed separately, and as it were piecemeal. When

the observations have been made, there is a convenience (amounting for

many purposes to a necessity) in obtaining a representation of the

phenomenon as a whole, by combining, or as we may say, piecing these

detached fragments together. A navigator sailing in the midst of the ocean

discovers land: he can not at first, or by any one observation, determine

whether it is a continent or an island; but he coasts along it, and after a few

days finds himself to have sailed completely round it: he then pronounces it

an island. Now there was no particular time or place of observation at which

he could perceive that this land was entirely surrounded by water: he

ascertained the fact by a succession of partial observations, and then selected

a general expression which summed up in two or three words the whole of

what he so observed. But is there any thing of the nature of an induction in

this process? Did he infer any thing that had not been observed, from

something else which had? Certainly not. He had observed the whole of what

the proposition asserts. That the land in question is an island, is not an

inference from the partial facts which the navigator saw in the course of his

circumnavigation; it is the facts themselves; it is a summary of those facts;

the description of a complex fact, to which those simpler ones are as the parts

of a whole.

              Now there is, I conceive, no difference in kind between this simple

operation, and that by which Kepler ascertained the nature of the planetary

orbits: and Kepler’s operation, all at least that was characteristic in it, was not

more an inductive act than that of our supposed navigator.

              The object of Kepler was to determine the real path described by

each of the planets, or let us say by the planet Mars (since it was of that body

that he first established the two of his three laws which did not require a

comparison of planets). To do this there was no other mode than that of directobservation: and all which observation could do was to ascertain a great

number of the successive places of the planet; or rather, of its apparent

places. That the planet occupied successively all these positions, or at all

events, positions which produced the same impressions on the eye, and that it

passed from one of these to another insensibly, and without any apparent

breach of continuity; thus much the senses, with the aid of the proper

instruments, could ascertain. What Kepler did more than this, was to find

what sort of a curve these different points would make, supposing them to be

all joined together. He expressed the whole series of the observed places of

Mars by what Dr. Whewell calls the general conception of an ellipse. This

operation was far from being as easy as that of the navigator who expressed

the series of his observations on successive points of the coast by the general

conception of an island. But it is the very same sort of operation; and if the

one is not an induction but a description, this must also be true of the other.

              The only real induction concerned in the case, consisted in inferring

that because the observed places of Mars were correctly represented by points

in an imaginary ellipse, therefore Mars would continue to revolve in that

same ellipse; and in concluding (before the gap had been filled up by further

observations) that the positions of the planet during the time which

intervened between two observations, must have coincided with the

intermediate points of the curve. For these were facts which had not been

directly observed. They were inferences from the observations; facts inferred,

as distinguished from facts seen. But these inferences were so far from being

a part of Kepler’s philosophical operation, that they had been drawn long

before he was born. Astronomers had long known that the planets

periodically returned to the same places. When this had been ascertained,

there was no induction left for Kepler to make, nor did he make any further

induction. He merely applied his new conception to the facts inferred, as he

did to the facts observed. Knowing already that the planets continued to move

in the same paths; when he found that an ellipse correctly represented the past

path, he knew that it would represent the future path. In finding a

compendious expression for the one set of facts, he found one for the other:

but he found the expression only, not the inference; nor did he (which is the

true test of a general truth) add any thing to the power of prediction already

possessed.

              § 4. The descriptive operation which enables a number of details tobe summed up in a single proposition, Dr. Whewell, by an aptly chosen

expression, has termed the Colligation of Facts. In most of his observations

concerning that mental process I fully agree, and would gladly transfer all

that portion of his book into my own pages. I only think him mistaken in

setting up this kind of operation, which according to the old and received

meaning of the term, is not induction at all, as the type of induction generally;

and laying down, throughout his work, as principles of induction, the

principles of mere colligation.

              Dr. Whewell maintains that the general proposition which binds

together the particular facts, and makes them, as it were, one fact, is not the

mere sum of those facts, but something more, since there is introduced a

conception of the mind, which did not exist in the facts themselves. “The
                            102
particular facts,” says he, “are not merely brought together, but there is a

new element added to the combination by the very act of thought by which

they are combined.... When the Greeks, after long observing the motions of

the planets, saw that these motions might be rightly considered as produced

by the motion of one wheel revolving in the inside of another wheel, these

wheels were creations of their minds, added to the facts which they perceived

by sense. And even if the wheels were no longer supposed to be material, but

were reduced to mere geometrical spheres or circles, they were not the less

products of the mind alone — something additional to the facts observed. The

same is the case in all other discoveries. The facts are known, but they are

insulated and unconnected, till the discoverer supplies from his own store a

principle of connection. The pearls are there, but they will not hang together

till some one provides the string.”

              Let me first remark that Dr. Whewell, in this passage, blends

together, indiscriminately, examples of both the processes which I am

endeavoring to distinguish from one another. When the Greeks abandoned

the supposition that the planetary motions were produced by the revolution of

material wheels, and fell back upon the idea of “mere geometrical spheres or

circles,” there was more in this change of opinion than the mere substitution

of an ideal curve for a physical one. There was the abandonment of a theory,

and the replacement of it by a mere description. No one would think of

calling the doctrine of material wheels a mere description. That doctrine was

an attempt to point out the force by which the planets were acted upon, and

compelled to move in their orbits. But when, by a great step in philosophy,the materiality of the wheels was discarded, and the geometrical forms alone

retained, the attempt to account for the motions was given up, and what was

left of the theory was a mere description of the orbits. The assertion that the

planets were carried round by wheels revolving in the inside of other wheels,

gave place to the proposition, that they moved in the same lines which would

be traced by bodies so carried: which was a mere mode of representing the

sum of the observed facts; as Kepler’s was another and a better mode of

representing the same observations.

              It is true that for these simply descriptive operations, as well as for

the erroneous inductive one, a conception of the mind was required. The

conception of an ellipse must have presented itself to Kepler’s mind, before

he could identify the planetary orbits with it. According to Dr. Whewell, the

conception was something added to the facts. He expresses himself as if

Kepler had put something into the facts by his mode of conceiving them. But

Kepler did no such thing. The ellipse was in the facts before Kepler

recognized it; just as the island was an island before it had been sailed round.

Kepler did not put what he had conceived into the facts, but saw it in them. A

conception implies, and corresponds to, something conceived: and though the

conception itself is not in the facts, but in our mind, yet if it is to convey any

knowledge relating to them, it must be a conception of something which

really is in the facts, some property which they actually possess, and which

they would manifest to our senses, if our senses were able to take cognizance

of it. If, for instance, the planet left behind it in space a visible track, and if

the observer were in a fixed position at such a distance from the plane of the

orbit as would enable him to see the whole of it at once, he would see it to be

an ellipse; and if gifted with appropriate instruments and powers of

locomotion, he could prove it to be such by measuring its different

dimensions. Nay, further: if the track were visible, and he were so placed that

he could see all parts of it in succession, but not all of them at once, he might

be able, by piecing together his successive observations, to discover both that

it was an ellipse and that the planet moved in it. The case would then exactly

resemble that of the navigator who discovers the land to be an island by

sailing round it. If the path was visible, no one I think would dispute that to

identify it with an ellipse is to describe it: and I can not see why any

difference should be made by its not being directly an object of sense, when

every point in it is as exactly ascertained as if it were so.              Subject to the indispensable condition which has just been stated, I

do not conceive that the part which conceptions have in the operation of

studying facts, has ever been overlooked or undervalued. No one ever

disputed that in order to reason about any thing we must have a conception of

it; or that when we include a multitude of things under a general expression,

there is implied in the expression a conception of something common to

those things. But it by no means follows that the conception is necessarily

pre-existent, or constructed by the mind out of its own materials. If the facts

are rightly classed under the conception, it is because there is in the facts

themselves something of which the conception is itself a copy; and which if

we can not directly perceive, it is because of the limited power of our organs,

and not because the thing itself is not there. The conception itself is often

obtained by abstraction from the very facts which, in Dr. Whewell’s

language, it is afterward called in to connect. This he himself admits, when he

observes (which he does on several occasions), how great a service would be

rendered to the science of physiology by the philosopher “who should
                                                                        103
establish a precise, tenable, and consistent conception of life.” Such a

conception can only be abstracted from the phenomena of life itself; from the

very facts which it is put in requisition to connect. In other cases, no doubt,

instead of collecting the conception from the very phenomena which we are

attempting to colligate, we select it from among those which have been

previously collected by abstraction from other facts. In the instance of

Kepler’s laws, the latter was the case. The facts being out of the reach of

being observed, in any such manner as would have enabled the senses to

identify directly the path of the planet, the conception requisite for framing a

general description of that path could not be collected by abstraction from the

observations themselves; the mind had to supply hypothetically, from among

the conceptions it had obtained from other portions of its experience, some

one which would correctly represent the series of the observed facts. It had to

frame a supposition respecting the general course of the phenomenon, and

ask itself, If this be the general description, what will the details be? and then

compare these with the details actually observed. If they agreed, the

hypothesis would serve for a description of the phenomenon: if not, it was

necessarily abandoned, and another tried. It is such a case as this which gives

rise to the doctrine that the mind, in framing the descriptions, adds something

of its own which it does not find in the facts.

              Yet it is a fact surely, that the planet does describe an ellipse; and afact which we could see, if we had adequate visual organs and a suitable

position. Not having these advantages, but possessing the conception of an

ellipse, or (to express the meaning in less technical language) knowing what

an ellipse was, Kepler tried whether the observed places of the planet were

consistent with such a path. He found they were so; and he, consequently,

asserted as a fact that the planet moved in an ellipse. But this fact, which

Kepler did not add to, but found in, the motions of the planet, namely, that it

occupied in succession the various points in the circumference of a given

ellipse, was the very fact, the separate parts of which had been separately

observed; it was the sum of the different observations.

              Having stated this fundamental difference between my opinion and

that of Dr. Whewell, I must add, that his account of the manner in which a

conception is selected, suitable to express the facts, appears to me perfectly

just. The experience of all thinkers will, I believe, testify that the process is

tentative; that it consists of a succession of guesses; many being rejected,

until one at last occurs fit to be chosen. We know from Kepler himself that

before hitting upon the “conception” of an ellipse, he tried nineteen other

imaginary paths, which, finding them inconsistent with the observations, he

was obliged to reject. But as Dr. Whewell truly says, the successful

hypothesis, though a guess, ought generally to be called, not a lucky, but a

skillful guess. The guesses which serve to give mental unity and wholeness to

a chaos of scattered particulars, are accidents which rarely occur to any minds

but those abounding in knowledge and disciplined in intellectual

combinations.

              How far this tentative method, so indispensable as a means to the

colligation of facts for purposes of description, admits of application to

Induction itself, and what functions belong to it in that department, will be

considered in the chapter of the present Book which relates to Hypotheses.

On the present occasion we have chiefly to distinguish this process of

Colligation from Induction properly so called; and that the distinction may be

made clearer, it is well to advert to a curious and interesting remark, which is

as strikingly true of the former operation, as it appears to me unequivocally

false of the latter.

              In different stages of the progress of knowledge, philosophers have

employed, for the colligation of the same order of facts, different

conceptions. The early rude observations of the heavenly bodies, in whichminute precision was neither attained nor sought, presented nothing

inconsistent with the representation of the path of a planet as an exact circle,

having the earth for its centre. As observations increased in accuracy, facts

were disclosed which were not reconcilable with this simple supposition: for

the colligation of those additional facts, the supposition was varied; and

varied again and again as facts became more numerous and precise. The earth

was removed from the centre to some other point within the circle; the planet

was supposed to revolve in a smaller circle called an epicycle, round an

imaginary point which revolved in a circle round the earth: in proportion as

observation elicited fresh facts contradictory to these representations, other

epicycles and other eccentrics were added, producing additional

complication; until at last Kepler swept all these circles away, and substituted

the conception of an exact ellipse. Even this is found not to represent with

complete correctness the accurate observations of the present day, which

disclose many slight deviations from an orbit exactly elliptical. Now Dr.

Whewell has remarked that these successive general expressions, though

apparently so conflicting, were all correct: they all answered the purpose of

colligation; they all enabled the mind to represent to itself with facility, and

by a simultaneous glance, the whole body of facts at the time ascertained:

each in its turn served as a correct description of the phenomena, so far as the

senses had up to that time taken cognizance of them. If a necessity afterward

arose for discarding one of these general descriptions of the planet’s orbit,

and framing a different imaginary line, by which to express the series of

observed positions, it was because a number of new facts had now been

added, which it was necessary to combine with the old facts into one general

description. But this did not affect the correctness of the former expression,

considered as a general statement of the only facts which it was intended to

represent. And so true is this, that, as is well remarked by M. Comte, these

ancient generalizations, even the rudest and most imperfect of them, that of

uniform movement in a circle, are so far from being entirely false, that they

are even now habitually employed by astronomers when only a rough

approximation to correctness is required. “L’astronomie moderne, en

détruisant sans retour les hypothèses primitives, envisagées comme lois

réelles du monde, a soigneusement maintenu leur valeur positive et

permanente, la propriété de représenter commodément les phénomènes quand

il s’agit d’une première ébauche. Nos ressources à cet égard sont même bien

plus étendues, précisément à cause que nous ne nous faisons aucune illusionsur la réalité des hypothèses; ce qui nous permet d’employer sans scrupule,
                                                                      104
en chaque cas, celle que nous jugeons la plus avantageuse.”

              Dr. Whewell’s remark, therefore, is philosophically correct.

Successive expressions for the colligation of observed facts, or, in other

words, successive descriptions of a phenomenon as a whole, which has been

observed only in parts, may, though conflicting, be all correct as far as they

go. But it would surely be absurd to assert this of conflicting inductions.

              The scientific study of facts may be undertaken for three different

purposes: the simple description of the facts; their explanation; or their

prediction: meaning by prediction, the determination of the conditions under

which similar facts may be expected again to occur. To the first of these three

operations the name of Induction does not properly belong: to the other two it

does. Now, Dr. Whewell’s observation is true of the first alone. Considered

as a mere description, the circular theory of the heavenly motions represents

perfectly well their general features: and by adding epicycles without limit,

those motions, even as now known to us, might be expressed with any degree

of accuracy that might be required. The elliptical theory, as a mere

description, would have a great advantage in point of simplicity, and in the

consequent facility of conceiving it and reasoning about it; but it would not

really be more true than the other. Different descriptions, therefore, may be

all true: but not, surely, different explanations. The doctrine that the heavenly

bodies moved by a virtue inherent in their celestial nature; the doctrine that

they were moved by impact (which led to the hypothesis of vortices as the

only impelling force capable of whirling bodies in circles), and the

Newtonian doctrine, that they are moved by the composition of a centripetal

with an original projectile force; all these are explanations, collected by real

induction from supposed parallel cases; and they were all successively

received by philosophers, as scientific truths on the subject of the heavenly

bodies. Can it be said of these, as was said of the different descriptions, that

they are all true as far as they go? Is it not clear that only one can be true in

any degree, and the other two must be altogether false? So much for

explanations: let us now compare different predictions: the first, that eclipses

will occur when one planet or satellite is so situated as to cast its shadow

upon another; the second, that they will occur when some great calamity is

impending over mankind. Do these two doctrines only differ in the degree of

their truth, as expressing real facts with unequal degrees of accuracy?                                                                  105
Assuredly the one is true, and the other absolutely false.

              In every way, therefore, it is evident that to explain induction as the

colligation of facts by means of appropriate conceptions, that is, conceptions

which will really express them, is to confound mere description of the

observed facts with inference from those facts, and ascribe to the latter what

is a characteristic property of the former.

              There is, however, between Colligation and Induction, a real

correlation, which it is important to conceive correctly. Colligation is not

always induction; but induction is always colligation. The assertion that the

planets move in ellipses, was but a mode of representing observed facts; it

was but a colligation; while the assertion that they are drawn, or tend, toward

the sun, was the statement of a new fact, inferred by induction. But the

induction, once made, accomplishes the purposes of colligation likewise. It

brings the same facts, which Kepler had connected by his conception of an

ellipse, under the additional conception of bodies acted upon by a central

force, and serves, therefore, as a new bond of connection for those facts; a

new principle for their classification.

              Further, the descriptions which are improperly confounded with

induction, are nevertheless a necessary preparation for induction; no less

necessary than correct observation of the facts themselves. Without the

previous colligation of detached observations by means of one general

conception, we could never have obtained any basis for an induction, except

in the case of phenomena of very limited compass. We should not be able to

affirm any predicates at all, of a subject incapable of being observed

otherwise than piecemeal: much less could we extend those predicates by

induction to other similar subjects. Induction, therefore, always presupposes,

not only that the necessary observations are made with the necessary

accuracy, but also that the results of these observations are, so far as

practicable, connected together by general descriptions, enabling the mind to

represent to itself as wholes whatever phenomena are capable of being so

represented.

              § 5. Dr. Whewell has replied at some length to the preceding

observations, restating his opinions, but without (as far as I can perceive)

adding any thing material to his former arguments. Since, however, mine

have not had the good fortune to make any impression upon him, I willsubjoin a few remarks, tending to show more clearly in what our difference

of opinion consists, as well as, in some measure, to account for it.

              Nearly all the definitions of induction, by writers of authority, make

it consist in drawing inferences from known cases to unknown; affirming of a

class, a predicate which has been found true of some cases belonging to the

class; concluding because some things have a certain property, that other

things which resemble them have the same property — or because a thing has

manifested a property at a certain time, that it has and will have that property

at other times.

              It will scarcely be contended that Kepler’s operation was an

Induction in this sense of the term. The statement, that Mars moves in an

elliptical orbit, was no generalization from individual cases to a class of

cases. Neither was it an extension to all time, of what had been found true at

some particular time. The whole amount of generalization which the case

admitted of, was already completed, or might have been so. Long before the

elliptic theory was thought of, it had been ascertained that the planets

returned periodically to the same apparent places; the series of these places

was, or might have been, completely determined, and the apparent course of

each planet marked out on the celestial globe in an uninterrupted line. Kepler

did not extend an observed truth to other cases than those in which it had

been observed: he did not widen the subject of the proposition which

expressed the observed facts. The alteration he made was in the predicate.

Instead of saying, the successive places of Mars are so and so, he summed

them up in the statement, that the successive places of Mars are points in an

ellipse. It is true, this statement, as Dr. Whewell says, was not the sum of the

observations merely ; it was the sum of the observations seen under a new
              106
point of view . But it was not the sum of more than the observations, as a

real induction is. It took in no cases but those which had been actually

observed, or which could have been inferred from the observations before the

new point of view presented itself. There was not that transition from known

cases to unknown, which constitutes Induction in the original and

acknowledged meaning of the term.

              Old definitions, it is true, can not prevail against new knowledge:

and if the Keplerian operation, as a logical process, be really identical with

what takes place in acknowledged induction, the definition of induction ought

to be so widened as to take it in; since scientific language ought to adapt itselfto the true relations which subsist between the things it is employed to

designate. Here then it is that I am at issue with Dr. Whewell. He does think

the operations identical. He allows of no logical process in any case of

induction, other than what there was in Kepler’s case, namely, guessing until

a guess is found which tallies with the facts; and accordingly, as we shall see

hereafter, he rejects all canons of induction, because it is not by means of

them that we guess. Dr. Whewell’s theory of the logic of science would be

very perfect if it did not pass over altogether the question of Proof. But in my

apprehension there is such a thing as proof, and inductions differ altogether

from descriptions in their relation to that element. Induction is proof; it is

inferring something unobserved from something observed: it requires,

therefore, an appropriate test of proof; and to provide that test, is the special

purpose of inductive logic. When, on the contrary, we merely collate known

observations, and, in Dr. Whewell’s phraseology, connect them by means of

a new conception; if the conception does serve to connect the observations,

we have all we want. As the proposition in which it is embodied pretends to

no other truth than what it may share with many other modes of representing

the same facts, to be consistent with the facts is all it requires: it neither needs

nor admits of proof; though it may serve to prove other things, inasmuch as,

by placing the facts in mental connection with other facts, not previously seen

to resemble them, it assimilates the case to another class of phenomena,

concerning which real Inductions have already been made. Thus Kepler’s so-

called law brought the orbit of Mars into the class ellipse, and by doing so,

proved all the properties of an ellipse to be true of the orbit: but in this proof

Kepler’s law supplied the minor premise, and not (as is the case with real

Inductions) the major.

              Dr. Whewell calls nothing Induction where there is not a new mental

conception introduced, and every thing induction where there is. But this is to

confound two very different things, Invention and Proof. The introduction of

a new conception belongs to Invention: and invention may be required in any

operation, but is the essence of none. A new conception may be introduced

for descriptive purposes, and so it may for inductive purposes. But it is so far

from constituting induction, that induction does not necessarily stand in need

of it. Most inductions require no conception but what was present in every

one of the particular instances on which the induction is grounded. That all

men are mortal is surely an inductive conclusion; yet no new conception is

introduced by it. Whoever knows that any man has died, has all theconceptions involved in the inductive generalization. But Dr. Whewell

considers the process of invention which consists in framing a new

conception consistent with the facts, to be not merely a necessary part of all

induction, but the whole of it.

              The mental operation which extracts from a number of detached

observations certain general characters in which the observed phenomena

resemble one another, or resemble other known facts, is what Bacon, Locke,

and most subsequent metaphysicians, have understood by the word

Abstraction. A general expression obtained by abstraction, connecting known

facts by means of common characters, but without concluding from them to

unknown, may, I think, with strict logical correctness, be termed a

Description; nor do I know in what other way things can ever be described.

My position, however, does not depend on the employment of that particular

word; I am quite content to use Dr. Whewell’s term Colligation, or the more

general phrases, “mode of representing, or of expressing, phenomena:”

provided it be clearly seen that the process is not Induction, but something

radically different.

              What more may usefully be said on the subject of Colligation, or of

the correlative expression invented by Dr. Whewell, the Explication of

Conceptions, and generally on the subject of ideas and mental representations

as connected with the study of facts, will find a more appropriate place in the

Fourth Book, on the Operations Subsidiary to Induction: to which I must

refer the reader for the removal of any difficulty which the present discussion

may have left.

 

 

                   Chapter III. – Of The Ground Of Induction.

 

 

              § 1. Induction properly so called, as distinguished from those mental

operations, sometimes, though improperly, designated by the name, which I

have attempted in the preceding chapter to characterize, may, then, be

summarily defined as Generalization from Experience. It consists in inferring

from some individual instances in which a phenomenon is observed to occur,

that it occurs in all instances of a certain class; namely, in all which resemble

the former, in what are regarded as the material circumstances.

              In what way the material circumstances are to be distinguished from

those which are immaterial, or why some of the circumstances are material

and others not so, we are not yet ready to point out. We must first observe,

that there is a principle implied in the very statement of what Induction is; an

assumption with regard to the course of nature and the order of the universe;

namely, that there are such things in nature as parallel cases; that what

happens once, will, under a sufficient degree of similarity of circumstances,

happen again, and not only again, but as often as the same circumstances

recur. This, I say, is an assumption, involved in every case of induction. And,

if we consult the actual course of nature, we find that the assumption is

warranted. The universe, so far as known to us, is so constituted, that

whatever is true in any one case, is true in all cases of a certain description;

the only difficulty is, to find what description.

              This universal fact, which is our warrant for all inferences from

experience, has been described by different philosophers in different forms of

language: that the course of nature is uniform; that the universe is governed

by general laws; and the like. One of the most usual of these modes of

expression, but also one of the most inadequate, is that which has been

brought into familiar use by the metaphysicians of the school of Reid and

Stewart. The disposition of the human mind to generalize from experience —

a propensity considered by these philosophers as an instinct of our nature —

they usually describe under some such name as “our intuitive conviction that

the future will resemble the past.” Now it has been well pointed out by Mr.
      107
Bailey, that (whether the tendency be or not an original and ultimate

element of our nature), Time, in its modifications of past, present, and future,has no concern either with the belief itself, or with the grounds of it. We

believe that fire will burn to-morrow, because it burned to-day and yesterday;

but we believe, on precisely the same grounds, that it burned before we were

born, and that it burns this very day in Cochin–China. It is not from the past

to the future, as past and future, that we infer, but from the known to the

unknown; from facts observed to facts unobserved; from what we have

perceived, or been directly conscious of, to what has not come within our

experience. In this last predicament is the whole region of the future; but also

the vastly greater portion of the present and of the past.

              Whatever be the most proper mode of expressing it, the proposition

that the course of nature is uniform, is the fundamental principle, or general

axiom of Induction. It would yet be a great error to offer this large

generalization as any explanation of the inductive process. On the contrary, I

hold it to be itself an instance of induction, and induction by no means of the

most obvious kind. Far from being the first induction we make, it is one of

the last, or at all events one of those which are latest in attaining strict

philosophical accuracy. As a general maxim, indeed, it has scarcely entered

into the minds of any but philosophers; nor even by them, as we shall have

many opportunities of remarking, have its extent and limits been always very

justly conceived. The truth is, that this great generalization is itself founded

on prior generalizations. The obscurer laws of nature were discovered by

means of it, but the more obvious ones must have been understood and

assented to as general truths before it was ever heard of. We should never

have thought of affirming that all phenomena take place according to general

laws, if we had not first arrived, in the case of a great multitude of

phenomena, at some knowledge of the laws themselves; which could be done

no otherwise than by induction. In what sense, then, can a principle, which is

so far from being our earliest induction, be regarded as our warrant for all the

others? In the only sense, in which (as we have already seen) the general

propositions which we place at the head of our reasonings when we throw

them into syllogisms, ever really contribute to their validity. As Archbishop

Whately remarks, every induction is a syllogism with the major premise

suppressed; or (as I prefer expressing it) every induction may be thrown into

the form of a syllogism, by supplying a major premise. If this be actually

done, the principle which we are now considering, that of the uniformity of

the course of nature, will appear as the ultimate major premise of all

inductions, and will, therefore, stand to all inductions in the relation in which,as has been shown at so much length, the major proposition of a syllogism

always stands to the conclusion; not contributing at all to prove it, but being a

necessary condition of its being proved; since no conclusion is proved, for
                                                          108
which there can not be found a true major premise.

              The statement, that the uniformity of the course of nature is the

ultimate major premise in all cases of induction, may be thought to require

some explanation. The immediate major premise in every inductive

argument, it certainly is not. Of that, Archbishop Whately’s must be held to

be the correct account. The induction, “John, Peter, etc., are mortal, therefore

all mankind are mortal,” may, as he justly says, be thrown into a syllogism by

prefixing as a major premise (what is at any rate a necessary condition of the

validity of the argument), namely, that what is true of John, Peter, etc., is true

of all mankind. But how came we by this major premise? It is not self-

evident; nay, in all cases of unwarranted generalization, it is not true. How,

then, is it arrived at? Necessarily either by induction or ratiocination; and if

by induction, the process, like all other inductive arguments, may be thrown

into the form of a syllogism. This previous syllogism it is, therefore,

necessary to construct. There is, in the long run, only one possible

construction. The real proof that what is true of John, Peter, etc., is true of all

mankind, can only be, that a different supposition would be inconsistent with

the uniformity which we know to exist in the course of nature. Whether there

would be this inconsistency or not, may be a matter of long and delicate

inquiry; but unless there would, we have no sufficient ground for the major of

the inductive syllogism. It hence appears, that if we throw the whole course

of any inductive argument into a series of syllogisms, we shall arrive by more

or fewer steps at an ultimate syllogism, which will have for its major premise
                                                                            109
the principle, or axiom, of the uniformity of the course of nature.

              It was not to be expected that in the case of this axiom, any more

than of other axioms, there should be unanimity among thinkers with respect

to the grounds on which it is to be received as true. I have already stated that

I regard it as itself a generalization from experience. Others hold it to be a

principle which, antecedently to any verification by experience, we are

compelled by the constitution of our thinking faculty to assume as true.

Having so recently, and at so much length, combated a similar doctrine as

applied to the axioms of mathematics, by arguments which are in a great

measure applicable to the present case, I shall defer the more particulardiscussion of this controverted point in regard to the fundamental axiom of
                                                                110
induction, until a more advanced period of our inquiry. At present it is of

more importance to understand thoroughly the import of the axiom itself. For

the proposition, that the course of nature is uniform, possesses rather the

brevity suitable to popular, than the precision requisite in philosophical

language: its terms require to be explained, and a stricter than their ordinary

signification given to them, before the truth of the assertion can be admitted.

              § 2. Every person’s consciousness assures him that he does not

always expect uniformity in the course of events; he does not always believe

that the unknown will be similar to the known, that the future will resemble

the past. Nobody believes that the succession of rain and fine weather will be

the same in every future year as in the present. Nobody expects to have the

same dreams repeated every night. On the contrary, every body mentions it as

something extraordinary, if the course of nature is constant, and resembles

itself, in these particulars. To look for constancy where constancy is not to be

expected, as for instance that a day which has once brought good fortune will

always be a fortunate day, is justly accounted superstition.

              The course of nature, in truth, is not only uniform, it is also infinitely

various. Some phenomena are always seen to recur in the very same

combinations in which we met with them at first; others seem altogether

capricious; while some, which we had been accustomed to regard as bound

down exclusively to a particular set of combinations, we unexpectedly find

detached from some of the elements with which we had hitherto found them

conjoined, and united to others of quite a contrary description. To an

inhabitant of Central Africa, fifty years ago, no fact probably appeared to rest

on more uniform experience than this, that all human beings are black. To

Europeans, not many years ago, the proposition, All swans are white,

appeared an equally unequivocal instance of uniformity in the course of

nature. Further experience has proved to both that they were mistaken; but

they had to wait fifty centuries for this experience. During that long time,

mankind believed in a uniformity of the course of nature where no such

uniformity really existed.

              According to the notion which the ancients entertained of induction,

the foregoing were cases of as legitimate inference as any inductions

whatever. In these two instances, in which, the conclusion being false, the

ground of inference must have been insufficient, there was, nevertheless, asmuch ground for it as this conception of induction admitted of. The induction

of the ancients has been well described by Bacon, under the name of

“Inductio per enumerationem simplicem, ubi non reperitur instantia

contradictoria.” It consists in ascribing the character of general truths to all

propositions which are true in every instance that we happen to know of. This

is the kind of induction which is natural to the mind when unaccustomed to

scientific methods. The tendency, which some call an instinct, and which

others account for by association, to infer the future from the past, the known

from the unknown, is simply a habit of expecting that what has been found

true once or several times, and never yet found false, will be found true again.

Whether the instances are few or many, conclusive or inconclusive, does not

much affect the matter: these are considerations which occur only on

reflection; the unprompted tendency of the mind is to generalize its

experience, provided this points all in one direction; provided no other

experience of a conflicting character comes unsought. The notion of seeking

it, of experimenting for it, of interrogating nature (to use Bacon’s expression)

is of much later growth. The observation of nature, by uncultivated intellects,

is purely passive: they accept the facts which present themselves, without

taking the trouble of searching for more: it is a superior mind only which asks

itself what facts are needed to enable it to come to a safe conclusion, and then

looks out for these.

              But though we have always a propensity to generalize from

unvarying experience, we are not always warranted in doing so. Before we

can be at liberty to conclude that something is universally true because we

have never known an instance to the contrary, we must have reason to believe

that if there were in nature any instances to the contrary, we should have

known of them. This assurance, in the great majority of cases, we can not

have, or can have only in a very moderate degree. The possibility of having

it, is the foundation on which we shall see hereafter that induction by simple
                                                                                    111
enumeration may in some remarkable cases amount practically to proof.

No such assurance, however, can be had, on any of the ordinary subjects of

scientific inquiry. Popular notions are usually founded on induction by simple

enumeration; in science it carries us but a little way. We are forced to begin

with it; we must often rely on it provisionally, in the absence of means of

more searching investigation. But, for the accurate study of nature, we require

a surer and a more potent instrument.              It was, above all, by pointing out the insufficiency of this rude and

loose conception of Induction, that Bacon merited the title so generally

awarded to him, of Founder of the Inductive Philosophy. The value of his

own contributions to a more philosophical theory of the subject has certainly

been exaggerated. Although (along with some fundamental errors) his

writings contain, more or less fully developed, several of the most important

principles of the Inductive Method, physical investigation has now far

outgrown the Baconian conception of Induction. Moral and political inquiry,

indeed, are as yet far behind that conception. The current and approved

modes of reasoning on these subjects are still of the same vicious description

against which Bacon protested; the method almost exclusively employed by

those professing to treat such matters inductively, is the very inductio per

enumerationem simplicem which he condemns; and the experience which we

hear so confidently appealed to by all sects, parties, and interests, is still, in

his own emphatic words, mera palpatio .

              § 3. In order to a better understanding of the problem which the

logician must solve if he would establish a scientific theory of Induction, let

us compare a few cases of incorrect inductions with others which are

acknowledged to be legitimate. Some, we know, which were believed for

centuries to be correct, were nevertheless incorrect. That all swans are white,

can not have been a good induction, since the conclusion has turned out

erroneous. The experience, however, on which the conclusion rested, was

genuine. From the earliest records, the testimony of the inhabitants of the

known world was unanimous on the point. The uniform experience,

therefore, of the inhabitants of the known world, agreeing in a common

result, without one known instance of deviation from that result, is not always

sufficient to establish a general conclusion.

              But let us now turn to an instance apparently not very dissimilar to

this. Mankind were wrong, it seems, in concluding that all swans were white:

are we also wrong, when we conclude that all men’s heads grow above their

shoulders, and never below, in spite of the conflicting testimony of the

naturalist Pliny? As there were black swans, though civilized people had

existed for three thousand years on the earth without meeting with them, may

there not also be “men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders,”

notwithstanding a rather less perfect unanimity of negative testimony from

observers? Most persons would answer No; it was more credible that a birdshould vary in its color, than that men should vary in the relative position of

their principal organs. And there is no doubt that in so saying they would be

right: but to say why they are right, would be impossible, without entering

more deeply than is usually done, into the true theory of Induction.

              Again, there are cases in which we reckon with the most unfailing

confidence upon uniformity, and other cases in which we do not count upon

it at all. In some we feel complete assurance that the future will resemble the

past, the unknown be precisely similar to the known. In others, however

invariable may be the result obtained from the instances which have been

observed, we draw from them no more than a very feeble presumption that

the like result will hold in all other cases. That a straight line is the shortest

distance between two points, we do not doubt to be true even in the region of
                112
the fixed stars. When a chemist announces the existence and properties of a

newly-discovered substance, if we confide in his accuracy, we feel assured

that the conclusions he has arrived at will hold universally, though the

induction be founded but on a single instance. We do not withhold our assent,

waiting for a repetition of the experiment; or if we do, it is from a doubt

whether the one experiment was properly made, not whether if properly made

it would be conclusive. Here, then, is a general law of nature, inferred

without hesitation from a single instance; a universal proposition from a

singular one. Now mark another case, and contrast it with this. Not all the

instances which have been observed since the beginning of the world, in

support of the general proposition that all crows are black, would be deemed

a sufficient presumption of the truth of the proposition, to outweigh the

testimony of one unexceptionable witness who should affirm that in some

region of the earth not fully explored, he had caught and examined a crow,

and had found it to be gray.

              Why is a single instance, in some cases, sufficient for a complete

induction, while in others, myriads of concurring instances, without a single

exception known or presumed, go such a very little way toward establishing a

universal proposition? Whoever can answer this question knows more of the

philosophy of logic than the wisest of the ancients, and has solved the

problem of induction.

 

                          Chapter IV. – Of Laws Of Nature.

 

 

              § 1. In the contemplation of that uniformity in the course of nature,

which is assumed in every inference from experience, one of the first

observations that present themselves is, that the uniformity in question is not

properly uniformity, but uniformities. The general regularity results from the

co-existence of partial regularities. The course of nature in general is

constant, because the course of each of the various phenomena that compose

it is so. A certain fact invariably occurs whenever certain circumstances are

present, and does not occur when they are absent; the like is true of another

fact; and so on. From these separate threads of connection between parts of

the great whole which we term nature, a general tissue of connection

unavoidably weaves itself, by which the whole is held together. If A is

always accompanied by D, B by E, and C by F, it follows that A B is

accompanied by D E, A C by D F, B C by E F, and finally A B C by D E F;

and thus the general character of regularity is produced, which, along with

and in the midst of infinite diversity, pervades all nature.

              The first point, therefore, to be noted in regard to what is called the

uniformity of the course of nature, is, that it is itself a complex fact,

compounded of all the separate uniformities which exist in respect to single

phenomena. These various uniformities, when ascertained by what is

regarded as a sufficient induction, we call, in common parlance, Laws of

Nature. Scientifically speaking, that title is employed in a more restricted

sense, to designate the uniformities when reduced to their most simple

expression. Thus in the illustration already employed, there were seven

uniformities; all of which, if considered sufficiently certain, would, in the

more lax application of the term, be called laws of nature. But of the seven,

three alone are properly distinct and independent: these being presupposed,

the others follow of course. The first three, therefore, according to the stricter

acceptation, are called laws of nature; the remainder not; because they are in

truth mere cases of the first three; virtually included in them; said, therefore,

to result from them: whoever affirms those three has already affirmed all the

rest.

              To substitute real examples for symbolical ones, the following arethree uniformities, or call them laws of nature: the law that air has weight, the

law that pressure on a fluid is propagated equally in all directions, and the

law that pressure in one direction, not opposed by equal pressure in the

contrary direction, produces motion, which does not cease until equilibrium

is restored. From these three uniformities we should be able to predict

another uniformity, namely, the rise of the mercury in the Torricellian tube.

This, in the stricter use of the phrase, is not a law of nature. It is the result of

laws of nature. It is a case of each and every one of the three laws: and is the

only occurrence by which they could all be fulfilled. If the mercury were not

sustained in the barometer, and sustained at such a height that the column of

mercury were equal in weight to a column of the atmosphere of the same

diameter; here would be a case, either of the air not pressing upon the surface

of the mercury with the force which is called its weight, or of the downward

pressure on the mercury not being propagated equally in an upward direction,

or of a body pressed in one direction and not in the direction opposite, either

not moving in the direction in which it is pressed, or stopping before it had

attained equilibrium. If we knew, therefore, the three simple laws, but had

never tried the Torricellian experiment, we might deduce its result from those

laws. The known weight of the air, combined with the position of the

apparatus, would bring the mercury within the first of the three inductions;

the first induction would bring it within the second, and the second within the

third, in the manner which we characterized in treating of Ratiocination. We

should thus come to know the more complex uniformity, independently of

specific experience, through our knowledge of the simpler ones from which it

results; though, for reasons which will appear hereafter, verification by

specific experience would still be desirable, and might possibly be

indispensable.

              Complex uniformities which, like this, are mere cases of simpler

ones, and have, therefore, been virtually affirmed in affirming those, may

with propriety be called laws , but can scarcely, in the strictness of scientific

speech, be termed Laws of Nature. It is the custom in science, wherever

regularity of any kind can be traced, to call the general proposition which

expresses the nature of that regularity, a law; as when, in mathematics, we

speak of the law of decrease of the successive terms of a converging series.

But the expression law of nature has generally been employed with a sort of

tacit reference to the original sense of the word law, namely, the expression

of the will of a superior. When, therefore, it appeared that any of theuniformities which were observed in nature, would result spontaneously from

certain other uniformities, no separate act of creative will being supposed

necessary for the production of the derivative uniformities, these have not

usually been spoken of as laws of nature. According to one mode of

expression, the question, What are the laws of nature? may be stated thus:

What are the fewest and simplest assumptions, which being granted, the

whole existing order of nature would result? Another mode of stating it

would be thus: What are the fewest general propositions from which all the

uniformities which exist in the universe might be deductively inferred?

              Every great advance which marks an epoch in the progress of

science, has consisted in a step made toward the solution of this problem.

Even a simple colligation of inductions already made, without any fresh

extension of the inductive inference, is already an advance in that direction.

When Kepler expressed the regularity which exists in the observed motions

of the heavenly bodies, by the three general propositions called his laws, he,

in so doing, pointed out three simple suppositions which, instead of a much

greater number, would suffice to construct the whole scheme of the heavenly

motions, so far as it was known up to that time. A similar and still greater

step was made when these laws, which at first did not seem to be included in

any more general truths, were discovered to be cases of the three laws of

motion, as obtaining among bodies which mutually tend toward one another

with a certain force, and have had a certain instantaneous impulse originally

impressed upon them. After this great discovery, Kepler’s three propositions,

though still called laws, would hardly, by any person accustomed to use

language with precision, be termed laws of nature: that phrase would be

reserved for the simpler and more general laws into which Newton is said to

have resolved them.

              According to this language, every well-grounded inductive

generalization is either a law of nature, or a result of laws of nature, capable,

if those laws are known, of being predicted from them. And the problem of

Inductive Logic may be summed up in two questions: how to ascertain the

laws of nature; and how, after having ascertained them, to follow them into

their results. On the other hand, we must not suffer ourselves to imagine that

this mode of statement amounts to a real analysis, or to any thing but a mere

verbal transformation of the problem; for the expression, Laws of Nature,

means nothing but the uniformities which exist among natural phenomena(or, in other words, the results of induction), when reduced to their simplest

expression. It is, however, something to have advanced so far, as to see that

the study of nature is the study of laws, not a law; of uniformities, in the

plural number: that the different natural phenomena have their separate rules

or modes of taking place, which, though much intermixed and entangled with

one another, may, to a certain extent, be studied apart: that (to resume our

former metaphor) the regularity which exists in nature is a web composed of

distinct threads, and only to be understood by tracing each of the threads

separately; for which purpose it is often necessary to unravel some portion of

the web, and exhibit the fibres apart. The rules of experimental inquiry are

the contrivances for unraveling the web.

              § 2. In thus attempting to ascertain the general order of nature by

ascertaining the particular order of the occurrence of each one of the

phenomena of nature, the most scientific proceeding can be no more than an

improved form of that which was primitively pursued by the human

understanding, while undirected by science. When mankind first formed the

idea of studying phenomena according to a stricter and surer method than that

which they had in the first instance spontaneously adopted, they did not,

conformably to the well-meant but impracticable precept of Descartes, set out

from the supposition that nothing had been already ascertained. Many of the

uniformities existing among phenomena are so constant, and so open to

observation, as to force themselves upon involuntary recognition. Some facts

are so perpetually and familiarly accompanied by certain others, that mankind

learned, as children learn, to expect the one where they found the other, long

before they knew how to put their expectation into words by asserting, in a

proposition, the existence of a connection between those phenomena. No

science was needed to teach that food nourishes, that water drowns, or

quenches thirst, that the sun gives light and heat, that bodies fall to the

ground. The first scientific inquirers assumed these and the like as known

truths, and set out from them to discover others which were unknown: nor

were they wrong in so doing, subject, however, as they afterward began to

see, to an ulterior revision of these spontaneous generalizations themselves,

when the progress of knowledge pointed out limits to them, or showed their

truth to be contingent on some circumstance not originally attended to. It will

appear, I think, from the subsequent part of our inquiry, that there is no

logical fallacy in this mode of proceeding; but we may see already that any

other mode is rigorously impracticable: since it is impossible to frame anyscientific method of induction, or test of the correctness of inductions, unless

on the hypothesis that some inductions deserving of reliance have been

already made.

              Let us revert, for instance, to one of our former illustrations, and

consider why it is that, with exactly the same amount of evidence, both

negative and positive, we did not reject the assertion that there are black

swans, while we should refuse credence to any testimony which asserted that

there were men wearing their heads underneath their shoulders. The first

assertion was more credible than the latter. But why more credible? So long

as neither phenomenon had been actually witnessed, what reason was there

for finding the one harder to be believed than the other? Apparently because

there is less constancy in the colors of animals, than in the general structure

of their anatomy. But how do we know this? Doubtless, from experience. It

appears, then, that we need experience to inform us, in what degree, and in

what cases, or sorts of cases, experience is to be relied on. Experience must

be consulted in order to learn from it under what circumstances arguments

from it will be valid. We have no ulterior test to which we subject experience

in general; but we make experience its own test. Experience testifies, that

among the uniformities which it exhibits or seems to exhibit, some are more

to be relied on than others; and uniformity, therefore, may be presumed, from

any given number of instances, with a greater degree of assurance, in

proportion as the case belongs to a class in which the uniformities have

hitherto been found more uniform.

              This mode of correcting one generalization by means of another, a

narrower generalization by a wider, which common sense suggests and

adopts in practice, is the real type of scientific Induction. All that art can do is

but to give accuracy and precision to this process, and adapt it to all varieties

of cases, without any essential alteration in its principle.

              There are of course no means of applying such a test as that above

described, unless we already possess a general knowledge of the prevalent

character of the uniformities existing throughout nature. The indispensable

foundation, therefore, of a scientific formula of induction, must be a survey

of the inductions to which mankind have been conducted in unscientific

practice; with the special purpose of ascertaining what kinds of uniformities

have been found perfectly invariable, pervading all nature, and what are those

which have been found to vary with difference of time, place, or otherchangeable circumstances.

              § 3. The necessity of such a survey is confirmed by the

consideration, that the stronger inductions are the touch-stone to which we

always endeavor to bring the weaker. If we find any means of deducing one

of the less strong inductions from stronger ones, it acquires, at once, all the

strength of those from which it is deduced; and even adds to that strength;

since the independent experience on which the weaker induction previously

rested, becomes additional evidence of the truth of the better established law

in which it is now found to be included. We may have inferred, from

historical evidence, that the uncontrolled power of a monarch, of an

aristocracy, or of the majority, will often be abused: but we are entitled to

rely on this generalization with much greater assurance when it is shown to

be a corollary from still better established facts; the very low degree of

elevation of character ever yet attained by the average of mankind, and the

little efficacy, for the most part, of the modes of education hitherto practiced,

in maintaining the predominance of reason and conscience over the selfish

propensities. It is at the same time obvious that even these more general facts

derive an accession of evidence from the testimony which history bears to the

effects of despotism. The strong induction becomes still stronger when a

weaker one has been bound up with it.

              On the other hand, if an induction conflicts with stronger inductions,

or with conclusions capable of being correctly deduced from them, then,

unless on reconsideration it should appear that some of the stronger

inductions have been expressed with greater universality than their evidence

warrants, the weaker one must give way. The opinion so long prevalent that a

comet, or any other unusual appearance in the heavenly regions, was the

precursor of calamities to mankind, or to those at least who witnessed it; the

belief in the veracity of the oracles of Delphi or Dodona; the reliance on

astrology, or on the weather-prophecies in almanacs, were doubtless
                                                            113
inductions supposed to be grounded on experience: and faith in such

delusions seems quite capable of holding out against a great multitude of

failures, provided it be nourished by a reasonable number of casual

coincidences between the prediction and the event. What has really put an

end to these insufficient inductions, is their inconsistency with the stronger

inductions subsequently obtained by scientific inquiry, respecting the causes

on which terrestrial events really depend; and where those scientific truthshave not yet penetrated, the same or similar delusions still prevail.

              It may be affirmed as a general principle, that all inductions, whether

strong or weak, which can be connected by ratiocination, are confirmatory of

one another; while any which lead deductively to consequences that are

incompatible, become mutually each other’s test, showing that one or other

must be given up, or at least more guardedly expressed. In the case of

inductions which confirm each other, the one which becomes a conclusion

from ratiocination rises to at least the level of certainty of the weakest of

those from which it is deduced; while in general all are more or less increased

in certainty. Thus the Torricellian experiment, though a mere case of three

more general laws, not only strengthened greatly the evidence on which those

laws rested, but converted one of them (the weight of the atmosphere) from a

still doubtful generalization into a completely established doctrine.

              If, then, a survey of the uniformities which have been ascertained to

exist in nature, should point out some which, as far as any human purpose

requires certainty, may be considered quite certain and quite universal; then

by means of these uniformities we may be able to raise multitudes of other

inductions to the same point in the scale. For if we can show, with respect to

any inductive inference, that either it must be true, or one of these certain and

universal inductions must admit of an exception; the former generalization

will attain the same certainty, and indefeasibleness within the bounds

assigned to it, which are the attributes of the latter. It will be proved to be a

law; and if not a result of other and simpler laws, it will be a law of nature.

              There are such certain and universal inductions; and it is because

there are such, that a Logic of Induction is possible.

 

 

             Chapter V. – Of The Law Of Universal Causation.

 

 

              § 1. The phenomena of nature exist in two distinct relations to one

another; that of simultaneity, and that of succession. Every phenomenon is

related, in a uniform manner, to some phenomena that co-exist with it, and to

some that have preceded and will follow it.

              Of the uniformities which exist among synchronous phenomena, the

most important, on every account, are the laws of number; and next to them

those of space, or, in other words, of extension and figure. The laws of

number are common to synchronous and successive phenomena. That two

and two make four, is equally true whether the second two follow the first

two or accompany them. It is as true of days and years as of feet and inches.

The laws of extension and figure (in other words, the theorems of geometry,

from its lowest to its highest branches) are, on the contrary, laws of

simultaneous phenomena only. The various parts of space, and of the objects

which are said to fill space, co-exist; and the unvarying laws which are the

subject of the science of geometry, are an expression of the mode of their co-

existence.

              This is a class of laws, or in other words, of uniformities, for the

comprehension and proof of which it is not necessary to suppose any lapse of

time, any variety of facts or events succeeding one another. The propositions

of geometry are independent of the succession of events. All things which

possess extension, or, in other words, which fill space, are subject to

geometrical laws. Possessing extension, they possess figure; possessing

figure, they must possess some figure in particular, and have all the

properties which geometry assigns to that figure. If one body be a sphere and

another a cylinder, of equal height and diameter, the one will be exactly two-

thirds of the other, let the nature and quality of the material be what it will.

Again, each body, and each point of a body, must occupy some place or

position among other bodies; and the position of two bodies relatively to each

other, of whatever nature the bodies be, may be unerringly inferred from the

position of each of them relatively to any third body.

              In the laws of number, then, and in those of space, we recognize inthe most unqualified manner, the rigorous universality of which we are in

quest. Those laws have been in all ages the type of certainty, the standard of

comparison for all inferior degrees of evidence. Their invariability is so

perfect, that it renders us unable even to conceive any exception to them; and

philosophers have been led, though (as I have endeavored to show)

erroneously, to consider their evidence as lying not in experience, but in the

original constitution of the intellect. If, therefore, from the laws of space and

number, we were able to deduce uniformities of any other description, this

would be conclusive evidence to us that those other uniformities possessed

the same rigorous certainty. But this we can not do. From laws of space and

number alone, nothing can be deduced but laws of space and number.

              Of all truths relating to phenomena, the most valuable to us are those

which relate to the order of their succession. On a knowledge of these is

founded every reasonable anticipation of future facts, and whatever power we

possess of influencing those facts to our advantage. Even the laws of

geometry are chiefly of practical importance to us as being a portion of the

premises from which the order of the succession of phenomena may be

inferred. Inasmuch as the motion of bodies, the action of forces, and the

propagation of influences of all sorts, take place in certain lines and over

definite spaces, the properties of those lines and spaces are an important part

of the laws to which those phenomena are themselves subject. Again,

motions, forces, or other influences, and times, are numerable quantities; and

the properties of number are applicable to them as to all other things. But

though the laws of number and space are important elements in the

ascertainment of uniformities of succession, they can do nothing toward it

when taken by themselves. They can only be made instrumental to that

purpose when we combine with them additional premises, expressive of

uniformities of succession already known. By taking, for instance, as

premises these propositions, that bodies acted upon by an instantaneous force

move with uniform velocity in straight lines; that bodies acted upon by a

continuous force move with accelerated velocity in straight lines; and that

bodies acted upon by two forces in different directions move in the diagonal

of a parallelogram, whose sides represent the direction and quantity of those

forces; we may by combining these truths with propositions relating to the

properties of straight lines and of parallelograms (as that a triangle is half a

parallelogram of the same base and altitude), deduce another important

uniformity of succession, viz., that a body moving round a centre of forcedescribes areas proportional to the times. But unless there had been laws of

succession in our premises, there could have been no truths of succession in

our conclusions. A similar remark might be extended to every other class of

phenomena really peculiar; and, had it been attended to, would have

prevented many chimerical attempts at demonstrations of the indemonstrable,

and explanations which do not explain.

              It is not, therefore, enough for us that the laws of space, which are

only laws of simultaneous phenomenon, and the laws of number, which

though true of successive phenomena do not relate to their succession,

possess the rigorous certainty and universality of which we are in search. We

must endeavor to find some law of succession which has those same

attributes, and is therefore fit to be made the foundation of processes for

discovering, and of a test for verifying, all other uniformities of succession.

This fundamental law must resemble the truths of geometry in their most

remarkable peculiarity, that of never being, in any instance whatever,

defeated or suspended by any change of circumstances.

              Now among all those uniformities in the succession of phenomena,

which common observation is sufficient to bring to light, there are very few

which have any, even apparent, pretension to this rigorous indefeasibility:

and of those few, one only has been found capable of completely sustaining

it. In that one, however, we recognize a law which is universal also in another

sense; it is co-extensive with the entire field of successive phenomena, all

instances whatever of succession being examples of it. This law is the Law of

Causation. The truth that every fact which has a beginning has a cause, is co-

extensive with human experience.

              This generalization may appear to some minds not to amount to

much, since after all it asserts only this: “it is a law, that every event depends

on some law:” “it is a law, that there is a law for every thing.” We must not,

however, conclude that the generality of the principle is merely verbal; it will

be found on inspection to be no vague or unmeaning assertion, but a most

important and really fundamental truth.

              § 2. The notion of Cause being the root of the whole theory of

Induction, it is indispensable that this idea should, at the very outset of our

inquiry, be, with the utmost practicable degree of precision, fixed and

determined. If, indeed, it were necessary for the purpose of inductive logicthat the strife should be quelled, which has so long raged among the different

schools of metaphysicians, respecting the origin and analysis of our idea of

causation; the promulgation, or at least the general reception, of a true theory

of induction, might be considered desperate for a long time to come. But the

science of the Investigation of Truth by means of Evidence, is happily

independent of many of the controversies which perplex the science of the

ultimate constitution of the human mind, and is under no necessity of pushing

the analysis of mental phenomenon to that extreme limit which alone ought

to satisfy a metaphysician.

              I premise, then, that when in the course of this inquiry I speak of the

cause of any phenomenon, I do not mean a cause which is not itself a

phenomenon; I make no research into the ultimate or ontological cause of any

thing. To adopt a distinction familiar in the writings of the Scotch

metaphysicians, and especially of Reid, the causes with which I concern

myself are not efficient , but physical causes. They are causes in that sense

alone, in which one physical fact is said to be the cause of another. Of the

efficient causes of phenomena, or whether any such causes exist at all, I am

not called upon to give an opinion. The notion of causation is deemed, by the

schools of metaphysics most in vogue at the present moment, to imply a

mysterious and most powerful tie, such as can not, or at least does not, exist

between any physical fact and that other physical fact on which it is

invariably consequent, and which is popularly termed its cause: and thence is

deduced the supposed necessity of ascending higher, into the essences and

inherent constitution of things, to find the true cause, the cause which is not

only followed by, but actually produces, the effect. No such necessity exists

for the purposes of the present inquiry, nor will any such doctrine be found in

the following pages. The only notion of a cause, which the theory of

induction requires, is such a notion as can be gained from experience. The

Law of Causation, the recognition of which is the main pillar of inductive

science, is but the familiar truth, that invariability of succession is found by

observation to obtain between every fact in nature and some other fact which

has preceded it; independently of all considerations respecting the ultimate

mode of production of phenomena, and of every other question regarding the

nature of “Things in themselves.”

              Between the phenomena, then, which exist at any instant, and the

phenomena which exist at the succeeding instant, there is an invariable orderof succession; and, as we said in speaking of the general uniformity of the

course of nature, this web is composed of separate fibres; this collective order

is made up of particular sequences, obtaining invariably among the separate

parts. To certain facts, certain facts always do, and, as we believe, will

continue to, succeed. The invariable antecedent is termed the cause; the

invariable consequent, the effect. And the universality of the law of causation

consists in this, that every consequent is connected in this manner with some

particular antecedent, or set of antecedents. Let the fact be what it may, if it

has begun to exist, it was preceded by some fact or facts, with which it is

invariably connected. For every event there exists some combination of

objects or events, some given concurrence of circumstances, positive and

negative, the occurrence of which is always followed by that phenomenon.

We may not have found out what this concurrence of circumstances may be;

but we never doubt that there is such a one, and that it never occurs without

having the phenomenon in question as its effect or consequence. On the

universality of this truth depends the possibility of reducing the inductive

process to rules. The undoubted assurance we have that there is a law to be

found if we only knew how to find it, will be seen presently to be the source

from which the canons of the Inductive Logic derive their validity.

              § 3. It is seldom, if ever, between a consequent and a single

antecedent, that this invariable sequence subsists. It is usually between a

consequent and the sum of several antecedents; the concurrence of all of them

being requisite to produce, that is, to be certain of being followed by, the

consequent. In such cases it is very common to single out one only of the

antecedents under the denomination of Cause, calling the others merely

Conditions. Thus, if a person eats of a particular dish, and dies in

consequence, that is, would not have died if he had not eaten of it, people

would be apt to say that eating of that dish was the cause of his death. There

needs not, however, be any invariable connection between eating of the dish

and death; but there certainly is, among the circumstances which took place,

some combination or other on which death is invariably consequent: as, for

instance, the act of eating of the dish, combined with a particular bodily

constitution, a particular state of present health, and perhaps even a certain

state of the atmosphere; the whole of which circumstances perhaps

constituted in this particular case the conditions of the phenomenon, or, in

other words, the set of antecedents which determined it, and but for which it

would not have happened. The real Cause, is the whole of these antecedents;and we have, philosophically speaking, no right to give the name of cause to

one of them, exclusively of the others. What, in the case we have supposed,

disguises the incorrectness of the expression, is this: that the various

conditions, except the single one of eating the food, were not events (that is,

instantaneous changes, or successions of instantaneous changes) but states ,

possessing more or less of permanency; and might therefore have preceded

the effect by an indefinite length of duration, for want of the event which was

requisite to complete the required concurrence of conditions: while as soon as

that event, eating the food, occurs, no other cause is waited for, but the effect

begins immediately to take place: and hence the appearance is presented of a

more immediate and close connection between the effect and that one

antecedent, than between the effect and the remaining conditions. But though

we may think proper to give the name of cause to that one condition, the

fulfillment of which completes the tale, and brings about the effect without

further delay; this condition has really no closer relation to the effect than any

of the other conditions has. All the conditions were equally indispensable to

the production of the consequent; and the statement of the cause is

incomplete, unless in some shape or other we introduce them all. A man takes

mercury, goes out-of-doors, and catches cold. We say, perhaps, that the cause

of his taking cold was exposure to the air. It is clear, however, that his having

taken mercury may have been a necessary condition of his catching cold; and

though it might consist with usage to say that the cause of his attack was

exposure to the air, to be accurate we ought to say that the cause was

exposure to the air while under the effect of mercury.

              If we do not, when aiming at accuracy, enumerate all the conditions,

it is only because some of them will in most cases be understood without

being expressed, or because for the purpose in view they may without

detriment be overlooked. For example, when we say, the cause of a man’s

death was that his foot slipped in climbing a ladder, we omit as a thing

unnecessary to be stated the circumstance of his weight, though quite as

indispensable a condition of the effect which took place. When we say that

the assent of the crown to a bill makes it law, we mean that the assent, being

never given until all the other conditions are fulfilled, makes up the sum of

the conditions, though no one now regards it as the principal one. When the

decision of a legislative assembly has been determined by the casting vote of

the chairman, we sometimes say that this one person was the cause of all the

effects which resulted from the enactment. Yet we do not really suppose thathis single vote contributed more to the result than that of any other person

who voted in the affirmative; but, for the purpose we have in view, which is

to insist on his individual responsibility, the part which any other person had

in the transaction is not material.

              In all these instances the fact which was dignified with the name of

cause, was the one condition which came last into existence. But it must not

be supposed that in the employment of the term this or any other rule is

always adhered to. Nothing can better show the absence of any scientific

ground for the distinction between the cause of a phenomenon and its

conditions, than the capricious manner in which we select from among the

conditions that which we choose to denominate the cause. However

numerous the conditions may be, there is hardly any of them which may not,

according to the purpose of our immediate discourse, obtain that nominal pre-

eminence. This will be seen by analyzing the conditions of some one familiar

phenomenon. For example, a stone thrown into water falls to the bottom.

What are the conditions of this event? In the first place there must be a stone,

and water, and the stone must be thrown into the water; but these

suppositions forming part of the enunciation of the phenomenon itself, to

include them also among the conditions would be a vicious tautology; and

this class of conditions, therefore, have never received the name of cause

from any but the Aristotelians, by whom they were called the material cause,

causa materialis . The next condition is, there must be an earth: and

accordingly it is often said, that the fall of a stone is caused by the earth; or

by a power or property of the earth, or a force exerted by the earth, all of

which are merely roundabout ways of saying that it is caused by the earth; or,

lastly, the earth’s attraction; which also is only a technical mode of saying

that the earth causes the motion, with the additional particularity that the

motion is toward the earth, which is not a character of the cause, but of the

effect. Let us now pass to another condition. It is not enough that the earth

should exist; the body must be within that distance from it, in which the

earth’s attraction preponderates over that of any other body. Accordingly we

may say, and the expression would be confessedly correct, that the cause of

the stone’s falling is its being within the sphere of the earth’s attraction. We

proceed to a further condition. The stone is immersed in water: it is therefore

a condition of its reaching the ground, that its specific gravity exceed that of

the surrounding fluid, or in other words that it surpass in weight an equal

volume of water. Accordingly any one would be acknowledged to speakcorrectly who said, that the cause of the stone’s going to the bottom is its

exceeding in specific gravity the fluid in which it is immersed.

              Thus we see that each and every condition of the phenomenon may

be taken in its turn, and, with equal propriety in common parlance, but with

equal impropriety in scientific discourse, may be spoken of as if it were the

entire cause. And in practice, that particular condition is usually styled the

cause, whose share in the matter is superficially the most conspicuous, or

whose requisiteness to the production of the effect we happen to be insisting

on at the moment. So great is the force of this last consideration, that it

sometimes induces us to give the name of cause even to one of the negative

conditions. We say, for example, The army was surprised because the

sentinel was off his post. But since the sentinel’s absence was not what

created the enemy, or put the soldiers asleep, how did it cause them to be

surprised? All that is really meant is, that the event would not have happened

if he had been at his duty. His being off his post was no producing cause, but

the mere absence of a preventing cause: it was simply equivalent to his non-

existence. From nothing, from a mere negation, no consequences can

proceed. All effects are connected, by the law of causation, with some set of

positive conditions; negative ones, it is true, being almost always required in

addition. In other words, every fact or phenomenon which has a beginning,

invariably arises when some certain combination of positive facts exists,

provided certain other positive facts do not exist.

              There is, no doubt, a tendency (which our first example, that of death

from taking a particular food, sufficiently illustrates) to associate the idea of

causation with the proximate antecedent event , rather than with any of the

antecedent states , or permanent facts, which may happen also to be

conditions of the phenomenon; the reason being that the event not only exists,

but begins to exist immediately previous; while the other conditions may

have pre-existed for an indefinite time. And this tendency shows itself very

visibly in the different logical fictions which are resorted to, even by men of

science, to avoid the necessity of giving the name of cause to any thing which

had existed for an indeterminate length of time before the effect. Thus, rather

than say that the earth causes the fall of bodies, they ascribe it to a force

exerted by the earth, or an attraction by the earth, abstractions which they can

represent to themselves as exhausted by each effort, and therefore

constituting at each successive instant a fresh fact, simultaneous with, or onlyimmediately preceding, the effect. Inasmuch as the coming of the

circumstance which completes the assemblage of conditions, is a change or

event, it thence happens that an event is always the antecedent in closest

apparent proximity to the consequent: and this may account for the illusion

which disposes us to look upon the proximate event as standing more

peculiarly in the position of a cause than any of the antecedent states. But

even this peculiarity, of being in closer proximity to the effect than any other

of its conditions, is, as we have already seen, far from being necessary to the

common notion of a cause; with which notion, on the contrary, any one of the

conditions, either positive or negative, is found, on occasion, completely to
      114
accord.

              The cause, then, philosophically speaking, is the sum total of the

conditions, positive and negative taken together; the whole of the

contingencies of every description, which being realized, the consequent

invariably follows. The negative conditions, however, of any phenomenon, a

special enumeration of which would generally be very prolix, may be all

summed up under one head, namely, the absence of preventing or

counteracting causes. The convenience of this mode of expression is mainly

grounded on the fact, that the effects of any cause in counteracting another

cause may in most cases be, with strict scientific exactness, regarded as a

mere extension of its own proper and separate effects. If gravity retards the

upward motion of a projectile, and deflects it into a parabolic trajectory, it

produces, in so doing, the very same kind of effect, and even (as

mathematicians know) the same quantity of effect, as it does in its ordinary

operation of causing the fall of bodies when simply deprived of their support.

If an alkaline solution mixed with an acid destroys its sourness, and prevents

it from reddening vegetable blues, it is because the specific effect of the alkali

is to combine with the acid, and form a compound with totally different

qualities. This property, which causes of all descriptions possess, of

preventing the effects of other causes by virtue (for the most part) of the same
                                                        115
laws according to which they produce their own, enables us, by

establishing the general axiom that all causes are liable to be counteracted in

their effects by one another, to dispense with the consideration of negative

conditions entirely, and limit the notion of cause to the assemblage of the

positive conditions of the phenomenon: one negative condition invariably

understood, and the same in all instances (namely, the absence of

counteracting causes) being sufficient, along with the sum of the positiveconditions, to make up the whole set of circumstances on which the

phenomenon is dependent.

              § 4. Among the positive conditions, as we have seen that there are

some to which, in common parlance, the term cause is more readily and

frequently awarded, so there are others to which it is, in ordinary

circumstances, refused. In most cases of causation a distinction is commonly

drawn between something which acts, and some other thing which is acted

upon; between an agent and a patient . Both of these, it would be universally

allowed, are conditions of the phenomenon; but it would be thought absurd to

call the latter the cause, that title being reserved for the former. The

distinction, however, vanishes on examination, or rather is found to be only

verbal; arising from an incident of mere expression, namely, that the object

said to be acted upon, and which is considered as the scene in which the

effect takes place, is commonly included in the phrase by which the effect is

spoken of, so that if it were also reckoned as part of the cause, the seeming

incongruity would arise of its being supposed to cause itself. In the instance

which we have already had, of falling bodies, the question was thus put:

What is the cause which makes a stone fall? and if the answer had been “the

stone itself,” the expression would have been in apparent contradiction to the

meaning of the word cause. The stone, therefore, is conceived as the patient,

and the earth (or, according to the common and most unphilosophical

practice, an occult quality of the earth) is represented as the agent or cause.

But that there is nothing fundamental in the distinction may be seen from

this, that it is quite possible to conceive the stone as causing its own fall,

provided the language employed be such as to save the mere verbal

incongruity. We might say that the stone moves toward the earth by the

properties of the matter composing it; and according to this mode of

presenting the phenomenon, the stone itself might without impropriety be

called the agent; though, to save the established doctrine of the inactivity of

matter, men usually prefer here also to ascribe the effect to an occult quality,

and say that the cause is not the stone itself, but the weight or gravitation of

the stone.

              Those who have contended for a radical distinction between agent

and patient, have generally conceived the agent as that which causes some

state of, or some change in the state of, another object which is called the

patient. But a little reflection will show that the license we assume ofspeaking of phenomena as states of the various objects which take part in

them (an artifice of which so much use has been made by some philosophers,

Brown in particular, for the apparent explanation of phenomena), is simply a

sort of logical fiction, useful sometimes as one among several modes of

expression, but which should never be supposed to be the enunciation of a

scientific truth. Even those attributes of an object which might seem with

greatest propriety to be called states of the object itself, its sensible qualities,

its color, hardness, shape, and the like, are in reality (as no one has pointed

out more clearly than Brown himself) phenomena of causation, in which the

substance is distinctly the agent, or producing cause, the patient being our

own organs, and those of other sentient beings. What we call states of

objects, are always sequences into which the objects enter, generally as

antecedents or causes; and things are never more active than in the

production of those phenomena in which they are said to be acted upon.

Thus, in the example of a stone falling to the earth, according to the theory of

gravitation the stone is as much an agent as the earth, which not only attracts,

but is itself attracted by, the stone. In the case of a sensation produced in our

organs, the laws of our organization, and even those of our minds, are as

directly operative in determining the effect produced, as the laws of the

outward object. Though we call prussic acid the agent of a person’s death, the

whole of the vital and organic properties of the patient are as actively

instrumental as the poison, in the chain of effects which so rapidly terminates

his sentient existence. In the process of education, we may call the teacher the

agent, and the scholar only the material acted upon; yet in truth all the facts

which pre-existed in the scholar’s mind exert either co-operating or

counteracting agencies in relation to the teacher’s efforts. It is not light alone

which is the agent in vision, but light coupled with the active properties of the

eye and brain, and with those of the visible object. The distinction between

agent and patient is merely verbal: patients are always agents; in a great

proportion, indeed, of all natural phenomena, they are so to such a degree as

to react forcibly on the causes which acted upon them: and even when this is

not the case, they contribute, in the same manner as any of the other

conditions, to the production of the effect of which they are vulgarly treated

as the mere theatre. All the positive conditions of a phenomenon are alike

agents, alike active; and in any expression of the cause which professes to be

complete, none of them can with reason be excluded, except such as have

already been implied in the words used for describing the effect; nor byincluding even these would there be incurred any but a merely verbal

impropriety.

              § 5. There is a case of causation which calls for separate notice, as it

possesses a peculiar feature, and presents a greater degree of complexity than

the common case. It often happens that the effect, or one of the effects, of a

cause, is, not to produce of itself a certain phenomenon, but to fit something

else for producing it. In other words, there is a case of causation in which the

effect is to invest an object with a certain property. When sulphur, charcoal,

and nitre are put together in certain proportions and in a certain manner, the

effect is, not an explosion, but that the mixture acquires a property by which,

in given circumstances, it will explode. The various causes, natural and

artificial, which educate the human body or the human mind, have for their

principal effect, not to make the body or mind immediately do any thing, but

to endow it with certain properties — in other words, to give assurance that in

given circumstances certain results will take place in it, or as consequences of

it. Physiological agencies often have for the chief part of their operation to

predispose the constitution to some mode of action. To take a simpler

instance than all these: putting a coat of white paint upon a wall does not

merely produce in those who see it done, the sensation of white; it confers on

the wall the permanent property of giving that kind of sensation. Regarded in

reference to the sensation, the putting on of the paint is a condition of a

condition; it is a condition of the wall’s causing that particular fact. The wall

may have been painted years ago, but it has acquired a property which has

lasted till now, and will last longer; the antecedent condition necessary to

enable the wall to become in its turn a condition, has been fulfilled once for

all. In a case like this, where the immediate consequent in the sequence is a

property produced in an object, no one now supposes the property to be a

substantive entity “inherent” in the object. What has been produced is what,

in other language, may be called a state of preparation in an object for

producing an effect. The ingredients of the gunpowder have been brought

into a state of preparation for exploding as soon as the other conditions of an

explosion shall have occurred. In the case of the gunpowder, this state of

preparation consists in a certain collocation of its particles relatively to one

another. In the example of the wall, it consists in a new collocation of two

things relatively to each other — the wall and the paint. In the example of the

molding influences on the human mind, its being a collocation at all is only

conjectural; for, even on the materialistic hypothesis, it would remain to beproved that the increased facility with which the brain sums up a column of

figures when it has been long trained to calculation, is the result of a

permanent new arrangement of some of its material particles. We must,

therefore, content ourselves with what we know, and must include among the

effects of causes, the capacities given to objects of being causes of other

effects. This capacity is not a real thing existing in the objects; it is but a

name for our conviction that they will act in a particular manner when certain

new circumstances arise. We may invest this assurance of future events with

a fictitious objective existence, by calling it a state of the object. But unless

the state consists, as in the case of the gunpowder it does, in a collocation of

particles, it expresses no present fact; it is but the contingent future fact

brought back under another name.

              It may be thought that this form of causation requires us to admit an

exception to the doctrine that the conditions of a phenomenon — the

antecedents required for calling it into existence — must all be found among

the facts immediately, not remotely, preceding its commencement. But what

we have arrived at is not a correction, it is only an explanation, of that

doctrine. In the enumeration of the conditions required for the occurrence of

any phenomenon, it always has to be included that objects must be present,

possessed of given properties. It is a condition of the phenomenon explosion

that an object should be present, of one or other of certain kinds, which for

that reason are called explosive. The presence of one of these objects is a

condition immediately precedent to the explosion. The condition which is not

immediately precedent is the cause which produced, not the explosion, but

the explosive property. The conditions of the explosion itself were all present

immediately before it took place, and the general law, therefore, remains

intact.

              § 6. It now remains to advert to a distinction which is of first-rate

importance both for clearing up the notion of cause, and for obviating a very

specious objection often made against the view which we have taken of the

subject.

              When we define the cause of any thing (in the only sense in which

the present inquiry has any concern with causes) to be “the antecedent which

it invariably follows,” we do not use this phrase as exactly synonymous with

“the antecedent which it invariably has followed in our past experience.”

Such a mode of conceiving causation would be liable to the objection veryplausibly urged by Dr. Reid, namely, that according to this doctrine night

must be the cause of day, and day the cause of night; since these phenomena

have invariably succeeded one another from the beginning of the world. But

it is necessary to our using the word cause, that we should believe not only

that the antecedent always has been followed by the consequent, but that, as
                                              116
long as the present constitution of things endures, it always will be so. And

this would not be true of day and night. We do not believe that night will be

followed by day under all imaginable circumstances, but only that it will be

so provided the sun rises above the horizon. If the sun ceased to rise, which,

for aught we know, may be perfectly compatible with the general laws of

matter, night would be, or might be, eternal. On the other hand, if the sun is

above the horizon, his light not extinct, and no opaque body between us and

him, we believe firmly that unless a change takes place in the properties of

matter, this combination of antecedents will be followed by the consequent,

day; that if the combination of antecedents could be indefinitely prolonged, it

would be always day; and that if the same combination had always existed, it

would always have been day, quite independently of night as a previous

condition. Therefore is it that we do not call night the cause, nor even a

condition, of day. The existence of the sun (or some such luminous body),
                                                            117
and there being no opaque medium in a straight line between that body and

the part of the earth where we are situated, are the sole conditions; and the

union of these, without the addition of any superfluous circumstance,

constitutes the cause. This is what writers mean when they say that the notion

of cause involves the idea of necessity. If there be any meaning which

confessedly belongs to the term necessity, it is unconditionalness . That

which is necessary, that which must be, means that which will be, whatever

supposition we may make in regard to all other things. The succession of day

and night evidently is not necessary in this sense. It is conditional on the

occurrence of other antecedents. That which will be followed by a given

consequent when, and only when, some third circumstance also exists, is not

the cause, even though no case should ever have occurred in which the

phenomenon took place without it.

              Invariable sequence, therefore, is not synonymous with causation,

unless the sequence, besides being invariable, is unconditional. There are

sequences, as uniform in past experience as any others whatever, which yet

we do not regard as cases of causation, but as conjunctions in some sort

accidental. Such, to an accurate thinker, is that of day and night. The onemight have existed for any length of time, and the other not have followed the

sooner for its existence; it follows only if certain other antecedents exist; and

where those antecedents existed, it would follow in any case. No one,

probably, ever called night the cause of day; mankind must so soon have

arrived at the very obvious generalization, that the state of general

illumination which we call day would follow from the presence of a

sufficiently luminous body, whether darkness had preceded or not.

              We may define, therefore, the cause of a phenomenon, to be the

antecedent, or the concurrence of antecedents, on which it is invariably and

unconditionally consequent. Or if we adopt the convenient modification of

the meaning of the word cause, which confines it to the assemblage of

positive conditions without the negative, then instead of “unconditionally,”

we must say, “subject to no other than negative conditions.”

              To some it may appear, that the sequence between night and day

being invariable in our experience, we have as much ground in this case as

experience can give in any case, for recognizing the two phenomena as cause

and effect; and that to say that more is necessary — to require a belief that the

succession is unconditional, or, in other words, that it would be invariable

under all changes of circumstances, is to acknowledge in causation an

element of belief not derived from experience. The answer to this is, that it is

experience itself which teaches us that one uniformity of sequence is

conditional and another unconditional. When we judge that the succession of

night and day is a derivative sequence, depending on something else, we

proceed on grounds of experience. It is the evidence of experience which

convinces us that day could equally exist without being followed by night,

and that night could equally exist without being followed by day. To say that
                                                                                  118
these beliefs are “not generated by our mere observation of sequence,” is to

forget that twice in every twenty-four hours, when the sky is clear, we have

an experimentum crucis that the cause of day is the sun. We have an

experimental knowledge of the sun which justifies us on experimental

grounds in concluding, that if the sun were always above the horizon there

would be day, though there had been no night, and that if the sun were always

below the horizon there would be night, though there had been no day. We

thus know from experience that the succession of night and day is not

unconditional. Let me add, that the antecedent which is only conditionally

invariable, is not the invariable antecedent. Though a fact may, in experience,have always been followed by another fact, yet if the remainder of our

experience teaches us that it might not always be so followed, or if the

experience itself is such as leaves room for a possibility that the known cases

may not correctly represent all possible cases, the hitherto invariable

antecedent is not accounted the cause; but why? Because we are not sure that

it is the invariable antecedent.

              Such cases of sequence as that of day and night not only do not

contradict the doctrine which resolves causation into invariable sequence, but

are necessarily implied in that doctrine. It is evident, that from a limited

number of unconditional sequences, there will result a much greater number

of conditional ones. Certain causes being given, that is, certain antecedents

which are unconditionally followed by certain consequents; the mere co-

existence of these causes will give rise to an unlimited number of additional

uniformities. If two causes exist together, the effects of both will exist

together; and if many causes co-exist, these causes (by what we shall term

hereafter the intermixture of their laws) will give rise to new effects,

accompanying or succeeding one another in some particular order, which

order will be invariable while the causes continue to co-exist, but no longer.

The motion of the earth in a given orbit round the sun, is a series of changes

which follow one another as antecedents and consequents, and will continue

to do so while the sun’s attraction, and the force with which the earth tends to

advance in a direct line through space, continue to co-exist in the same

quantities as at present. But vary either of these causes, and this particular

succession of motions would cease to take place. The series of the earth’s

motions, therefore, though a case of sequence invariable within the limits of

human experience, is not a case of causation. It is not unconditional.

              This distinction between the relations of succession which, so far as

we know, are unconditional, and those relations, whether of succession or of

co-existence, which, like the earth’s motions, or the succession of day and

night, depend on the existence or on the co-existence of other antecedent

facts — corresponds to the great division which Dr. Whewell and other

writers have made of the field of science, into the investigation of what they

term the Laws of Phenomena, and the investigation of causes; a phraseology,

as I conceive, not philosophically sustainable, inasmuch as the ascertainment

of causes, such causes as the human faculties can ascertain, namely, causes

which are themselves phenomena, is, therefore, merely the ascertainment ofother and more universal Laws of Phenomena. And let me here observe, that

Dr. Whewell, and in some degree even Sir John Herschel, seem to have

misunderstood the meaning of those writers who, like M. Comté, limit the

sphere of scientific investigation to Laws of Phenomena, and speak of the

inquiry into causes as vain and futile. The causes which M. Comté designates

as inaccessible, are efficient causes. The investigation of physical, as opposed

to efficient, causes (including the study of all the active forces in Nature,

considered as facts of observation) is as important a part of M. Comté’s

conception of science as of Dr. Whewell’s. His objection to the word cause is

a mere matter of nomenclature, in which, as a matter of nomenclature, I

consider him to be entirely wrong. “Those,” it is justly remarked by Mr.
      119
Bailey, “who, like M. Comté, object to designate events as causes, are

objecting without any real ground to a mere but extremely convenient

generalization, to a very useful common name, the employment of which

involves, or needs involve, no particular theory.” To which it may be added,

that by rejecting this form of expression, M. Comté leaves himself without

any term for marking a distinction which, however incorrectly expressed, is

not only real, but is one of the fundamental distinctions in science; indeed it

is on this alone, as we shall hereafter find, that the possibility rests of framing

a rigorous Canon of Induction. And as things left without a name are apt to

be forgotten, a Canon of that description is not one of the many benefits

which the philosophy of Induction has received from M. Comté’s great

powers.

              § 7. Does a cause always stand with its effect in the relation of

antecedent and consequent? Do we not often say of two simultaneous facts

that they are cause and effect — as when we say that fire is the cause of

warmth, the sun and moisture the cause of vegetation, and the like? Since a

cause does not necessarily perish because its effect has been produced, the

two things do very generally co-exist; and there are some appearances, and

some common expressions, seeming to imply not only that causes may, but

that they must, be contemporaneous with their effects. Cessante causâ cessat

et effectus , has been a dogma of the schools: the necessity for the continued

existence of the cause in order to the continuance of the effect, seems to have

been once a generally received doctrine. Kepler’s numerous attempts to

account for the motions of the heavenly bodies on mechanical principles,

were rendered abortive by his always supposing that the agency which set

those bodies in motion must continue to operate in order to keep up themotion which it at first produced. Yet there were at all times many familiar

instances of the continuance of effects, long after their causes had ceased. A

coup de soleil gives a person brain-fever: will the fever go off as soon as he is

moved out of the sunshine? A sword is run through his body: must the sword

remain in his body in order that he may continue dead? A plowshare once

made, remains a plowshare, without any continuance of heating and

hammering, and even after the man who heated and hammered it has been

gathered to his fathers. On the other hand, the pressure which forces up the

mercury in an exhausted tube must be continued in order to sustain it in the

tube. This (it may be replied) is because another force is acting without

intermission, the force of gravity, which would restore it to its level, unless

counterpoised by a force equally constant. But again: a tight bandage causes

pain, which pain will sometimes go off as soon as the bandage is removed.

The illumination which the sun diffuses over the earth ceases when the sun

goes down.

              There is, therefore, a distinction to be drawn. The conditions which

are necessary for the first production of a phenomenon, are occasionally also

necessary for its continuance; though more commonly its continuance

requires no condition except negative ones. Most things, once produced,

continue as they are, until something changes or destroys them; but some

require the permanent presence of the agencies which produced them at first.

These may, if we please, be considered as instantaneous phenomena,

requiring to be renewed at each instant by the cause by which they were at

first generated. Accordingly, the illumination of any given point of space has

always been looked upon as an instantaneous fact, which perishes and is

perpetually renewed as long as the necessary conditions subsist. If we adopt

this language we avoid the necessity of admitting that the continuance of the

cause is ever required to maintain the effect. We may say, it is not required to

maintain, but to reproduce, the effect, or else to counteract some force

tending to destroy it. And this may be a convenient phraseology. But it is

only a phraseology. The fact remains, that in some cases (though those are a

minority) the continuance of the conditions which produced an effect is

necessary to the continuance of the effect.

              As to the ulterior question, whether it is strictly necessary that the

cause, or assemblage of conditions, should precede, by ever so short an

instant, the production of the effect (a question raised and argued with much                                                                      120
ingenuity by Sir John Herschel in an Essay already quoted), the inquiry is

of no consequence for our present purpose. There certainly are cases in which

the effect follows without any interval perceptible by our faculties; and when

there is an interval, we can not tell by how many intermediate links

imperceptible to us that interval may really be filled up. But even granting

that an effect may commence simultaneously with its cause, the view I have

taken of causation is in no way practically affected. Whether the cause and its

effect be necessarily successive or not, the beginning of a phenomenon is

what implies a cause, and causation is the law of the succession of

phenomena. If these axioms be granted, we can afford, though I see no

necessity for doing so, to drop the words antecedent and consequent as

applied to cause and effect. I have no objection to define a cause, the

assemblage of phenomena, which occurring, some other phenomenon

invariably commences, or has its origin. Whether the effect coincides in point

of time with, or immediately follows, the hindmost of its conditions, is

immaterial. At all events, it does not precede it; and when we are in doubt,

between two co-existent phenomena, which is cause and which effect, we

rightly deem the question solved if we can ascertain which of them preceded

the other.

              § 8. It continually happens that several different phenomena, which

are not in the slightest degree dependent or conditional on one another, are

found all to depend, as the phrase is, on one and the same agent; in other

words, one and the same phenomenon is seen to be followed by several sorts

of effects quite heterogeneous, but which go on simultaneously one with

another; provided, of course, that all other conditions requisite for each of

them also exist. Thus, the sun produces the celestial motions; it produces

daylight, and it produces heat. The earth causes the fall of heavy bodies, and

it also, in its capacity of a great magnet, causes the phenomena of the

magnetic needle. A crystal of galena causes the sensations of hardness, of

weight, of cubical form, of gray color, and many others between which we

can trace no interdependence. The purpose to which the phraseology of

Properties and Powers is specially adapted, is the expression of this sort of

cases. When the same phenomenon is followed (either subject or not to the

presence of other conditions) by effects of different and dissimilar orders, it is

usual to say that each different sort of effect is produced by a different

property of the cause. Thus we distinguish the attractive or gravitative

property of the earth, and its magnetic property: the gravitative, luminiferous,and calorific properties of the sun: the color, shape, weight, and hardness of a

crystal. These are mere phrases, which explain nothing, and add nothing to

our knowledge of the subject; but, considered as abstract names denoting the

connection between the different effects produced and the object which

produces them, they are a very powerful instrument of abridgment, and of

that acceleration of the process of thought which abridgment accomplishes.

              This class of considerations leads to a conception which we shall

find to be of great importance, that of a Permanent Cause, or original natural

agent. There exist in nature a number of permanent causes, which have

subsisted ever since the human race has been in existence, and for an

indefinite and probably an enormous length of time previous. The sun, the

earth, and planets, with their various constituents, air, water, and other

distinguishable substances, whether simple or compound, of which nature is

made up, are such Permanent Causes. These have existed, and the effects or

consequences which they were fitted to produce have taken place (as often as

the other conditions of the production met), from the very beginning of our

experience. But we can give no account of the origin of the Permanent

Causes themselves. Why these particular natural agents existed originally and

no others, or why they are commingled in such and such proportions, and

distributed in such and such a manner throughout space, is a question we can

not answer. More than this: we can discover nothing regular in the

distribution itself; we can reduce it to no uniformity, to no law. There are no

means by which, from the distribution of these causes or agents in one part of

space, we could conjecture whether a similar distribution prevails in another.

The co-existence, therefore, of Primeval Causes ranks, to us, among merely

casual concurrences: and all those sequences or co-existences among the

effects of several such causes, which, though invariable while those causes

co-exist, would, if the co-existence terminated, terminate along with it, we do

not class as cases of causation, or laws of nature: we can only calculate on

finding these sequences or co-existences where we know by direct evidence,

that the natural agents on the properties of which they ultimately depend, are

distributed in the requisite manner. These Permanent Causes are not always

objects; they are sometimes events, that is to say, periodical cycles of events,

that being the only mode in which events can possess the property of

permanence. Not only, for instance, is the earth itself a permanent cause, or

primitive natural agent, but the earth’s rotation is so too: it is a cause which

has produced, from the earliest period (by the aid of other necessaryconditions), the succession of day and night, the ebb and flow of the sea, and

many other effects, while, as we can assign no cause (except conjecturally)

for the rotation itself, it is entitled to be ranked as a primeval cause. It is,

however, only the origin of the rotation which is mysterious to us: once

begun, its continuance is accounted for by the first law of motion (that of the

permanence of rectilinear motion once impressed) combined with the

gravitation of the parts of the earth toward one another.

              All phenomena without exception which begin to exist, that is, all

except the primeval causes, are effects either immediate or remote of those

primitive facts, or of some combination of them. There is no Thing produced,

no event happening, in the known universe, which is not connected by a

uniformity, or invariable sequence, with some one or more of the phenomena

which preceded it; insomuch that it will happen again as often as those

phenomena occur again, and as no other phenomenon having the character of

a counteracting cause shall co-exist. These antecedent phenomena, again,

were connected in a similar manner with some that preceded them; and so on,

until we reach, as the ultimate step attainable by us, either the properties of

some one primeval cause, or the conjunction of several. The whole of the

phenomena of nature were therefore the necessary, or, in other words, the

unconditional, consequences of some former collocation of the Permanent

Causes.

              The state of the whole universe at any instant, we believe to be the

consequence of its state at the previous instant; insomuch that one who knew

all the agents which exist at the present moment, their collocation in space,

and all their properties, in other words, the laws of their agency, could predict

the whole subsequent history of the universe, at least unless some new
                                                                                      121
volition of a power capable of controlling the universe should supervene.

And if any particular state of the entire universe could ever recur a second

time, all subsequent states would return too, and history would, like a

circulating decimal of many figures, periodically repeat itself:

              Jam redit et virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna....

Alter erit tum Tiphys, et altera quæ vehat Argo

Delectos heroas; erunt quoque altera bella,

Atque iterum ad Trojam magnus mittetur Achilles.

              And though things do not really revolve in this eternal round, thewhole series of events in the history of the universe, past and future, is not the

less capable, in its own nature, of being constructed a priori by any one

whom we can suppose acquainted with the original distribution of all natural

agents, and with the whole of their properties, that is, the laws of succession

existing between them and their effects: saving the far more than human

powers of combination and calculation which would be required, even in one

possessing the data, for the actual performance of the task.

              § 9. Since every thing which occurs is determined by laws of

causation and collocations of the original causes, it follows that the co-

existences which are observable among effects can not be themselves the

subject of any similar set of laws, distinct from laws of causation.

Uniformities there are, as well of co-existence as of succession, among

effects; but these must in all cases be a mere result either of the identity or of

the co-existence of their causes: if the causes did not co-exist, neither could

the effects. And these causes being also effects of prior causes, and these of

others, until we reach the primeval causes, it follows that (except in the case

of effects which can be traced immediately or remotely to one and the same

cause) the co-existences of phenomena can in no case be universal, unless the

co-existences of the primeval causes to which the effects are ultimately

traceable can be reduced to a universal law: but we have seen that they can

not. There are, accordingly, no original and independent, in other words no

unconditional, uniformities of co-existence, between effects of different

causes; if they co-exist, it is only because the causes have casually co-existed.

The only independent and unconditional co-existences which are sufficiently

invariable to have any claim to the character of laws, are between different

and mutually independent effects of the same cause; in other words, between

different properties of the same natural agent. This portion of the Laws of

Nature will be treated of in the latter part of the present Book, under the name

of the Specific Properties of Kinds.

              § 10. Since the first publication of the present treatise, the sciences

of physical nature have made a great advance in generalization, through the

doctrine known as the Conservation or Persistence of Force. This imposing

edifice of theory, the building and laying out of which has for some time been

the principal occupation of the most systematic minds among physical

inquirers, consists of two stages: one, of ascertained fact, the other containing

a large element of hypothesis.              To begin with the first. It is proved by numerous facts, both natural

and of artificial production, that agencies which had been regarded as distinct

and independent sources of force — heat, electricity, chemical action,

nervous and muscular action, momentum of moving bodies — are

interchangeable, in definite and fixed quantities, with one another. It had long

been known that these dissimilar phenomena had the power, under certain

conditions, of producing one another: what is new in the theory is a more

accurate estimation of what this production consists in. What happens is, that

the whole or part of the one kind of phenomena disappears, and is replaced

by phenomena of one of the other descriptions, and that there is an

equivalence in quantity between the phenomena that have disappeared and

those which have been produced, insomuch that if the process be reversed,

the very same quantity which had disappeared will re-appear, without

increase or diminution. Thus the amount of heat which will raise the

temperature of a pound of water one degree of the thermometer, will, if

expended, say in the expansion of steam, lift a weight of 772 pounds one

foot, or a weight of one pound 772 feet: and the same exact quantity of heat

can, by certain means, be recovered, through the expenditure of exactly that

amount of mechanical motion.

              The establishment of this comprehensive law has led to a change in

the language in which the scientific world had been accustomed to speak of

what are called the Forces of nature. Before this correlation between

phenomena most unlike one another had been ascertained, their unlikeness

had caused them to be referred to so many distinct forces. Now that they are

known to be convertible into one another without loss, they are spoken of as

all of them results of one and the same force, manifesting itself in different

modes. This force (it is said) can only produce a limited and definite quantity

of effect, but always does produce that definite quantity; and produces it,

according to circumstances, in one or another of the forms, or divides it

among several, but so as (according to a scale of numerical equivalents

established by experiment) always to make up the same sum; and no one of

the manifestations can be produced, save by the disappearance of the

equivalent quantity of another, which in its turn, in appropriate

circumstances, will re-appear undiminished. This mutual interchangeability

of the forces of nature, according to fixed numerical equivalents, is the part of

the new doctrine which rests on irrefragable fact.              To make the statement true, however, it is necessary to add, that an

indefinite and perhaps immense interval of time may elapse between the

disappearance of the force in one form and its re-appearance in another. A

stone thrown up into the air with a given force, and falling back immediately,

will, by the time it reaches the earth, recover the exact amount of mechanical

momentum which was expended in throwing it up, deduction being made of a

small portion of motion which has been communicated to the air. But if the

stone has lodged on a height, it may not fall back for years, or perhaps ages,

and until it does, the force expended in raising it is temporarily lost, being

represented only by what, in the language of the new theory, is called

potential energy. The coal imbedded in the earth is considered by the theory

as a vast reservoir of force, which has remained dormant for many geological

periods, and will so remain until, by being burned, it gives out the stored-up

force in the form of heat. Yet it is not supposed that this force is a material

thing which can be confined by bounds, as used to be thought of latent heat

when that important phenomenon was first discovered. What is meant is that

when the coal does at last, by combustion, generate a quantity of heat

(transformable like all other heat into mechanical momentum, and the other

forms of force), this extrication of heat is the re-appearance of a force derived

from the sun’s rays, expended myriads of ages ago in the vegetation of the

organic substances which were the material of the coal.

              Let us now pass to the higher stage of the theory of Conservation of

Force; the part which is no longer a generalization of proved fact, but a

combination of fact and hypothesis. Stated in few words, it is as follows: That

the Conservation of Force is really the Conservation of Motion; that in the

various interchanges between the forms of force, it is always motion that is

transformed into motion. To establish this, it is necessary to assume motions

which are hypothetical. The supposition is, that there are motions which

manifest themselves to our senses only as heat, electricity, etc., being

molecular motions; oscillations, invisible to us, among the minute particles of

bodies; and that these molecular motions are transmutable into molar motions

(motions of masses), and molar motions into molecular. Now there is a real

basis of fact for this supposition: we have positive evidence of the existence

of molecular motion in these manifestations of force. In the case of chemical

action, for instance, the particles separate and form new combinations, often

with a great visible disturbance of the mass. In the case of heat, the evidence

is equally conclusive, since heat expands bodies (that is, causes their particlesto move from one another); and if of sufficient amount, changes their mode

of aggregation from solid to liquid, or from liquid to gaseous. Again, the

mechanical actions which produce heat — friction, and the collision of

bodies — must from the nature of the case produce a shock, that is, an

internal motion of particles, which indeed, we find, is often so violent as to

break them permanently asunder. Such facts are thought to warrant the

inference, that it is not, as was supposed, heat that causes the motion of

particles, but the motion of particles that causes heat; the original cause of

both being the previous motion (whether molar or molecular — collision of

bodies or combustion of fuel) which formed the heating agency. This

inference already contains hypothesis; but at least the supposed cause, the

intestine motion of molecules, is a vera causa . But in order to reduce the

Conservation of Force to Conservation of Motion, it was necessary to

attribute to motion the heat propagated, through apparently empty space,

from the sun. This required the supposition (already made for the explanation

of the laws of light) of a subtle ether pervading space, which, though

impalpable to us, must have the property which constitutes matter, that of

resistance, since waves are propagated through it by an impulse from a given

point. The ether must be supposed (a supposition not required by the theory

of light) to penetrate into the minute interstices of all bodies. The vibratory

motion supposed to be taking place in the heated mass of the sun, is

considered as imparted from that mass to the particles of the surrounding

ether, and through them to the particles of the same ether in the interstices of

terrestrial bodies; and this, too, with a sufficient mechanical force to throw

the particles of those bodies into a state of similar vibration, producing the

expansion of their mass, and the sensation of heat in sentient creatures. All

this is hypothesis, though, of its legitimacy as hypothesis, I do not mean to

express any doubt. It would seem to follow as a consequence from this

theory, that Force may and should be defined, matter in motion. This

definition, however, will not stand, for, as has already been seen, the matter

needs not be in actual motion. It is not necessary to suppose that the motion

afterward manifested, is actually taking place among the molecules of the
                                        122
coal during its sojourn in the earth; certainly not in the stone which is at

rest on the eminence to which it has been raised. The true definition of Force

must be, not motion, but Potentiality of Motion; and what the doctrine, if

established, amounts to, is, not that there is at all times the same quantity of

actual motion in the universe; but that the possibilities of motion are limitedto a definite quantity, which can not be added to, but which can not be

exhausted; and that all actual motion which takes place in Nature is a draft

upon this limited stock. It needs not all of it have ever existed as actual

motion. There is a vast amount of potential motion in the universe in the form

of gravitation, which it would be a great abuse of hypothesis to suppose to

have been stored up by the expenditure of an equal amount of actual motion

in some former state of the universe. Nor does the motion produced by

gravity take place, so far as we know, at the expense of any other motion,

either molar or molecular.

              It is proper to consider whether the adoption of this theory as a

scientific truth, involving as it does a change in the conception hitherto

entertained of the most general physical agencies, requires any modification

in the view I have taken of Causation as a law of nature. As it appears to me,

none whatever. The manifestations which the theory regards as modes of

motion, are as much distinct and separate phenomena when referred to a

single force, as when attributed to several. Whether the phenomenon is called

a transformation of force or the generation of one, it has its own set or sets of

antecedents, with which it is connected by invariable and unconditional

sequence; and that set, or those sets, of antecedents are its cause. The relation

of the Conservation theory to the principle of Causation is discussed in much

detail, and very instructively, by Professor Bain, in the second volume of his

Logic. The chief practical conclusion drawn by him, bearing on Causation, is,

that we must distinguish in the assemblage of conditions which constitutes

the Cause of a phenomenon, two elements: one, the presence of a force; the

other, the collocation or position of objects which is required in order that the

force may undergo the particular transmutation which constitutes the

phenomenon. Now, it might always have been said with acknowledged

correctness, that a force and a collocation were both of them necessary to

produce any phenomenon. The law of causation is, that change can only be

produced by change. Along with any number of stationary antecedents,

which are collocations, there must be at least one changing antecedent, which

is a force. To produce a bonfire, there must not only be fuel, and air, and a

spark, which are collocations, but chemical action between the air and the

materials, which is a force. To grind corn, there must be a certain collocation

of the parts composing a mill, relatively to one another and to the corn; but

there must also be the gravitation of water, or the motion of wind, to supply a

force. But as the force in these cases was regarded as a property of the objectsin which it is embodied, it seemed tautology to say that there must be the

collocation and the force. As the collocation must be a collocation of objects

possessing the force-giving property, the collocation, so understood, included

the force.

              How, then, shall we have to express these facts, if the theory be

finally substantiated that all Force is reducible to a previous Motion? We

shall have to say, that one of the conditions of every phenomenon is an

antecedent Motion. But it will have to be explained that this needs not be

actual motion. The coal which supplies the force exerted in combustion is not

shown to have been exerting that force in the form of molecular motion in the

pit; it was not even exerting pressure. The stone on the eminence is exerting a

pressure, but only equivalent to its weight, not to the additional momentum it

would acquire by falling. The antecedent, therefore, is not a force in action;

and we can still only call it a property of the objects, by which they would

exert a force on the occurrence of a fresh collocation. The collocation,

therefore, still includes the force. The force said to be stored up, is simply a

particular property which the object has acquired. The cause we are in search

of, is a collocation of objects possessing that particular property. When,

indeed, we inquire further into the cause from which they derive that

property, the new conception introduced by the Conservation theory comes

in: the property is itself an effect, and its cause, according to the theory, is a

former motion of exactly equivalent amount, which has been impressed on

the particles of the body, perhaps at some very distant period. But the case is

simply one of those we have already considered, in which the efficacy of a

cause consists in its investing an object with a property. The force said to be

laid up, and merely potential, is no more a really existing thing than any other

properties of objects are really existing things. The expression is a mere

artifice of language, convenient for describing the phenomena: it is

unnecessary to suppose that any thing has been in continuous existence

except an abstract potentiality. A force suspended in its operation, neither

manifesting itself by motion nor by pressure, is not an existing fact, but a

name for our conviction that in appropriate circumstances a fact would take

place. We know that a pound weight, were it to fall from the earth into the

sun, would acquire in falling a momentum equal to millions of pounds; but

we do not credit the pound weight with more of actually existing force than is

equal to the pressure it is now exerting on the earth, and that is exactly a

pound. We might as well say that a force of millions of pounds exists in apound, as that the force which will manifest itself when the coal is burned is a

real thing existing in the coal. What is fixed in the coal is only a certain

property: it has become fit to be the antecedent of an effect called

combustion, which partly consists in giving out, under certain conditions, a

given definite quantity of heat.

              We thus see that no new general conception of Causation is

introduced by the Conservation theory. The indestructibility of Force no more

interferes with the theory of Causation than the indestructibility of Matter,

meaning by matter the element of resistance in the sensible world. It only

enables us to understand better than before the nature and laws of some of the

sequences.

              This better understanding, however, enables us, with Mr. Bain, to

admit, as one of the tests for distinguishing causation from mere

concomitance, the expenditure or transfer of energy. If the effect, or any part

of the effect, to be accounted for, consists in putting matter in motion, then

any of the objects present which has lost motion has contributed to the effect;

and this is the true meaning of the proposition that the cause is that one of the

antecedents which exerts active force.

              § 11. It is proper in this place to advert to a rather ancient doctrine

respecting causation, which has been revived during the last few years in

many quarters, and at present gives more signs of life than any other theory

of causation at variance with that set forth in the preceding pages.

              According to the theory in question, Mind, or to speak move

precisely, Will, is the only cause of phenomena. The type of Causation, as

well as the exclusive source from which we derive the idea, is our own

voluntary agency. Here, and here only (it is said), we have direct evidence of

causation. We know that we can move our bodies. Respecting the phenomena

of inanimate nature, we have no other direct knowledge than that of

antecedence and sequence. But in the case of our voluntary actions, it is

affirmed that we are conscious of power before we have experience of

results. An act of volition, whether followed by an effect or not, is

accompanied by a consciousness of effort, “of force exerted, of power in

action, which is necessarily causal, or causative.” This feeling of energy or

force, inherent in an act of will, is knowledge a priori ; assurance, prior to

experience, that we have the power of causing effects. Volition, therefore, itis asserted, is something more than an unconditional antecedent; it is a cause,

in a different sense from that in which physical phenomena are said to cause

one another: it is an Efficient Cause. From this the transition is easy to the

further doctrine, that Volition is the sole Efficient Cause of all phenomena.

“It is inconceivable that dead force could continue unsupported for a moment

beyond its creation. We can not even conceive of change or phenomena

without the energy of a mind.” “The word action ” itself, says another writer

of the same school, “has no real significance except when applied to the

doings of an intelligent agent. Let any one conceive, if he can, of any power,

energy, or force inherent in a lump of matter.” Phenomena may have the

semblance of being produced by physical causes, but they are in reality

produced, say these writers, by the immediate agency of mind. All things

which do not proceed from a human (or, I suppose, an animal) will proceed,

they say, directly from divine will. The earth is not moved by the

combination of a centripetal and a projectile force; this is but a mode of

speaking, which serves to facilitate our conceptions. It is moved by the direct

volition of an omnipotent Being, in a path coinciding with that which we

deduce from the hypothesis of these two forces.

              As I have so often observed, the general question of the existence of

Efficient Causes does not fall within the limits of our subject; but a theory

which represents them as capable of being subjects of human knowledge, and

which passes off as efficient causes what are only physical or phenomenal

causes, belongs as much to Logic as to metaphysics, and is a fit subject for

discussion here.

              To my apprehension, a volition is not an efficient, but simply a

physical cause. Our will causes our bodily actions in the same sense, and in

no other, in which cold causes ice, or a spark causes an explosion of

gunpowder. The volition, a state of our mind, is the antecedent; the motion of

our limbs in conformity to the volition, is the consequent. This sequence I

conceive to be not a subject of direct consciousness, in the sense intended by

the theory. The antecedent, indeed, and the consequent, are subjects of

consciousness. But the connection between them is a subject of experience. I

can not admit that our consciousness of the volition contains in itself any a

priori knowledge that the muscular motion will follow. If our nerves of

motion were paralyzed, or our muscles stiff and inflexible, and had been so

all our lives, I do not see the slightest ground for supposing that we shouldever (unless by information from other people) have known any thing of

volition as a physical power, or been conscious of any tendency in feelings of

our mind to produce motions of our body, or of other bodies. I will not

undertake to say whether we should in that case have had the physical feeling

which I suppose is meant when these writers speak of “consciousness of

effort:” I see no reason why we should not; since that physical feeling is

probably a state of nervous sensation beginning and ending in the brain,

without involving the motory apparatus: but we certainly should not have

designated it by any term equivalent to effort, since effort implies

consciously aiming at an end, which we should not only in that case have had

no reason to do, but could not even have had the idea of doing. If conscious

at all of this peculiar sensation, we should have been conscious of it, I

conceive, only as a kind of uneasiness, accompanying our feelings of desire.

              It is well argued by Sir William Hamilton against the theory in

question, that it “is refuted by the consideration that between the overt fact of

corporeal movement of which we are cognizant, and the internal act of

mental determination of which we are also cognizant, there intervenes a

numerous series of intermediate agencies of which we have no knowledge;

and, consequently, that we can have no consciousness of any causal

connection between the extreme links of this chain, the volition to move and

the limb moving, as this hypothesis asserts. No one is immediately conscious,

for example, of moving his arm through his volition. Previously to this

ultimate movement, muscles, nerves, a multitude of solid and fluid parts,

must be set in motion by the will, but of this motion we know, from

consciousness, absolutely nothing. A person struck with paralysis is

conscious of no inability in his limb to fulfill the determinations of his will;

and it is only after having willed, and finding that his limbs do not obey his

volition, that he learns by this experience, that the external movement does

not follow the internal act. But as the paralytic learns after the volition that

his limbs do not obey his mind; so it is only after volition that the man in
                                                                        123
health learns, that his limbs do obey the mandates of his will.”

              Those against whom I am contending have never produced, and do
                                                    124
not pretend to produce, any positive evidence that the power of our will to

move our bodies would be known to us independently of experience. What

they have to say on the subject is, that the production of physical events by a

will seems to carry its own explanation with it, while the action of matterupon matter seems to require something else to explain it; and is even,

according to them, “inconceivable” on any other supposition than that some

will intervenes between the apparent cause and its apparent effect. They thus

rest their case on an appeal to the inherent laws of our conceptive faculty;

mistaking, as I apprehend, for the laws of that faculty its acquired habits,

grounded on the spontaneous tendencies of its uncultured state. The

succession between the will to move a limb and the actual motion is one of

the most direct and instantaneous of all sequences which come under our

observation, and is familiar to every moment’s experience from our earliest

infancy; more familiar than any succession of events exterior to our bodies,

and especially more so than any other case of the apparent origination (as

distinguished from the mere communication) of motion. Now, it is the natural

tendency of the mind to be always attempting to facilitate its conception of

unfamiliar facts by assimilating them to others which are familiar.

Accordingly, our voluntary acts, being the most familiar to us of all cases of

causation, are, in the infancy and early youth of the human race,

spontaneously taken as the type of causation in general, and all phenomena

are supposed to be directly produced by the will of some sentient being. This

original Fetichism I shall not characterize in the words of Hume, or of any

follower of Hume, but in those of a religious metaphysician, Dr. Reid, in

order more effectually to show the unanimity which exists on the subject

among all competent thinkers.

              “When we turn our attention to external objects, and begin to

exercise our rational faculties about them, we find that there are some

motions and changes in them which we have power to produce, and that there

are many which must have some other cause. Either the objects must have

life and active power, as we have, or they must be moved or changed by

something that has life and active power, as external objects are moved by us.

              “Our first thoughts seem to be, that the objects in which we perceive

such motion have understanding and active power as we have. ‘Savages,’

says the Abbé Raynal, ‘wherever they see motion which they can not account

for, there they suppose a soul.’ All men may be considered as savages in this

respect, until they are capable of instruction, and of using their faculties in a

more perfect manner than savages do.

              “The Abbé Raynal’s observation is sufficiently confirmed, both from

fact, and from the structure of all languages.              “Rude nations do really believe sun, moon, and stars, earth, sea, and

air, fountains, and lakes, to have understanding and active power. To pay

homage to them, and implore their favor, is a kind of idolatry natural to

savages.

              “All languages carry in their structure the marks of their being

formed when this belief prevailed. The distinction of verbs and participles

into active and passive, which is found in all languages, must have been

originally intended to distinguish what is really active from what is merely

passive; and in all languages, we find active verbs applied to those objects, in

which, according to the Abbé Raynal’s observation, savages suppose a soul.

              “Thus we say the sun rises and sets, and comes to the meridian, the

moon changes, the sea ebbs and flows, the winds blow. Languages were

formed by men who believed these objects to have life and active power in

themselves. It was therefore proper and natural to express their motions and

changes by active verbs.

              “There is no surer way of tracing the sentiments of nations before

they have records, than by the structure of their language, which,

notwithstanding the changes produced in it by time, will always retain some

signatures of the thoughts of those by whom it was invented. When we find

the same sentiments indicated in the structure of all languages, those

sentiments must have been common to the human species when languages

were invented.

              “When a few, of superior intellectual abilities, find leisure for

speculation, they begin to philosophize, and soon discover, that many of

those objects which at first they believed to be intelligent and active are really

lifeless and passive. This is a very important discovery. It elevates the mind,

emancipates from many vulgar superstitions, and invites to further

discoveries of the same kind.

              “As philosophy advances, life and activity in natural objects retires,

and leaves them dead and inactive. Instead of moving voluntarily, we find

them to be moved necessarily; instead of acting, we find them to be acted

upon; and Nature appears as one great machine, where one wheel is turned by

another, that by a third; and how far this necessary succession may reach, the
                                125
philosopher does not know.”              There is, then, a spontaneous tendency of the intellect to account to

itself for all cases of causation by assimilating them to the intentional acts of

voluntary agents like itself. This is the instinctive philosophy of the human

mind in its earliest stage, before it has become familiar with any other

invariable sequences than those between its own volitions or those of other

human beings and their voluntary acts. As the notion of fixed laws of

succession among external phenomena gradually establishes itself, the

propensity to refer all phenomena to voluntary agency slowly gives way

before it. The suggestions, however, of daily life continuing to be more

powerful than those of scientific thought, the original instinctive philosophy

maintains its ground in the mind, underneath the growths obtained by

cultivation, and keeps up a constant resistance to their throwing their roots

deep into the soil. The theory against which I am contending derives its

nourishment from that substratum. Its strength does not lie in argument, but

in its affinity to an obstinate tendency of the infancy of the human mind.

              That this tendency, however, is not the result of an inherent mental

law, is proved by superabundant evidence. The history of science, from its

earliest dawn, shows that mankind have not been unanimous in thinking

either that the action of matter upon matter was not conceivable, or that the

action of mind upon matter was. To some thinkers, and some schools of

thinkers, both in ancient and in modern times, this last has appeared much

more inconceivable than the former. Sequences entirely physical and

material, as soon as they had become sufficiently familiar to the human mind,

came to be thought perfectly natural, and were regarded not only as needing

no explanation themselves, but as being capable of affording it to others, and

even of serving as the ultimate explanation of things in general.

              One of the ablest recent supporters of the Volitional theory has

furnished an explanation, at once historically true and philosophically acute,

of the failure of the Greek philosophers in physical inquiry, in which, as I

conceive, he unconsciously depicts his own state of mind. “Their stumbling-

block was one as to the nature of the evidence they had to expect for their

conviction.... They had not seized the idea that they must not expect to

understand the processes of outward causes, but only their results; and

consequently, the whole physical philosophy of the Greeks was an attempt to

identify mentally the effect with its cause, to feel after some not only

necessary but natural connection, where they meant by natural that whichwould per se carry some presumption to their own mind.... They wanted to

see some reason why the physical antecedent should produce this particular

consequent, and their only attempts were in directions where they could find
                126
such reasons.” In other words, they were not content merely to know that

one phenomenon was always followed by another; they thought that they had

not attained the true aim of science, unless they could perceive something in

the nature of the one phenomenon from which it might have been known or

presumed previous to trial that it would be followed by the other: just what

the writer, who has so clearly pointed out their error, thinks that he perceives

in the nature of the phenomenon Volition. And to complete the statement of

the case, he should have added that these early speculators not only made this

their aim, but were quite satisfied with their success in it; not only sought for

causes which should carry in their mere statement evidence of their

efficiency, but fully believed that they had found such causes. The reviewer

can see plainly that this was an error, because he does not believe that there

exist any relations between material phenomena which can account for their

producing one another; but the very fact of the persistency of the Greeks in

this error, shows that their minds were in a very different state: they were

able to derive from the assimilation of physical facts to other physical facts,

the kind of mental satisfaction which we connect with the word explanation,

and which the reviewer would have us think can only be found in referring

phenomena to a will. When Thales and Hippo held that moisture was the

universal cause, and external element, of which all other things were but the

infinitely various sensible manifestations; when Anaximenes predicated the

same thing of air, Pythagoras of numbers, and the like, they all thought that

they had found a real explanation; and were content to rest in this explanation

as ultimate. The ordinary sequences of the external universe appeared to

them, no less than to their critic, to be inconceivable without the supposition

of some universal agency to connect the antecedents with the consequents;

but they did not think that Volition, exerted by minds, was the only agency

which fulfilled this requirement. Moisture, or air, or numbers, carried to their

minds a precisely similar impression of making intelligible what was

otherwise inconceivable, and gave the same full satisfaction to the demands

of their conceptive faculty.

              It was not the Greeks alone, who “wanted to see some reason why

the physical antecedent should produce this particular consequent,” some

connection “which would per se carry some presumption to their own mind.”Among modern philosophers, Leibnitz laid it down as a self-evident principle

that all physical causes without exception must contain in their own nature

something which makes it intelligible that they should be able to produce the

effects which they do produce. Far from admitting Volition as the only kind

of cause which carried internal evidence of its own power, and as the real

bond of connection between physical antecedents and their consequents, he

demanded some naturally and per se efficient physical antecedent as the bond

of connection between Volition itself and its effects. He distinctly refused to

admit the will of God as a sufficient explanation of any thing except miracles;

and insisted upon finding something that would account better for the
                                                                        127
phenomena of nature than a mere reference to divine volition.

              Again, and conversely, the action of mind upon matter (which, we

are now told, not only needs no explanation itself, but is the explanation of all

other effects), has appeared to some thinkers to be itself the grand

inconceivability. It was to get over this very difficulty that the Cartesians

invented the system of Occasional Causes. They could not conceive that

thoughts in a mind could produce movements in a body, or that bodily

movements could produce thoughts. They could see no necessary connection,

no relation a priori , between a motion and a thought. And as the Cartesians,

more than any other school of philosophical speculation before or since,

made their own minds the measure of all things, and refused, on principle, to

believe that Nature had done what they were unable to see any reason why

she must do, they affirmed it to be impossible that a material and a mental

fact could be causes one of another. They regarded them as mere Occasions

on which the real agent, God, thought fit to exert his power as a Cause. When

a man wills to move his foot, it is not his will that moves it, but God (they

said) moves it on the occasion of his will. God, according to this system, is

the only efficient cause, not quâ mind, or quâ endowed with volition, but quâ

omnipotent. This hypothesis was, as I said, originally suggested by the

supposed inconceivability of any real mutual action between Mind and

Matter; but it was afterward extended to the action of Matter upon Matter, for

on a nicer examination they found this inconceivable too, and therefore,

according to their logic, impossible. The deus ex machinâ was ultimately

called in to produce a spark on the occasion of a flint and steel coming

together, or to break an egg on the occasion of its falling on the ground.

              All this, undoubtedly, shows that it is the disposition of mankind ingeneral, not to be satisfied with knowing that one fact is invariably

antecedent and another consequent, but to look out for something which may

seem to explain their being so. But we also see that this demand may be

completely satisfied by an agency purely physical, provided it be much more

familiar than that which it is invoked to explain. To Thales and Anaximenes,

it appeared inconceivable that the antecedents which we see in nature should

produce the consequents; but perfectly natural that water, or air, should

produce them. The writers whom I oppose declare this inconceivable, but can

conceive that mind, or volition, is per se an efficient cause: while the

Cartesians could not conceive even that, but peremptorily declared that no

mode of production of any fact whatever was conceivable, except the direct

agency of an omnipotent being; thus giving additional proof of what finds

new confirmation in every stage of the history of science: that both what

persons can, and what they can not, conceive, is very much an affair of

accident, and depends altogether on their experience, and their habits of

thought; that by cultivating the requisite associations of ideas, people may

make themselves unable to conceive any given thing; and may make

themselves able to conceive most things, however inconceivable these may at

first appear; and the same facts in each person’s mental history which

determine what is or is not conceivable to him, determine also which among

the various sequences in nature will appear to him so natural and plausible, as

to need no other proof of their existence; to be evident by their own light,

independent equally of experience and of explanation.

              By what rule is any one to decide between one theory of this

description and another? The theorists do not direct us to any external

evidence; they appeal each to his own subjective feelings. One says, the

succession C B appears to me more natural, conceivable, and credible per se ,

than the succession A B; you are therefore mistaken in thinking that B

depends upon A; I am certain, though I can give no other evidence of it, that

C comes in between A and B, and is the real and only cause of B. The other

answers, the successions C B and A B appear to me equally natural and

conceivable, or the latter more so than the former: A is quite capable of

producing B without any other intervention. A third agrees with the first in

being unable to conceive that A can produce B, but finds the sequence D B

still more natural than C B, or of nearer kin to the subject-matter, and prefers

his D theory to the C theory. It is plain that there is no universal law

operating here, except the law that each person’s conceptions are governedand limited by his individual experiences and habits of thought. We are

warranted in saying of all three, what each of them already believes of the

other two, namely, that they exalt into an original law of the human intellect

and of outward nature one particular sequence of phenomena, which appears

to them more natural and more conceivable than other sequences, only

because it is more familiar. And from this judgment I am unable to except the

theory, that Volition is an Efficient Cause.

              I am unwilling to leave the subject without adverting to the

additional fallacy contained in the corollary from this theory; in the inference

that because Volition is an efficient cause, therefore it is the only cause, and

the direct agent in producing even what is apparently produced by something

else. Volitions are not known to produce any thing directly except nervous

action, for the will influences even the muscles only through the nerves.

Though it were granted, then, that every phenomenon has an efficient, and

not merely a phenomenal cause, and that volition, in the case of the peculiar

phenomena which are known to be produced by it, is that efficient cause; are

we therefore to say, with these writers, that since we know of no other

efficient cause, and ought not to assume one without evidence, there is no

other, and volition is the direct cause of all phenomena? A more outrageous

stretch of inference could hardly be made. Because among the infinite variety

of the phenomena of nature there is one, namely, a particular mode of action

of certain nerves, which has for its cause, and as we are now supposing for its

efficient cause, a state of our mind; and because this is the only efficient

cause of which we are conscious, being the only one of which in the nature of

the case we can be conscious, since it is the only one which exists within

ourselves; does this justify us in concluding that all other phenomena must

have the same kind of efficient cause with that one eminently special, narrow,

and peculiarly human or animal, phenomenon? The nearest parallel to this

specimen of generalization is suggested by the recently revived controversy

on the old subject of Plurality of Worlds, in which the contending parties

have been so conspicuously successful in overthrowing one another. Here

also we have experience only of a single case, that of the world in which we

live, but that this is inhabited we know absolutely, and without possibility of

doubt. Now if on this evidence any one were to infer that every heavenly

body without exception, sun, planet, satellite, comet, fixed star or nebula, is

inhabited, and must be so from the inherent constitution of things, his

inference would exactly resemble that of the writers who conclude thatbecause volition is the efficient cause of our own bodily motions, it must be

the efficient cause of every thing else in the universe. It is true there are cases

in which, with acknowledged propriety, we generalize from a single instance

to a multitude of instances. But they must be instances which resemble the

one known instance, and not such as have no circumstance in common with it

except that of being instances. I have, for example, no direct evidence that

any creature is alive except myself, yet I attribute, with full assurance, life

and sensation to other human beings and animals. But I do not conclude that

all other things are alive merely because I am. I ascribe to certain other

creatures a life like my own, because they manifest it by the same sort of

indications by which mine is manifested. I find that their phenomena and

mine conform to the same laws, and it is for this reason that I believe both to

arise from a similar cause. Accordingly I do not extend the conclusion

beyond the grounds for it. Earth, fire, mountains, trees, are remarkable

agencies, but their phenomena do not conform to the same laws as my actions

do, and I therefore do not believe earth or fire, mountains or trees, to possess

animal life. But the supporters of the Volition Theory ask us to infer that

volition causes every thing, for no reason except that it causes one particular

thing; although that one phenomenon, far from being a type of all natural

phenomena, is eminently peculiar; its laws bearing scarcely any resemblance

to those of any other phenomenon, whether of inorganic or of organic nature.

              NOTE SUPPLEMENTARY TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTER.

              The author of the Second Burnett Prize Essay (Dr. Tulloch), who has

employed a considerable number of pages in controverting the doctrines of

the preceding chapter, has somewhat surprised me by denying a fact, which I

imagined too well known to require proof — that there have been

philosophers who found in physical explanations of phenomena the same

complete mental satisfaction which we are told is only given by volitional

explanation, and others who denied the Volitional Theory on the same

ground of inconceivability on which it is defended. The assertion of the

Essayist is countersigned still more positively by an able reviewer of the
      128
Essay: “Two illustrations,” says the reviewer, “are advanced by Mr. Mill:

the case of Thales and Anaximenes, stated by him to have maintained, the

one Moisture and the other Air to be the origin of all things; and that of

Descartes and Leibnitz, whom he asserts to have found the action of Mind

upon Matter the grand inconceivability. In counter-statement as to the first ofthese cases the author shows — what we believe now hardly admits of doubt

— that the Greek philosophers distinctly recognized as beyond and above

their primal material source, the νοῦς, or Divine Intelligence, as the efficient

and originating Source of all; and as to the second, by proof that it was the

mode , not the fact , of that action on matter, which was represented as

inconceivable.”

              A greater quantity of historical error has seldom been comprised in a

single sentence. With regard to Thales, the assertion that he considered water

as a mere material in the hands of νοῦς rests on a passage of Cicero de

Naturâ Deorum ; and whoever will refer to any of the accurate historians of

philosophy, will find that they treat this as a mere fancy of Cicero, resting on

no authority, opposed to all the evidence; and make surmises as to the

manner in which Cicero may have been led into the error. (See Rutter, vol. i.,

p. 211, 2d ed.; Brandis, vol. i., pp. 118–9, 1st ed.; Preller, Historia

Philosophiæ Græco-Romanæ , p. 10. “Schiefe Ansicht, durchaus zu

verwerfen;” “augenscheinlich folgernd statt zu berichten;” “quibus vera

sententia Thaletis plane detorquetur,” are the expressions of these writers.) As

for Anaximenes, he even according to Cicero, maintained, not that air was the

material out of which God made the world, but that the air was a god:

“Anaximenes aëra deum statuit;” or, according to St. Augustine, that it was

the material out of which the gods were made; “non tamen ab ipsis [Diis]

aërem factum, sed ipsos ex aëre ortos credidit.” Those who are not familiar

with the metaphysical terminology of antiquity, must not be misled by

finding it stated that Anaximenes attributed ψυχὴ (translated soul , or life ) to

his universal element, the air. The Greek philosophers acknowledged several
                                                                        129
kinds of ψυχὴ, the nutritive, the sensitive, and the intellective. Even the

moderns, with admitted correctness, attribute life to plants. As far as we can

make out the meaning of Anaximenes, he made choice of Air as the universal

agent, on the ground that it is perpetually in motion, without any apparent

cause external to itself: so that he conceived it as exercising spontaneous

force, and as the principle of life and activity in all things, men and gods

inclusive. If this be not representing it as the Efficient Cause the dispute

altogether has no meaning.

              If either Anaximenes, or Thales, or any of their contemporaries, had

held the doctrine that νοῦς was the Efficient Cause, that doctrine could not

have been reputed, as it was throughout antiquity, to have originated withAnaxagoras. The testimony of Aristotle, in the first book of his Metaphysics,

is perfectly decisive with respect to these early speculations. After

enumerating four kinds of causes, or rather four different meanings of the

word Cause, viz., the Essence of a thing, the Matter of it, the Origin of

Motion (Efficient Cause), and the End or Final Cause, he proceeds to say,

that most of the early philosophers recognized only the second kind of Cause,

the Matter of a thing, τὰς ἐν ὕλης εἶδει μόνας ᾠήθησαν ἀρχὰς εἷναι πάντων.

As his first example he specifies Thales, whom he describes as taking the

lead in this view of the subject, ὁ τῆς τοιαύτης ἀρχηγὸς φιλοσοφίας, and goes

on to Hippon, Anaximenes, Diogenes (of Apollonia), Hippasus of

Metapontum, Heraclitus, and Empedocles. Anaxagoras, however (he

proceeds to say), taught a different doctrine, as we know , and it is alleged

that Hermotimus of Clazomenæ taught it before him. Anaxagoras

represented, that even if these various theories of the universal material were

true, there would be need of some other cause to account for the

transformations of the materials, since the material can not originate its own

changes: οὐ γὰρ δὴ τό γε ὑποκείμενον αὐτὸ ποιεὶ μεταβάλλειν ἑαῦτο; λέγω δ᾽

οἰον οὐτε τὸ ξύλον οὔτε ὁ χαλκὸς αἴτιος τοῦ μεταβάλλειν ἑκάτερον αὐτῶν,

οὐδὲ ποιεῖ τὸ μὲν ξύλον κλίνην ὁ δέ χαλκὸς ἀνδριάντα, ἀλλ᾽ ἑτερόν τι τῆς

μεταβολῆς αἴτιον, viz., the other kind of cause, ὄθεν ἡ ἀρχὴ τῆς κινήσεως —

an Efficient Cause. Aristotle expresses great approbation of this doctrine

(which he says made its author appear the only sober man among persons

raving, οἰον νήφων ἐφάνη παρ᾽ εἰκῆ λέγοντας τοῦς πρότερον); but while

describing the influence which it exercised over subsequent speculation, he

remarks that the philosophers against whom this, as he thinks, insuperable

difficulty was urged, had not felt it to be any difficulty: οὐδέν ἐδυσχεράναν

ἐν ἑαυτοῖς. It is surely unnecessary to say more in proof of the matter of fact

which Dr. Tulloch and his reviewer disbelieve.

              Having pointed out what he thinks the error of these early

speculators in not recognizing the need of an efficient cause, Aristotle goes

on to mention two other efficient causes to which they might have had

recourse, instead of intelligence: τύχη, chance, and τὸ αὐτομάτον,

spontaneity. He indeed puts these aside as not sufficiently worthy causes for

the order in the universe, οὐδ᾽ αὑ τωῷ αὐτομάτῳ καὶ τῇ τύχῃ τοσοῦτον

ἐπιτρέψαι πρᾶγμα καλῶς εἰχεν; but he does not reject them as incapable of

producing any effect, but only as incapable of producing that effect. He

himself recognizes τύχη and τὸ αὐτομάτον as co-ordinate agents with Mindin producing the phenomena of the universe; the department allotted to them

being composed of all the classes of phenomena which are not supposed to

follow any uniform law. By thus including Chance among efficient causes,

Aristotle fell into an error which philosophy has now outgrown, but which is

by no means so alien to the spirit even of modern speculation as it may at

first sight appear. Up to quite a recent period philosophers went on ascribing,

and many of them have not yet ceased to ascribe, a real existence to the

results of abstraction. Chance could make out as good a title to that dignity as

many other of the mind’s abstract creations: it had had a name given to it, and

why should it not be a reality? As for τὸ αὐτομάτον, it is recognized even yet

as one of the modes of origination of phenomena by all those thinkers who

maintain what is called the Freedom of the Will. The same self-determining

power which that doctrine attributes to volitions, was supposed by the

ancients to be possessed also by some other natural phenomena: a

circumstance which throws considerable light on more than one of the

supposed invincible necessities of belief. I have introduced it here, because

this belief of Aristotle, or rather of the Greek philosophers generally, is as

fatal as the doctrines of Thales and the Ionic school to the theory that the

human mind is compelled by its constitution to conceive volition as the origin
                                                              130
of all force, and the efficient cause of all phenomena.

              With regard to the modern philosophers (Leibnitz and the

Cartesians) whom I had cited as having maintained that the action of mind

upon matter, so far from being the only conceivable origin of material

phenomena, is itself inconceivable; the attempt to rebut this argument by

asserting that the mode, not the fact, of the action of mind on matter was

represented as inconceivable, is an abuse of the privilege of writing

confidently about authors without reading them; for any knowledge whatever

of Leibnitz would have taught those who thus speak of him, that the

inconceivability of the mode, and the impossibility of the thing, were in his

mind convertible expressions. What was his famous Principle of the

Sufficient Reason, the very corner-stone of his Philosophy, from which the

Pre-established Harmony, the doctrine of Monads, and all the opinions most

characteristic of Leibnitz, were corollaries? It was, that nothing exists, the

existence of which is not capable of being proved and explained a priori ; the

proof and explanation in the case of contingent facts being derived from the

nature of their causes; which could not be the causes unless there was

something in their nature showing them to be capable of producing thoseparticular effects. And this “something” which accounts for the production of

physical effects, he was able to find in many physical causes, but could not

find it in any finite minds, which therefore he unhesitatingly asserted to be

incapable of producing any physical effects whatever. “On ne saurait

concevoir,” he says, “une action réciproque de la matière et de l’intelligence

l’une sur l’autre,” and there is therefore (he contends) no choice but between

the Occasional Causes of the Cartesians and his own Pre-established

Harmony, according to which there is no more connection between our

volitions and our muscular actions than there is between two clocks which

are wound up to strike at the same instant. But he felt no similar difficulty as

to physical causes; and throughout his speculations, as in the passage I have

already cited respecting gravitation, he distinctly refuses to consider as part of

the order of nature any fact which is not explicable from the nature of its

physical cause.

              With regard to the Cartesians (not Descartes; I did not make that

mistake, though the reviewer of Dr. Tulloch’s Essay attributes it to me) I take

a passage almost at random from Malebranche, who is the best known of the

Cartesians, and, though not the inventor of the system of Occasional Causes,

is its principal expositor. In Part II., chap. iii., of his Sixth Book, having first

said that matter can not have the power of moving itself, he proceeds to argue

that neither can mind have the power of moving it. “Quand on examine l’idée

que l’on a de tous les esprits finis, on ne voit point de liaison nécessaire entre

leur volonté et le mouvement de quelque corps que ce soit, on voit au

contraire qu’il n’y en a point, et qu’il n’y en peut avoir” (there is nothing in

the idea of finite mind which can account for its causing the motion of a

body); “on doit aussi conclure, si on vent raisonner selon ses lumières, qu’il

n’y a aucun esprit créé qui puisse remuer quelque corps que ce soit comme

cause véritable on principale, de même que l’on a dit qu’aucun corps ne se

pouvait remuer soi-même:” thus the idea of Mind is according to him as

incompatible as the idea of Matter with the exercise of active force. But

when, he continues, we consider not a created but a Divine Mind, the case is

altered; for the idea of a Divine Mind includes omnipotence; and the idea of

omnipotence does contain the idea of being able to move bodies. Thus it is

the nature of omnipotence which renders the motion of bodies even by the

Divine Mind credible or conceivable, while, so far as depended on the mere

nature of mind, it would have been inconceivable and incredible. If

Malebranche had not believed in an omnipotent Being, he would have held                                                                        131
all action of mind on body to be a demonstrated impossibility.

              A doctrine more precisely the reverse of the Volitional theory of

causation can not well be imagined. The Volitional theory is, that we know

by intuition or by direct experience the action of our own mental volitions on

matter; that we may hence infer all other action upon matter to be that of

volition, and might thus know, without any other evidence, that matter is

under the government of a Divine Mind. Leibnitz and the Cartesians, on the

contrary, maintain that our volitions do not and can not act upon matter, and

that it is only the existence of an all-governing Being, and that Being

omnipotent, which can account for the sequence between our volitions and

our bodily actions. When we consider that each of these two theories, which,

as theories of causation, stand at the opposite extremes of possible divergence

from one another, invokes not only as its evidence, but as its sole evidence,

the absolute inconceivability of any theory but itself, we are enabled to

measure the worth of this kind of evidence: and when we find the Volitional

theory entirely built upon the assertion that by our mental constitution we are

compelled to recognize our volitions as efficient causes, and then find other

thinkers maintaining that we know that they are not and can not be such

causes, and can not conceive them to be so, I think we have a right to say that

this supposed law of our mental constitution does not exist.

              Dr. Tulloch (pp. 45–47) thinks it a sufficient answer to this, that

Leibnitz and the Cartesians were Theists, and believed the will of God to be

an efficient cause. Doubtless they did, and the Cartesians even believed

(though Leibnitz did not) that it is the only such cause. Dr. Tulloch mistakes

the nature of the question. I was not writing on Theism, as Dr. Tulloch is, but

against a particular theory of causation, which, if it be unfounded, can give

no effective support to Theism or to any thing else. I found it asserted that

volition is the only efficient cause, on the ground that no other efficient cause

is conceivable. To this assertion I oppose the instances of Leibnitz and of the

Cartesians, who affirmed with equal positiveness that volition as an efficient

cause is itself not conceivable, and that omnipotence, which renders all things

conceivable, can alone take away the impossibility. This I thought, and think,

a conclusive answer to the argument on which this theory of causation

avowedly depends. But I certainly did not imagine that Theism was bound up

with that theory; nor expected to be charged with denying Leibnitz and the

Cartesians to be Theists because I denied that they held the theory. 

Chapter VI. – On The Composition Of Causes.

 

 

              § 1. To complete the general notion of causation on which the rules

of experimental inquiry into the laws of nature must be founded, one

distinction still remains to be pointed out: a distinction so radical, and of so

much importance, as to require a chapter to itself.

              The preceding discussions have rendered us familiar with the case in

which several agents, or causes, concur as conditions to the production of an

effect; a case, in truth, almost universal, there being very few effects to the

production of which no more than one agent contributes. Suppose, then, that

two different agents, operating jointly, are followed, under a certain set of

collateral conditions, by a given effect. If either of these agents, instead of

being joined with the other, had operated alone, under the same set of

conditions in all other respects, some effect would probably have followed,

which would have been different from the joint effect of the two, and more or

less dissimilar to it. Now, if we happen to know what would be the effect of

each cause when acting separately from the other, we are often able to arrive

deductively, or a priori , at a correct prediction of what will arise from their

conjunct agency. To render this possible, it is only necessary that the same

law which expresses the effect of each cause acting by itself, shall also

correctly express the part due to that cause of the effect which follows from

the two together. This condition is realized in the extensive and important

class of phenomena commonly called mechanical, namely the phenomena of

the communication of motion (or of pressure, which is tendency to motion)

from one body to another. In this important class of cases of causation, one

cause never, properly speaking, defeats or frustrates another; both have their

full effect. If a body is propelled in two directions by two forces, one tending

to drive it to the north and the other to the east, it is caused to move in a given

time exactly as far in both directions as the two forces would separately have

carried it; and is left precisely where it would have arrived if it had been

acted upon first by one of the two forces, and afterward by the other. This law

of nature is called, in dynamics, the principle of the Composition of Forces;

and in imitation of that well-chosen expression, I shall give the name of the

Composition of Causes to the principle which is exemplified in all cases inwhich the joint effect of several causes is identical with the sum of their

separate effects.

              This principle, however, by no means prevails in all departments of

the field of nature. The chemical combination of two substances produces, as

is well known, a third substance, with properties different from those of

either of the two substances separately, or of both of them taken together. Not

a trace of the properties of hydrogen or of oxygen is observable in those of

their compound, water. The taste of sugar of lead is not the sum of the tastes

of its component elements, acetic acid and lead or its oxide; nor is the color

of blue vitriol a mixture of the colors of sulphuric acid and copper. This

explains why mechanics is a deductive or demonstrative science, and

chemistry not. In the one, we can compute the effects of combinations of

causes, whether real or hypothetical, from the laws which we know to govern

those causes when acting separately, because they continue to observe the

same laws when in combination which they observe when separate: whatever

would have happened in consequence of each cause taken by itself, happens

when they are together, and we have only to cast up the results. Not so in the

phenomena which are the peculiar subject of the science of chemistry. There

most of the uniformities to which the causes conform when separate, cease

altogether when they are conjoined; and we are not, at least in the present

state of our knowledge, able to foresee what result will follow from any new

combination until we have tried the specific experiment.

              If this be true of chemical combinations, it is still more true of those

far more complex combinations of elements which constitute organized

bodies; and in which those extraordinary new uniformities arise which are

called the laws of life. All organized bodies are composed of parts similar to

those composing inorganic nature, and which have even themselves existed

in an inorganic state; but the phenomena of life, which result from the

juxtaposition of those parts in a certain manner, bear no analogy to any of the

effects which would be produced by the action of the component substances

considered as mere physical agents. To whatever degree we might imagine

our knowledge of the properties of the several ingredients of a living body to

be extended and perfected, it is certain that no mere summing up of the

separate actions of those elements will ever amount to the action of the living

body itself. The tongue, for instance, is, like all other parts of the animal

frame, composed of gelatine, fibrine, and other products of the chemistry ofdigestion; but from no knowledge of the properties of those substances could

we ever predict that it could taste, unless gelatine or fibrine could themselves

taste; for no elementary fact can be in the conclusion which was not in the

premises.

              There are thus two different modes of the conjunct action of causes;

from which arise two modes of conflict, or mutual interference, between laws

of nature. Suppose, at a given point of time and space, two or more causes,

which, if they acted separately, would produce effects contrary, or at least

conflicting with each other; one of them tending to undo, wholly or partially,

what the other tends to do. Thus the expansive force of the gases generated

by the ignition of gunpowder tends to project a bullet toward the sky, while

its gravity tends to make it fall to the ground. A stream running into a

reservoir at one end tends to fill it higher and higher, while a drain at the

other extremity tends to empty it. Now, in such cases as these, even if the two

causes which are in joint action exactly annul one another, still the laws of

both are fulfilled; the effect is the same as if the drain had been open for half
              132
an hour first, and the stream had flowed in for as long afterward. Each

agent produces the same amount of effect as if it had acted separately, though

the contrary effect which was taking place during the same time obliterated it

as fast as it was produced. Here, then, are two causes, producing by their joint

operations an effect which at first seems quite dissimilar to those which they

produce separately, but which on examination proves to be really the sum of

those separate effects. It will be noticed that we here enlarge the idea of the

sum of two effects, so as to include what is commonly called their difference,

but which is in reality the result of the addition of opposites; a conception to

which mankind are indebted for that admirable extension of the algebraical

calculus, which has so vastly increased its powers as an instrument of

discovery, by introducing into its reasonings (with the sign of subtraction

prefixed, and under the name of Negative Quantities) every description

whatever of positive phenomena, provided they are of such a quality in

reference to those previously introduced, that to add the one is equivalent to

subtracting an equal quantity of the other.

              There is, then, one mode of the mutual interference of laws of

nature, in which, even when the concurrent causes annihilate each other’s

effects, each exerts its full efficacy according to its own law — its law as a

separate agent. But in the other description of cases, the agencies which arebrought together cease entirely, and a totally different set of phenomena arise:

as in the experiment of two liquids which, when mixed in certain proportions,

instantly become, not a larger amount of liquid, but a solid mass.

              § 2. This difference between the case in which the joint effect of

causes is the sum of their separate effects, and the case in which it is

heterogeneous to them — between laws which work together without

alteration, and laws which, when called upon to work together, cease and

give place to others — is one of the fundamental distinctions in nature. The

former case, that of the Composition of Causes, is the general one; the other

is always special and exceptional. There are no objects which do not, as to

some of their phenomena, obey the principle of the Composition of Causes;

none that have not some laws which are rigidly fulfilled in every combination

into which the objects enter. The weight of a body, for instance, is a property

which it retains in all the combinations in which it is placed. The weight of a

chemical compound, or of an organized body, is equal to the sum of the

weights of the elements which compose it. The weight either of the elements

or of the compound will vary, if they be carried farther from their centre of

attraction, or brought nearer to it; but whatever effects the one effects the

other. They always remain precisely equal. So, again, the component parts of

a vegetable or animal substance do not lose their mechanical and chemical

properties as separate agents, when, by a peculiar mode of juxtaposition,

they, as an aggregate whole, acquire physiological or vital properties in

addition. Those bodies continue, as before, to obey mechanical and chemical

laws, in so far as the operation of those laws is not counteracted by the new

laws which govern them as organized beings; when, in short, a concurrence

of causes takes place which calls into action new laws bearing no analogy to

any that we can trace in the separate operation of the causes, the new laws,

while they supersede one portion of the previous laws, may co-exist with

another portion, and may even compound the effect of those previous laws

with their own.

              Again, laws which were themselves generated in the second mode,

may generate others in the first. Though there are laws which, like those of

chemistry and physiology, owe their existence to a breach of the principle of

Composition of Causes, it does not follow that these peculiar, or, as they

might be termed, heteropathic laws, are not capable of composition with one

another. The causes which by one combination have had their laws altered,may carry their new laws with them unaltered into their ulterior

combinations. And hence there is no reason to despair of ultimately raising

chemistry and physiology to the condition of deductive sciences; for though it

is impossible to deduce all chemical and physiological truths from the laws or

properties of simple substances or elementary agents, they may possibly be

deducible from laws which commence when these elementary agents are

brought together into some moderate number of not very complex

combinations. The Laws of Life will never be deducible from the mere laws

of the ingredients, but the prodigiously complex Facts of Life may all be

deducible from comparatively simple laws of life; which laws (depending

indeed on combinations, but on comparatively simple combinations, of

antecedents) may, in more complex circumstances, be strictly compounded

with one another, and with the physical and chemical laws of the ingredients.

The details of the vital phenomena, even now, afford innumerable

exemplifications of the Composition of Causes; and in proportion as these

phenomena are more accurately studied, there appears more reason to believe

that the same laws which operate in the simpler combinations of

circumstances do, in fact, continue to be observed in the more complex. This

will be found equally true in the phenomena of mind; and even in social and

political phenomena, the results of the laws of mind. It is in the case of

chemical phenomena that the least progress has yet been made in bringing the

special laws under general ones from which they may be deduced; but there

are even in chemistry many circumstances to encourage the hope that such

general laws will hereafter be discovered. The different actions of a chemical

compound will never, undoubtedly, be found to be the sums of the actions of

its separate elements; but there may exist, between the properties of the

compound and those of its elements, some constant relation, which, if

discoverable by a sufficient induction, would enable us to foresee the sort of

compound which will result from a new combination before we have actually

tried it, and to judge of what sort of elements some new substance is

compounded before we have analyzed it. The law of definite proportions,

first discovered in its full generality by Dalton, is a complete solution of this

problem in one, though but a secondary aspect, that of quantity; and in

respect to quality, we have already some partial generalizations, sufficient to

indicate the possibility of ultimately proceeding farther. We can predicate

some common properties of the kind of compounds which result from the

combination, in each of the small number of possible proportions, of any acidwhatever with any base. We have also the curious law, discovered by

Berthollet, that two soluble salts mutually decompose one another whenever

the new combinations which result produce an insoluble compound, or one

less soluble than the two former. Another uniformity is that called the law of

isomorphism; the identity of the crystalline forms of substances which
                                                                            133
possess in common certain peculiarities of chemical composition. Thus it

appears that even heteropathic laws, such laws of combined agency as are not

compounded of the laws of the separate agencies, are yet, at least in some

cases, derived from them according to a fixed principle. There may,

therefore, be laws of the generation of laws from others dissimilar to them;

and in chemistry, these undiscovered laws of the dependence of the

properties of the compound on the properties of its elements, may, together

with the laws of the elements themselves, furnish the premises by which the

science is perhaps destined one day to be rendered deductive.

              It would seem, therefore, that there is no class of phenomena in

which the Composition of Causes does not obtain: that as a general rule,

causes in combination produce exactly the same effects as when acting

singly: but that this rule, though general, is not universal: that in some

instances, at some particular points in the transition from separate to united

action, the laws change, and an entirely new set of effects are either added to,

or take the place of, those which arise from the separate agency of the same

causes: the laws of these new effects being again susceptible of composition,

to an indefinite extent, like the laws which they superseded.

              § 3. That effects are proportional to their causes is laid down by

some writers as an axiom in the theory of causation; and great use is

sometimes made of this principle in reasonings respecting the laws of nature,

though it is encumbered with many difficulties and apparent exceptions,

which much ingenuity has been expended in showing not to be real ones.

This proposition, in so far as it is true, enters as a particular case into the

general principle of the Composition of Causes; the causes compounded

being, in this instance, homogeneous; in which case, if in any, their joint

effect might be expected to be identical with the sum of their separate effects.

If a force equal to one hundred weight will raise a certain body along an

inclined plane, a force equal to two hundred weight will raise two bodies

exactly similar, and thus the effect is proportional to the cause. But does not a

force equal to two hundred weight actually contain in itself two forces eachequal to one hundred weight, which, if employed apart, would separately

raise the two bodies in question? The fact, therefore, that when exerted jointly

they raise both bodies at once, results from the Composition of Causes, and is

a mere instance of the general fact that mechanical forces are subject to the

law of Composition. And so in every other case which can be supposed. For

the doctrine of the proportionality of effects to their causes can not of course

be applicable to cases in which the augmentation of the cause alters the kind

of effect; that is, in which the surplus quantity superadded to the cause does

not become compounded with it, but the two together generate an altogether

new phenomenon. Suppose that the application of a certain quantity of heat to

a body merely increases its bulk, that a double quantity melts it, and a triple

quantity decomposes it: these three effects being heterogeneous, no ratio,

whether corresponding or not to that of the quantities of heat applied, can be

established between them. Thus the supposed axiom of the proportionality of

effects to their causes fails at the precise point where the principle of the

Composition of Causes also fails; viz., where the concurrence of causes is

such as to determine a change in the properties of the body generally, and

render it subject to new laws, more or less dissimilar to those to which it

conformed in its previous state. The recognition, therefore, of any such law of

proportionality is superseded by the more comprehensive principle, in which
                                                    134
as much of it as is true is implicitly asserted.

              The general remarks on causation, which seemed necessary as an

introduction to the theory of the inductive process, may here terminate. That

process is essentially an inquiry into cases of causation. All the uniformities

which exist in the succession of phenomena, and most of the uniformities in

their co-existence, are either, as we have seen, themselves laws of causation,

or consequences resulting from, and corollaries capable of being deduced

from, such laws. If we could determine what causes are correctly assigned to

what effects, and what effects to what causes, we should be virtually

acquainted with the whole course of nature. All those uniformities which are

mere results of causation might then be explained and accounted for; and

every individual fact or event might be predicted, provided we had the

requisite data, that is, the requisite knowledge of the circumstances which, in

the particular instance, preceded it.

              To ascertain, therefore, what are the laws of causation which exist in

nature; to determine the effect of every cause, and the causes of all effects, isthe main business of Induction; and to point out how this is done is the chief

object of Inductive Logic.

 

 

               Chapter VII. – On Observation And Experiment.

 

 

              § 1. It results from the preceding exposition, that the process of

ascertaining what consequents, in nature, are invariably connected with what

antecedents, or in other words what phenomena are related to each other as

causes and effects, is in some sort a process of analysis. That every fact

which begins to exist has a cause, and that this cause must be found in some

fact or concourse of facts which immediately preceded the occurrence, may

be taken for certain. The whole of the present facts are the infallible result of

all past facts, and more immediately of all the facts which existed at the

moment previous. Here, then, is a great sequence, which we know to be

uniform. If the whole prior state of the entire universe could again recur, it

would again be followed by the present state. The question is, how to resolve

this complex uniformity into the simpler uniformities which compose it, and

assign to each portion of the vast antecedent the portion of the consequent

which is attendant on it.

              This operation, which we have called analytical, inasmuch as it is the

resolution of a complex whole into the component elements, is more than a

merely mental analysis. No mere contemplation of the phenomena, and

partition of them by the intellect alone, will of itself accomplish the end we

have now in view. Nevertheless, such a mental partition is an indispensable

first step. The order of nature, as perceived at a first glance, presents at every

instant a chaos followed by another chaos. We must decompose each chaos

into single facts. We must learn to see in the chaotic antecedent a multitude

of distinct antecedents, in the chaotic consequent a multitude of distinct

consequents. This, supposing it done, will not of itself tell us on which of the

antecedents each consequent is invariably attendant. To determine that point,

we must endeavor to effect a separation of the facts from one another, not in

our minds only, but in nature. The mental analysis, however, must take place

first. And every one knows that in the mode of performing it, one intellect

differs immensely from another. It is the essence of the act of observing; for

the observer is not he who merely sees the thing which is before his eyes, but

he who sees what parts that thing is composed of. To do this well is a rare

talent. One person, from inattention, or attending only in the wrong place,overlooks half of what he sees; another sets down much more than he sees,

confounding it with what he imagines, or with what he infers; another takes

note of the kind of all the circumstances, but being inexpert in estimating

their degree, leaves the quantity of each vague and uncertain; another sees

indeed the whole, but makes such an awkward division of it into parts,

throwing things into one mass which require to be separated, and separating

others which might more conveniently be considered as one, that the result is

much the same, sometimes even worse, than if no analysis had been

attempted at all. It would be possible to point out what qualities of mind, and

modes of mental culture, fit a person for being a good observer: that,

however, is a question not of Logic, but of the Theory of Education, in the

most enlarged sense of the term. There is not properly an Art of Observing.

There may be rules for observing. But these, like rules for inventing, are

properly instructions for the preparation of one’s own mind; for putting it into

the state in which it will be most fitted to observe, or most likely to invent.

They are, therefore, essentially rules of self-education, which is a different

thing from Logic. They do not teach how to do the thing, but how to make

ourselves capable of doing it. They are an art of strengthening the limbs, not

an art of using them.

              The extent and minuteness of observation which may be requisite,

and the degree of decomposition to which it may be necessary to carry the

mental analysis, depend on the particular purpose in view. To ascertain the

state of the whole universe at any particular moment is impossible, but would

also be useless. In making chemical experiments, we do not think it necessary

to note the position of the planets; because experience has shown, as a very

superficial experience is sufficient to show, that in such cases that

circumstance is not material to the result: and accordingly, in the ages when

men believed in the occult influences of the heavenly bodies, it might have

been unphilosophical to omit ascertaining the precise condition of those

bodies at the moment of the experiment. As to the degree of minuteness of

the mental subdivision, if we were obliged to break down what we observe

into its very simplest elements, that is, literally into single facts, it would be

difficult to say where we should find them; we can hardly ever affirm that our

divisions of any kind have reached the ultimate unit. But this, too, is

fortunately unnecessary. The only object of the mental separation is to

suggest the requisite physical separation, so that we may either accomplish it

ourselves, or seek for it in nature; and we have done enough when we havecarried the subdivision as far as the point at which we are able to see what

observations or experiments we require. It is only essential, at whatever point

our mental decomposition of facts may for the present have stopped, that we

should hold ourselves ready and able to carry it further as occasion requires,

and should not allow the freedom of our discriminating faculty to be

imprisoned by the swathes and bands of ordinary classification; as was the

case with all early speculative inquirers, not excepting the Greeks, to whom it

seldom occurred that what was called by one abstract name might, in reality,

be several phenomena, or that there was a possibility of decomposing the

facts of the universe into any elements but those which ordinary language

already recognized.

              § 2. The different antecedents and consequents being, then, supposed

to be, so far as the case requires, ascertained and discriminated from one

another, we are to inquire which is connected with which. In every instance

which comes under our observation, there are many antecedents and many

consequents. If those antecedents could not be severed from one another

except in thought, or if those consequents never were found apart, it would be

impossible for us to distinguish (a posteriori at least) the real laws, or to

assign to any cause its effect, or to any effect its cause. To do so, we must be

able to meet with some of the antecedents apart from the rest, and observe

what follows from them; or some of the consequents, and observe by what

they are preceded. We must, in short, follow the Baconian rule of varying the

circumstances . This is, indeed, only the first rule of physical inquiry, and

not, as some have thought, the sole rule; but it is the foundation of all the rest.

              For the purpose of varying the circumstances, we may have recourse

(according to a distinction commonly made) either to observation or to

experiment; we may either find an instance in nature suited to our purposes,

or, by an artificial arrangement of circumstances, make one. The value of the

instance depends on what it is in itself, not on the mode in which it is

obtained: its employment for the purposes of induction depends on the same

principles in the one case and in the other; as the uses of money are the same

whether it is inherited or acquired. There is, in short, no difference in kind, no

real logical distinction, between the two processes of investigation. There are,

however, practical distinctions to which it is of considerable importance to

advert.

              § 3. The first and most obvious distinction between Observation andExperiment is, that the latter is an immense extension of the former. It not

only enables us to produce a much greater number of variations in the

circumstances than nature spontaneously offers, but also, in thousands of

cases, to produce the precise sort of variation which we are in want of for

discovering the law of the phenomenon; a service which nature, being

constructed on a quite different scheme from that of facilitating our studies, is

seldom so friendly as to bestow upon us. For example, in order to ascertain

what principle in the atmosphere enables it to sustain life, the variation we

require is that a living animal should be immersed in each component

element of the atmosphere separately. But nature does not supply either

oxygen or azote in a separate state. We are indebted to artificial experiment

for our knowledge that it is the former, and not the latter, which supports

respiration; and for our knowledge of the very existence of the two

ingredients.

              Thus far the advantage of experimentation over simple observation

is universally recognized: all are aware that it enables us to obtain

innumerable combinations of circumstances which are not to be found in

nature, and so add to nature’s experiments a multitude of experiments of our

own. But there is another superiority (or, as Bacon would have expressed it,

another prerogative) of instances artificially obtained over spontaneous

instances — of our own experiments over even the same experiments when

made by nature — which is not of less importance, and which is far from

being felt and acknowledged in the same degree.

              When we can produce a phenomenon artificially, we can take it, as it

were, home with us, and observe it in the midst of circumstances with which

in all other respects we are accurately acquainted. If we desire to know what

are the effects of the cause A, and are able to produce A by means at our

disposal, we can generally determine at our own discretion, so far as is

compatible with the nature of the phenomenon A, the whole of the

circumstances which shall be present along with it: and thus, knowing exactly

the simultaneous state of every thing else which is within the reach of A’s

influence, we have only to observe what alteration is made in that state by the

presence of A.

              For example, by the electric machine we can produce, in the midst of

known circumstances, the phenomena which nature exhibits on a grander

scale in the form of lightning and thunder. Now let any one consider whatamount of knowledge of the effects and laws of electric agency mankind

could have obtained from the mere observation of thunder-storms, and

compare it with that which they have gained, and may expect to gain, from

electrical and galvanic experiments. This example is the more striking, now

that we have reason to believe that electric action is of all natural phenomena

(except heat) the most pervading and universal, which, therefore, it might

antecedently have been supposed could stand least in need of artificial means

of production to enable it to be studied; while the fact is so much the

contrary, that without the electric machine, the Leyden jar, and the voltaic

battery, we probably should never have suspected the existence of electricity

as one of the great agents in nature; the few electric phenomena we should

have known of would have continued to be regarded either as supernatural, or

as a sort of anomalies and eccentricities in the order of the universe.

              When we have succeeded in insulating the phenomenon which is the

subject of inquiry, by placing it among known circumstances, we may

produce further variations of circumstances to any extent, and of such kinds

as we think best calculated to bring the laws of the phenomenon into a clear

light. By introducing one well-defined circumstance after another into the

experiment, we obtain assurance of the manner in which the phenomenon

behaves under an indefinite variety of possible circumstances. Thus,

chemists, after having obtained some newly-discovered substance in a pure

state (that is, having made sure that there is nothing present which can

interfere with and modify its agency), introduce various other substances, one

by one, to ascertain whether it will combine with them, or decompose them,

and with what result; and also apply heat, or electricity, or pressure, to

discover what will happen to the substance under each of these

circumstances.

              But if, on the other hand, it is out of our power to produce the

phenomenon, and we have to seek for instances in which nature produces it,

the task before us is very different.

              Instead of being able to choose what the concomitant circumstances

shall be, we now have to discover what they are; which, when we go beyond

the simplest and most accessible cases, it is next to impossible to do with any

precision and completeness. Let us take, as an exemplification of a

phenomenon which we have no means of fabricating artificially, a human

mind. Nature produces many; but the consequence of our not being able toproduce them by art is, that in every instance in which we see a human mind

developing itself, or acting upon other things, we see it surrounded and

obscured by an indefinite multitude of unascertainable circumstances,

rendering the use of the common experimental methods almost delusive. We

may conceive to what extent this is true, if we consider, among other things,

that whenever Nature produces a human mind, she produces, in close

connection with it, a body; that is, a vast complication of physical facts, in no

two cases perhaps exactly similar, and most of which (except the mere

structure, which we can examine in a sort of coarse way after it has ceased to

act), are radically out of the reach of our means of exploration. If, instead of a

human mind, we suppose the subject of investigation to be a human society

or State, all the same difficulties recur in a greatly augmented degree.

              We have thus already come within sight of a conclusion, which the

progress of the inquiry will, I think, bring before us with the clearest

evidence: namely, that in the sciences which deal with phenomena in which

artificial experiments are impossible (as in the case of astronomy), or in

which they have a very limited range (as in mental philosophy, social

science, and even physiology), induction from direct experience is practiced

at a disadvantage in most cases equivalent to impracticability; from which it

follows that the methods of those sciences, in order to accomplish any thing

worthy of attainment, must be to a great extent, if not principally, deductive.

This is already known to be the case with the first of the sciences we have

mentioned, astronomy; that it is not generally recognized as true of the

others, is probably one of the reasons why they are not in a more advanced

state.

              § 4. If what is called pure observation is at so great a disadvantage,

compared with artificial experimentation, in one department of the direct

exploration of phenomena, there is another branch in which the advantage is

all on the side of the former.

              Inductive inquiry having for its object to ascertain what causes are

connected with what effects, we may begin this search at either end of the

road which leads from the one point to the other: we may either inquire into

the effects of a given cause or into the causes of a given effect. The fact that

light blackens chloride of silver might have been discovered either by

experiments on light, trying what effect it would produce on various

substances, or by observing that portions of the chloride had repeatedlybecome black, and inquiring into the circumstances. The effect of the urali

poison might have become known either by administering it to animals, or by

examining how it happened that the wounds which the Indians of Guiana

inflict with their arrows prove so uniformly mortal. Now it is manifest from

the mere statement of the examples, without any theoretical discussion, that

artificial experimentation is applicable only to the former of these modes of

investigation. We can take a cause, and try what it will produce; but we can

not take an effect, and try what it will be produced by. We can only watch till

we see it produced, or are enabled to produce it by accident.

              This would be of little importance, if it always depended on our

choice from which of the two ends of the sequence we would undertake our

inquiries. But we have seldom any option. As we can only travel from the

known to the unknown, we are obliged to commence at whichever end we are

best acquainted with. If the agent is more familiar to us than its effects, we

watch for, or contrive, instances of the agent, under such varieties of

circumstances as are open to us, and observe the result. If, on the contrary,

the conditions on which a phenomenon depends are obscure, but the

phenomenon itself familiar, we must commence our inquiry from the effect.

If we are struck with the fact that chloride of silver has been blackened, and

have no suspicion of the cause, we have no resource but to compare instances

in which the fact has chanced to occur, until by that comparison we discover

that in all those instances the substances had been exposed to light. If we

knew nothing of the Indian arrows but their fatal effect, accident alone could

turn our attention to experiments on the urali; in the regular course of

investigation, we could only inquire, or try to observe, what had been done to

the arrows in particular instances.

              Wherever, having nothing to guide us to the cause, we are obliged to

set out from the effect, and to apply the rule of varying the circumstances to

the consequents, not the antecedents, we are necessarily destitute of the

resource of artificial experimentation. We can not, at our choice, obtain

consequents, as we can antecedents, under any set of circumstances

compatible with their nature. There are no means of producing effects but

through their causes, and by the supposition the causes of the effect in

question are not known to us. We have, therefore, no expedient but to study it

where it offers itself spontaneously. If nature happens to present us with

instances sufficiently varied in their circumstances, and if we are able todiscover, either among the proximate antecedents or among some other order

of antecedents, something which is always found when the effect is found,

however various the circumstances, and never found when it is not, we may

discover, by mere observation without experiment, a real uniformity in

nature.

              But though this is certainly the most favorable case for sciences of

pure observation, as contrasted with those in which artificial experiments are

possible, there is in reality no case which more strikingly illustrates the

inherent imperfection of direct induction when not founded on

experimentation. Suppose that, by a comparison of cases of the effect, we

have found an antecedent which appears to be, and perhaps is, invariably

connected with it: we have not yet proved that antecedent to be the cause

until we have reversed the process, and produced the effect by means of that

antecedent. If we can produce the antecedent artificially, and if, when we do

so, the effect follows, the induction is complete; that antecedent is the cause
                    135
of that consequent. But we have then added the evidence of experiment to

that of simple observation. Until we had done so, we had only proved

invariable antecedence within the limits of experience, but not unconditional

antecedence, or causation. Until it had been shown by the actual production

of the antecedent under known circumstances, and the occurrence thereupon

of the consequent, that the antecedent was really the condition on which it

depended; the uniformity of succession which was proved to exist between

them might, for aught we knew, be (like the succession of day and night) not

a case of causation at all; both antecedent and consequent might be

successive stages of the effect of an ulterior cause. Observation, in short,

without experiment (supposing no aid from deduction) can ascertain

sequences and co-existences, but can not prove causation.

              In order to see these remarks verified by the actual state of the

sciences, we have only to think of the condition of natural history. In

zoology, for example, there is an immense number of uniformities

ascertained, some of co-existence, others of succession, to many of which,

notwithstanding considerable variations of the attendant circumstances, we

know not any exception: but the antecedents, for the most part, are such as

we can not artificially produce; or if we can, it is only by setting in motion

the exact process by which nature produces them; and this being to us a

mysterious process, of which the main circumstances are not only unknownbut unobservable, we do not succeed in obtaining the antecedents under

known circumstances. What is the result? That on this vast subject, which

affords so much and such varied scope for observation, we have made most

scanty progress in ascertaining any laws of causation. We know not with

certainty, in the case of most of the phenomena that we find conjoined, which

is the condition of the other; which is cause, and which effect, or whether

either of them is so, or they are not rather conjunct effects of causes yet to be

discovered, complex results of laws hitherto unknown.

              Although some of the foregoing observations may be, in technical

strictness of arrangement, premature in this place, it seemed that a few

general remarks on the difference between sciences of mere observation and

sciences of experimentation, and the extreme disadvantage under which

directly inductive inquiry is necessarily carried on in the former, were the

best preparation for discussing the methods of direct induction; a preparation

rendering superfluous much that must otherwise have been introduced, with

some inconvenience, into the heart of that discussion. To the consideration of

these methods we now proceed.

 

 

     Chapter VIII. – Of The Four Methods Of Experimental Inquiry.

 

 

              § 1. The simplest and most obvious modes of singling out from

among the circumstances which precede or follow a phenomenon, those with

which it is really connected by an invariable law, are two in number. One is,

by comparing together different instances in which the phenomenon occurs.

The other is, by comparing instances in which the phenomenon does occur,

with instances in other respects similar in which it does not. These two

methods may be respectively denominated, the Method of Agreement, and

the Method of Difference.

              In illustrating these methods, it will be necessary to bear in mind the

twofold character of inquiries into the laws of phenomena; which may be

either inquiries into the cause of a given effect, or into the effects or

properties of a given cause. We shall consider the methods in their

application to either order of investigation, and shall draw our examples

equally from both.

              We shall denote antecedents by the large letters of the alphabet, and

the consequents corresponding to them by the small. Let A, then, be an agent

or cause, and let the object of our inquiry be to ascertain what are the effects

of this cause. If we can either find, or produce, the agent A in such varieties

of circumstances that the different cases have no circumstance in common

except A; then whatever effect we find to be produced in all our trials, is

indicated as the effect of A. Suppose, for example, that A is tried along with

B and C, and that the effect is a b c ; and suppose that A is next tried with D

and E, but without B and C, and that the effect is a d e . Then we may reason

thus: b and c are not effects of A, for they were not produced by it in the

second experiment; nor are d and e , for they were not produced in the first.

Whatever is really the effect of A must have been produced in both instances;

now this condition is fulfilled by no circumstance except a . The phenomenon

a can not have been the effect of B or C, since it was produced where they

were not; nor of D or E, since it was produced where they were not.

Therefore it is the effect of A.

              For example, let the antecedent A be the contact of an alkalinesubstance and an oil. This combination being tried under several varieties of

circumstances, resembling each other in nothing else, the results agree in the

production of a greasy and detersive or saponaceous substance: it is therefore

concluded that the combination of an oil and an alkali causes the production

of a soap. It is thus we inquire, by the Method of Agreement, into the effect

of a given cause.

              In a similar manner we may inquire into the cause of a given effect.

Let a be the effect. Here, as shown in the last chapter, we have only the

resource of observation without experiment: we can not take a phenomenon

of which we know not the origin, and try to find its mode of production by

producing it: if we succeeded in such a random trial it could only be by

accident. But if we can observe a in two different combinations, a b c and a d

e ; and if we know, or can discover, that the antecedent circumstances in

these cases respectively were A B C and A D E, we may conclude by a

reasoning similar to that in the preceding example, that A is the antecedent

connected with the consequent a by a law of causation. B and C, we may say,

can not be causes of a , since on its second occurrence they were not present;

nor are D and E, for they were not present on its first occurrence. A, alone of

the five circumstances, was found among the antecedents of a in both

instances.

              For example, let the effect a be crystallization. We compare

instances in which bodies are known to assume crystalline structure, but

which have no other point of agreement; and we find them to have one, and

as far as we can observe, only one, antecedent in common: the deposition of a

solid matter from a liquid state, either a state of fusion or of solution. We

conclude, therefore, that the solidification of a substance from a liquid state is

an invariable antecedent of its crystallization.

              In this example we may go further, and say, it is not only the

invariable antecedent but the cause; or at least the proximate event which

completes the cause. For in this case we are able, after detecting the

antecedent A, to produce it artificially, and by finding that a follows it, verify

the result of our induction. The importance of thus reversing the proof was

strikingly manifested when, by keeping a phial of water charged with

siliceous particles undisturbed for years, a chemist (I believe Dr. Wollaston)

succeeded in obtaining crystals of quartz; and in the equally interesting

experiment in which Sir James Hall produced artificial marble by the coolingof its materials from fusion under immense pressure: two admirable examples

of the light which may be thrown upon the most secret processes of Nature

by well-contrived interrogation of her.

              But if we can not artificially produce the phenomenon A, the

conclusion that it is the cause of a remains subject to very considerable

doubt. Though an invariable, it may not be the unconditional antecedent of a ,

but may precede it as day precedes night or night day. This uncertainty arises

from the impossibility of assuring ourselves that A is the only immediate

antecedent common to both the instances. If we could be certain of having

ascertained all the invariable antecedents, we might be sure that the

unconditional invariable antecedent, or cause, must be found somewhere

among them. Unfortunately it is hardly ever possible to ascertain all the

antecedents, unless the phenomenon is one which we can produce artificially.

Even then, the difficulty is merely lightened, not removed: men knew how to

raise water in pumps long before they adverted to what was really the

operating circumstance in the means they employed, namely, the pressure of

the atmosphere on the open surface of the water. It is, however, much easier

to analyze completely a set of arrangements made by ourselves, than the

whole complex mass of the agencies which nature happens to be exerting at

the moment of the production of a given phenomenon. We may overlook

some of the material circumstances in an experiment with an electrical

machine; but we shall, at the worst, be better acquainted with them than with

those of a thunder-storm.

              The mode of discovering and proving laws of nature, which we have

now examined, proceeds on the following axiom: Whatever circumstances

can be excluded, without prejudice to the phenomenon, or can be absent

notwithstanding its presence, is not connected with it in the way of causation.

The casual circumstances being thus eliminated, if only one remains, that one

is the cause which we are in search of: if more than one, they either are, or

contain among them, the cause; and so, mutatis mutandis , of the effect. As

this method proceeds by comparing different instances to ascertain in what

they agree, I have termed it the Method of Agreement; and we may adopt as

its regulating principal the following canon:

              FIRST CANON.

              If two or more instances of the phenomenon under investigationhave only one circumstance in common, the circumstance in which alone all

the instances agree, is the cause (or effect) of the given phenomenon.

              Quitting for the present the Method of Agreement, to which we shall

almost immediately return, we proceed to a still more potent instrument of

the investigation of nature, the Method of Difference.

              § 2. In the Method of Agreement, we endeavored to obtain instances

which agreed in the given circumstance but differed in every other: in the

present method we require, on the contrary, two instances resembling one

another in every other respect, but differing in the presence or absence of the

phenomenon we wish to study. If our object be to discover the effects of an

agent A, we must procure A in some set of ascertained circumstances, as A B

C, and having noted the effects produced, compare them with the effect of the

remaining circumstances B C, when A is absent. If the effect of A B C is a b

c , and the effect of B C b c , it is evident that the effect of A is a . So again,

if we begin at the other end, and desire to investigate the cause of an effect a ,

we must select an instance, as a b c , in which the effect occurs, and in which

the antecedents were A B C, and we must look out for another instance in

which the remaining circumstances, b c , occur without a . If the antecedents,

in that instance, are B C, we know that the cause of a must be A: either A

alone, or A in conjunction with some of the other circumstances present.

              It is scarcely necessary to give examples of a logical process to

which we owe almost all the inductive conclusions we draw in daily life.

When a man is shot through the heart, it is by this method we know that it

was the gunshot which killed him: for he was in the fullness of life

immediately before, all circumstances being the same, except the wound.

              The axioms implied in this method are evidently the following.

Whatever antecedent can not be excluded without preventing the

phenomenon, is the cause, or a condition, of that phenomenon: whatever

consequent can be excluded, with no other difference in the antecedents than

the absence of a particular one, is the effect of that one. Instead of comparing

different instances of a phenomenon, to discover in what they agree, this

method compares an instance of its occurrence with an instance of its non-

occurrence, to discover in what they differ. The canon which is the regulating

principle of the Method of Difference may be expressed as follows:

              SECOND CANON.              If an instance in which the phenomenon under investigation occurs,

and an instance in which it does not occur, have every circumstance in

common save one, that one occurring only in the former; the circumstance in

which alone the two instances differ, is the effect, or the cause, or an

indispensable part of the cause, of the phenomenon.

              § 3. The two methods which we have now stated have many features

of resemblance, but there are also many distinctions between them. Both are

methods of elimination . This term (employed in the theory of equations to

denote the process by which one after another of the elements of a question is

excluded, and the solution made to depend on the relation between the

remaining elements only) is well suited to express the operation, analogous to

this, which has been understood since the time of Bacon to be the foundation

of experimental inquiry: namely, the successive exclusion of the various

circumstances which are found to accompany a phenomenon in a given

instance, in order to ascertain what are those among them which can be

absent consistently with the existence of the phenomenon. The Method of

Agreement stands on the ground that whatever can be eliminated, is not

connected with the phenomenon by any law. The Method of Difference has

for its foundation, that whatever can not be eliminated, is connected with the

phenomenon by a law.

              Of these methods, that of Difference is more particularly a method

of artificial experiment; while that of Agreement is more especially the

resource employed where experimentation is impossible. A few reflections

will prove the fact, and point out the reason of it.

              It is inherent in the peculiar character of the Method of Difference,

that the nature of the combinations which it requires is much more strictly

defined than in the Method of Agreement. The two instances which are to be

compared with one another must be exactly similar, in all circumstances

except the one which we are attempting to investigate: they must be in the

relation of A B C and B C, or of a b c and b c . It is true that this similarity of

circumstances needs not extend to such as are already known to be

immaterial to the result. And in the case of most phenomena we learn at once,

from the commonest experience, that most of the co-existent phenomena of

the universe may be either present or absent without affecting the given

phenomenon; or, if present, are present indifferently when the phenomenon

does not happen and when it does. Still, even limiting the identity which isrequired between the two instances, A B C and B C, to such circumstances as

are not already known to be indifferent, it is very seldom that nature affords

two instances, of which we can be assured that they stand in this precise

relation to one another. In the spontaneous operations of nature there is

generally such complication and such obscurity, they are mostly either on so

overwhelmingly large or on so inaccessibly minute a scale, we are so

ignorant of a great part of the facts which really take place, and even those of

which we are not ignorant are so multitudinous, and therefore so seldom

exactly alike in any two cases, that a spontaneous experiment, of the kind

required by the Method of Difference, is commonly not to be found. When,

on the contrary, we obtain a phenomenon by an artificial experiment, a pair

of instances such as the method requires is obtained almost as a matter of

course, provided the process does not last a long time. A certain state of

surrounding circumstances existed before we commenced the experiment;

this is B C. We then introduce A; say, for instance, by merely bringing an

object from another part of the room, before there has been time for any

change in the other elements. It is, in short (as M. Comté observes), the very

nature of an experiment, to introduce into the pre-existing state of

circumstances a change perfectly definite. We choose a previous state of

things with which we are well acquainted, so that no unforeseen alteration in

that state is likely to pass unobserved; and into this we introduce, as rapidly

as possible, the phenomenon which we wish to study; so that in general we

are entitled to feel complete assurance that the pre-existing state, and the state

which we have produced, differ in nothing except the presence or absence of

that phenomenon. If a bird is taken from a cage, and instantly plunged into

carbonic acid gas, the experimentalist may be fully assured (at all events after

one or two repetitions) that no circumstance capable of causing suffocation

had supervened in the interim, except the change from immersion in the

atmosphere to immersion in carbonic acid gas. There is one doubt, indeed,

which may remain in some cases of this description; the effect may have been

produced not by the change, but by the means employed to produce the

change. The possibility, however, of this last supposition generally admits of

being conclusively tested by other experiments. It thus appears that in the

study of the various kinds of phenomena which we can, by our voluntary

agency, modify or control, we can in general satisfy the requisitions of the

Method of Difference; but that by the spontaneous operations of nature those

requisitions are seldom fulfilled.              The reverse of this is the case with the Method of Agreement. We do

not here require instances of so special and determinate a kind. Any instances

whatever, in which nature presents us with a phenomenon, may be examined

for the purposes of this method; and if all such instances agree in any thing, a

conclusion of considerable value is already attained. We can seldom, indeed,

be sure that the one point of agreement is the only one; but this ignorance

does not, as in the Method of Difference, vitiate the conclusion; the certainty

of the result, as far as it goes, is not affected. We have ascertained one

invariable antecedent or consequent, however many other invariable

antecedents or consequents may still remain unascertained. If A B C, A D E,

A F G, are all equally followed by a, then a is an invariable consequent of A.

If a b c , a d e , a f g , all number A among their antecedents, then A is

connected as an antecedent, by some invariable law, with a . But to determine

whether this invariable antecedent is a cause, or this invariable consequent an

effect, we must be able, in addition, to produce the one by means of the other;

or, at least, to obtain that which alone constitutes our assurance of having

produced any thing, namely, an instance in which the effect, a , has come into

existence, with no other change in the pre-existing circumstances than the

addition of A. And this, if we can do it, is an application of the Method of

Difference, not of the Method of Agreement.

              It thus appears to be by the Method of Difference alone that we can

ever, in the way of direct experience, arrive with certainty at causes. The

Method of Agreement leads only to laws of phenomena (as some writers call

them, but improperly, since laws of causation are also laws of phenomena):

that is, to uniformities, which either are not laws of causation, or in which the

question of causation must for the present remain undecided. The Method of

Agreement is chiefly to be resorted to, as a means of suggesting applications

of the Method of Difference (as in the last example the comparison of A B C,

A D E, A F G, suggested that A was the antecedent on which to try the

experiment whether it could produce a ); or as an inferior resource, in case

the Method of Difference is impracticable; which, as we before showed,

generally arises from the impossibility of artificially producing the

phenomena. And hence it is that the Method of Agreement, though applicable

in principle to either case, is more emphatically the method of investigation

on those subjects where artificial experimentation is impossible; because on

those it is, generally, our only resource of a directly inductive nature; while,

in the phenomena which we can produce at pleasure, the Method ofDifference generally affords a more efficacious process, which will ascertain

causes as well as mere laws.

              § 4. There are, however, many cases in which, though our power of

producing the phenomenon is complete, the Method of Difference either can

not be made available at all, or not without a previous employment of the

Method of Agreement. This occurs when the agency by which we can

produce the phenomenon is not that of one single antecedent, but a

combination of antecedents, which we have no power of separating from

each other, and exhibiting apart. For instance, suppose the subject of inquiry

to be the cause of the double refraction of light. We can produce this

phenomenon at pleasure, by employing any one of the many substances

which are known to refract light in that peculiar manner. But if, taking one of

those substances, as Iceland spar, for example, we wish to determine on

which of the properties of Iceland spar this remarkable phenomenon depends,

we can make no use, for that purpose, of the Method of Difference; for we

can not find another substance precisely resembling Iceland spar except in

some one property. The only mode, therefore, of prosecuting this inquiry is

that afforded by the Method of Agreement; by which, in fact, through a

comparison of all the known substances which have the property of doubly

refracting light, it was ascertained that they agree in the circumstance of

being crystalline substances; and though the converse does not hold, though

all crystalline substances have not the property of double refraction, it was

concluded, with reason, that there is a real connection between these two

properties; that either crystalline structure, or the cause which gives rise to

that structure, is one of the conditions of double refraction.

              Out of this employment of the Method of Agreement arises a

peculiar modification of that method, which is sometimes of great avail in the

investigation of nature. In cases similar to the above, in which it is not

possible to obtain the precise pair of instances which our second canon

requires — instances agreeing in every antecedent except A, or in every

consequent except a , we may yet be able, by a double employment of the

Method of Agreement, to discover in what the instances which contain A or a

differ from those which do not.

              If we compare various instances in which a occurs, and find that

they all have in common the circumstance A, and (as far as can be observed)

no other circumstance, the Method of Agreement, so far, bears testimony to aconnection between A and a . In order to convert this evidence of connection

into proof of causation by the direct Method of Difference, we ought to be

able, in some one of these instances, as for example, A B C, to leave out A,

and observe whether by doing so, a is prevented. Now supposing (what is

often the case) that we are not able to try this decisive experiment; yet,

provided we can by any means discover what would be its result if we could

try it, the advantage will be the same. Suppose, then, that as we previously

examined a variety of instances in which a occurred, and found them to agree

in containing A, so we now observe a variety of instances in which a does not

occur, and find them agree in not containing A; which establishes, by the

Method of Agreement, the same connection between the absence of A and

the absence of a , which was before established between their presence. As,

then, it had been shown that whenever A is present a is present, so, it being

now shown that when A is taken away a is removed along with it, we have by

the one proposition A B C, a b c , by the other B C, b c , the positive and

negative instances which the Method of Difference requires.

              This method may be called the Indirect Method of Difference, or the

Joint Method of Agreement and Difference; and consists in a double

employment of the Method of Agreement, each proof being independent of

the other, and corroborating it. But it is not equivalent to a proof by the direct

Method of Difference. For the requisitions of the Method of Difference are

not satisfied, unless we can be quite sure either that the instances affirmative

of a agree in no antecedent whatever but A, or that the instances negative of a

agree in nothing but the negation of A. Now, if it were possible, which it

never is, to have this assurance, we should not need the joint method; for

either of the two sets of instances separately would then be sufficient to prove

causation. This indirect method, therefore, can only be regarded as a great

extension and improvement of the Method of Agreement, but not as

participating in the more cogent nature of the Method of Difference. The

following may be stated as its canon:

              THIRD CANON.

              If two or more instances in which the phenomenon occurs have only

one circumstance in common, while two or more instances in which it does

not occur have nothing in common save the absence of that circumstance, the

circumstance in which alone the two sets of instances differ, is the effect, or

the cause, or an indispensable part of the cause, of the phenomenon.              We shall presently see that the Joint Method of Agreement and

Difference constitutes, in another respect not yet adverted to, an improvement

upon the common Method of Agreement, namely, in being unaffected by a

characteristic imperfection of that method, the nature of which still remains to

be pointed out. But as we can not enter into this exposition without

introducing a new element of complexity into this long and intricate

discussion, I shall postpone it to a subsequent chapter, and shall at once

proceed to a statement of two other methods, which will complete the

enumeration of the means which mankind possess for exploring the laws of

nature by specific observation and experience.

              § 5. The first of these has been aptly denominated the Method of

Residues. Its principle is very simple. Subducting from any given

phenomenon all the portions which, by virtue of preceding inductions, can be

assigned to known causes, the remainder will be the effect of the antecedents

which had been overlooked, or of which the effect was as yet an unknown

quantity.

              Suppose, as before, that we have the antecedents A B C, followed by

the consequents a b c , and that by previous inductions (founded, we will

suppose, on the Method of Difference) we have ascertained the causes of

some of these effects, or the effects of some of these causes; and are thence

apprised that the effect of A is a , and that the effect of B is b . Subtracting

the sum of these effects from the total phenomenon, there remains c , which

now, without any fresh experiments, we may know to be the effect of C. This

Method of Residues is in truth a peculiar modification of the Method of

Difference. If the instance A B C, a b c , could have been compared with a

single instance A B, a b , we should have proved C to be the cause of c , by

the common process of the Method of Difference. In the present case,

however, instead of a single instance A B, we have had to study separately

the causes A and B, and to infer from the effects which they produce

separately what effect they must produce in the case A B C, where they act

together. Of the two instances, therefore, which the Method of Difference

requires — the one positive, the other negative — the negative one, or that in

which the given phenomenon is absent, is not the direct result of observation

and experiment, but has been arrived at by deduction. As one of the forms of

the Method of Difference, the Method of Residues partakes of its rigorous

certainty, provided the previous inductions, those which gave the effects of Aand B, were obtained by the same infallible method, and provided we are

certain that C is the only antecedent to which the residual phenomenon c can

be referred; the only agent of which we had not already calculated and

subducted the effect. But as we can never be quite certain of this, the

evidence derived from the Method of Residues is not complete unless we can

obtain C artificially, and try it separately, or unless its agency, when once

suggested, can be accounted for, and proved deductively from known laws.

              Even with these reservations, the Method of Residues is one of the

most important among our instruments of discovery. Of all the methods of

investigating laws of nature, this is the most fertile in unexpected results:

often informing us of sequences in which neither the cause nor the effect

were sufficiently conspicuous to attract of themselves the attention of

observers. The agent C may be an obscure circumstance, not likely to have

been perceived unless sought for, nor likely to have been sought for until

attention had been awakened by the insufficiency of the obvious causes to

account for the whole of the effect. And c may be so disguised by its

intermixture with a and b , that it would scarcely have presented itself

spontaneously as a subject of separate study. Of these uses of the method, we

shall presently cite some remarkable examples. The canon of the Method of

Residues is as follows:

              FOURTH CANON.

              Subduct from any phenomenon such part as is known by previous

inductions to be the effect of certain antecedents, and the residue of the

phenomenon is the effect of the remaining antecedents.

              § 6. There remains a class of laws which it is impracticable to

ascertain by any of the three methods which I have attempted to characterize:

namely, the laws of those Permanent Causes, or indestructible natural agents,

which it is impossible either to exclude or to isolate; which we can neither

hinder from being present, nor contrive that they shall be present alone. It

would appear at first sight that we could by no means separate the effects of

these agents from the effects of those other phenomena with which they can

not be prevented from co-existing. In respect, indeed, to most of the

permanent causes, no such difficulty exists; since, though we can not

eliminate them as co-existing facts, we can eliminate them as influencing

agents, by simply trying our experiment in a local situation beyond the limitsof their influence. The pendulum, for example, has its oscillations disturbed

by the vicinity of a mountain: we remove the pendulum to a sufficient

distance from the mountain, and the disturbance ceases: from these data we

can determine by the Method of Difference, the amount of effect due to the

mountain; and beyond a certain distance every thing goes on precisely as it

would do if the mountain exercised no influence whatever, which,

accordingly, we, with sufficient reason, conclude to be the fact.

              The difficulty, therefore, in applying the methods already treated of

to determine the effects of Permanent Causes, is confined to the cases in

which it is impossible for us to get out of the local limits of their influence.

The pendulum can be removed from the influence of the mountain, but it can

not be removed from the influence of the earth: we can not take away the

earth from the pendulum, nor the pendulum from the earth, to ascertain

whether it would continue to vibrate if the action which the earth exerts upon

it were withdrawn. On what evidence, then, do we ascribe its vibrations to the

earth’s influence? Not on any sanctioned by the Method of Difference; for

one of the two instances, the negative instance, is wanting. Nor by the

Method of Agreement; for though all pendulums agree in this, that during

their oscillations the earth is always present, why may we not as well ascribe

the phenomenon to the sun, which is equally a co-existent fact in all the

experiments? It is evident that to establish even so simple a fact of causation

as this, there was required some method over and above those which we have

yet examined.

              As another example, let us take the phenomenon Heat.

Independently of all hypothesis as to the real nature of the agency so called,

this fact is certain, that we are unable to exhaust any body of the whole of its

heat. It is equally certain that no one ever perceived heat not emanating from

a body. Being unable, then, to separate Body and Heat, we can not effect

such a variation of circumstances as the foregoing three methods require; we

can not ascertain, by those methods, what portion of the phenomena exhibited

by any body is due to the heat contained in it. If we could observe a body

with its heat, and the same body entirely divested of heat, the Method of

Difference would show the effect due to the heat, apart from that due to the

body. If we could observe heat under circumstances agreeing in nothing but

heat, and therefore not characterized also by the presence of a body, we could

ascertain the effects of heat, from an instance of heat with a body and aninstance of heat without a body, by the Method of Agreement; or we could

determine by the Method of Difference what effect was due to the body,

when the remainder which was due to the heat would be given by the Method

of Residues. But we can do none of these things; and without them the

application of any of the three methods to the solution of this problem would

be illusory. It would be idle, for instance, to attempt to ascertain the effect of

heat by subtracting from the phenomena exhibited by a body all that is due to

its other properties; for as we have never been able to observe any bodies

without a portion of heat in them, effects due to that heat might form a part of

the very results which we were affecting to subtract, in order that the effect of

heat might be shown by the residue.

              If, therefore, there were no other methods of experimental

investigation than these three, we should be unable to determine the effects

due to heat as a cause. But we have still a resource. Though we can not

exclude an antecedent altogether, we may be able to produce, or nature may

produce for us some modification in it. By a modification is here meant, a

change in it not amounting to its total removal. If some modification in the

antecedent A is always followed by a change in the consequent a , the other

consequents b and c remaining the same; or vicè versa , if every change in a

is found to have been preceded by some modification in A, none being

observable in any of the other antecedents, we may safely conclude that a is,

wholly or in part, an effect traceable to A, or at least in some way connected

with it through causation. For example, in the case of heat, though we can not

expel it altogether from any body, we can modify it in quantity, we can

increase or diminish it; and doing so, we find by the various methods of

experimentation or observation already treated of, that such increase or

diminution of heat is followed by expansion or contraction of the body. In

this manner we arrive at the conclusion, otherwise unattainable by us, that

one of the effects of heat is to enlarge the dimensions of bodies; or, what is

the same thing in other words, to widen the distances between their particles.

              A change in a thing, not amounting to its total removal, that is, a

change which leaves it still the same thing it was, must be a change either in

its quantity, or in some of its variable relations to other things, of which

variable relations the principal is its position in space. In the previous

example, the modification which was produced in the antecedent was an

alteration in its quantity. Let us now suppose the question to be, whatinfluence the moon exerts on the surface of the earth. We can not try an

experiment in the absence of the moon, so as to observe what terrestrial

phenomena her annihilation would put an end to; but when we find that all

the variations in the position of the moon are followed by corresponding

variations in the time and place of high water, the place being always either

the part of the earth which is nearest to, or that which is most remote from,

the moon, we have ample evidence that the moon is, wholly or partially, the

cause which determines the tides. It very commonly happens, as it does in

this instance, that the variations of an effect are correspondent, or analogous,

to those of its cause; as the moon moves farther toward the east, the high-

water point does the same: but this is not an indispensable condition, as may

be seen in the same example, for along with that high-water point there is at

the same instant another high-water point diametrically opposite to it, and

which, therefore, of necessity, moves toward the west, as the moon, followed

by the nearer of the tide waves, advances toward the east: and yet both these

motions are equally effects of the moon’s motion.

              That the oscillations of the pendulum are caused by the earth, is

proved by similar evidence. Those oscillations take place between equidistant

points on the two sides of a line, which, being perpendicular to the earth,

varies with every variation in the earth’s position, either in space or relatively

to the object. Speaking accurately, we only know by the method now

characterized, that all terrestrial bodies tend to the earth, and not to some

unknown fixed point lying in the same direction. In every twenty-four hours,

by the earth’s rotation, the line drawn from the body at right angles to the

earth coincides successively with all the radii of a circle, and in the course of

six months the place of that circle varies by nearly two hundred millions of

miles; yet in all these changes of the earth’s position, the line in which bodies

tend to fall continues to be directed toward it: which proves that terrestrial

gravity is directed to the earth, and not, as was once fancied by some, to a

fixed point of space.

              The method by which these results were obtained may be termed the

Method of Concomitant Variations; it is regulated by the following canon:

              FIFTH CANON.

              Whatever phenomenon varies in any manner whenever another

phenomenon varies in some particular manner, is either a cause or an effectof that phenomenon, or is connected with it through some fact of causation.

              The last clause is subjoined, because it by no means follows when

two phenomena accompany each other in their variations, that the one is

cause and the other effect. The same thing may, and indeed must happen,

supposing them to be two different effects of a common cause: and by this

method alone it would never be possible to ascertain which of the

suppositions is the true one. The only way to solve the doubt would be that

which we have so often adverted to, viz., by endeavoring to ascertain whether

we can produce the one set of variations by means of the other. In the case of

heat, for example, by increasing the temperature of a body we increase its

bulk, but by increasing its bulk we do not increase its temperature; on the

contrary (as in the rarefaction of air under the receiver of an air-pump), we

generally diminish it: therefore heat is not an effect, but a cause, of increase

of bulk. If we can not ourselves produce the variations, we must endeavor,

though it is an attempt which is seldom successful, to find them produced by

nature in some case in which the pre-existing circumstances are perfectly

known to us.

              It is scarcely necessary to say, that in order to ascertain the uniform

concomitance of variations in the effect with variations in the cause, the same

precautions must be used as in any other case of the determination of an

invariable sequence. We must endeavor to retain all the other antecedents

unchanged, while that particular one is subjected to the requisite series of

variations; or, in other words, that we may be warranted in inferring

causation from concomitance of variations, the concomitance itself must be

proved by the Method of Difference.

              It might at first appear that the Method of Concomitant Variations

assumes a new axiom, or law of causation in general, namely, that every

modification of the cause is followed by a change in the effect. And it does

usually happen that when a phenomenon A causes a phenomenon a , any

variation in the quantity or in the various relations of A, is uniformly

followed by a variation in the quantity or relations of a . To take a familiar

instance, that of gravitation. The sun causes a certain tendency to motion in

the earth; here we have cause and effect; but that tendency is toward the sun,

and therefore varies in direction as the sun varies in the relation of position;

and, moreover, the tendency varies in intensity, in a certain numerical

correspondence to the sun’s distance from the earth, that is, according toanother relation of the sun. Thus we see that there is not only an invariable

connection between the sun and the earth’s gravitation, but that two of the

relations of the sun, its position with respect to the earth and its distance from

the earth, are invariably connected as antecedents with the quantity and

direction of the earth’s gravitation. The cause of the earth’s gravitating at all,

is simply the sun; but the cause of its gravitating with a given intensity and in

a given direction, is the existence of the sun in a given direction and at a

given distance. It is not strange that a modified cause, which is in truth a

different cause, should produce a different effect.

              Although it is for the most part true that a modification of the cause

is followed by a modification of the effect, the Method of Concomitant

Variations does not, however, presuppose this as an axiom. It only requires

the converse proposition: that any thing on whose modifications,

modifications of an effect are invariably consequent, must be the cause (or

connected with the cause) of that effect; a proposition, the truth of which is

evident; for if the thing itself had no influence on the effect, neither could the

modifications of the thing have any influence. If the stars have no power over

the fortunes of mankind, it is implied in the very terms that the conjunctions

or oppositions of different stars can have no such power.

              Although the most striking applications of the Method of

Concomitant Variations take place in the cases in which the Method of

Difference, strictly so called, is impossible, its use is not confined to those

cases; it may often usefully follow after the Method of Difference, to give

additional precision to a solution which that has found. When by the Method

of Difference it has first been ascertained that a certain object produces a

certain effect, the Method of Concomitant Variations may be usefully called

in, to determine according to what law the quantity or the different relations

of the effect follow those of the cause.

              § 7. The case in which this method admits of the most extensive

employment, is that in which the variations of the cause are variations of

quantity. Of such variations we may in general affirm with safety, that they

will be attended not only with variations, but with similar variations, of the

effect: the proposition that more of the cause is followed by more of the

effect, being a corollary from the principle of the Composition of Causes,

which, as we have seen, is the general rule of causation; cases of the opposite

description, in which causes change their properties on being conjoined withone another, being, on the contrary, special and exceptional. Suppose, then,

that when A changes in quantity, a also changes in quantity, and in such a

manner that we can trace the numerical relation which the changes of the one

bear to such changes of the other as take place within our limits of

observation. We may then, with certain precautions, safely conclude that the

same numerical relation will hold beyond those limits. If, for instance, we

find that when A is double, a is double; that when A is treble or quadruple, a

is treble or quadruple; we may conclude that if A were a half or a third, a

would be a half or a third, and finally, that if A were annihilated, a would be

annihilated; and that a is wholly the effect of A, or wholly the effect of the

same cause with A. And so with any other numerical relation according to

which A and a would vanish simultaneously; as, for instance, if a were

proportional to the square of A. If, on the other hand, a is not wholly the

effect of A, but yet varies when A varies, it is probably a mathematical

function not of A alone, but of A and something else: its changes, for

example, may be such as would occur if part of it remained constant, or

varied on some other principle, and the remainder varied in some numerical

relations to the variations of A. In that case, when A diminishes, a will be

seen to approach not toward zero, but toward some other limit; and when the

series of variations is such as to indicate what that limit is, if constant, or the

law of its variation, if variable, the limit will exactly measure how much of a

is the effect of some other and independent cause, and the remainder will be

the effect of A (or of the cause of A).

              These conclusions, however, must not be drawn without certain

precautions. In the first place, the possibility of drawing them at all,

manifestly supposes that we are acquainted not only with the variations, but

with the absolute quantities both of A and a . If we do not know the total

quantities, we can not, of course, determine the real numerical relation

according to which those quantities vary. It is, therefore, an error to conclude,

as some have concluded, that because increase of heat expands bodies, that is,

increases the distance between their particles, therefore the distance is wholly

the effect of heat, and that if we could entirely exhaust the body of its heat,

the particles would be in complete contact. This is no more than a guess, and

of the most hazardous sort, not a legitimate induction: for since we neither

know how much heat there is in any body, nor what is the real distance

between any two of its particles, we can not judge whether the contraction of

the distance does or does not follow the diminution of the quantity of heataccording to such a numerical relation that the two quantities would vanish

simultaneously.

              In contrast with this, let us consider a case in which the absolute

quantities are known; the case contemplated in the first law of motion: viz.,

that all bodies in motion continue to move in a straight line with uniform

velocity until acted upon by some new force. This assertion is in open

opposition to first appearances; all terrestrial objects, when in motion,

gradually abate their velocity, and at last stop; which accordingly the

ancients, with their inductio per enumerationem simplicem , imagined to be

the law. Every moving body, however, encounters various obstacles, as

friction, the resistance of the atmosphere, etc., which we know by daily

experience to be causes capable of destroying motion. It was suggested that

the whole of the retardation might be owing to these causes. How was this

inquired into? If the obstacles could have been entirely removed, the case

would have been amenable to the Method of Difference. They could not be

removed, they could only be diminished, and the case, therefore, admitted

only of the Method of Concomitant Variations. This accordingly being

employed, it was found that every diminution of the obstacles diminished the

retardation of the motion: and inasmuch as in this case (unlike the case of

heat) the total quantities both of the antecedent and of the consequent were

known, it was practicable to estimate, with an approach to accuracy, both the

amount of the retardation and the amount of the retarding causes, or

resistances, and to judge how near they both were to being exhausted; and it

appeared that the effect dwindled as rapidly, and at each step was as far on

the road toward annihilation, as the cause was. The simple oscillation of a

weight suspended from a fixed point, and moved a little out of the

perpendicular, which in ordinary circumstances lasts but a few minutes, was

prolonged in Borda’s experiments to more than thirty hours, by diminishing

as much as possible the friction at the point of suspension, and by making the

body oscillate in a space exhausted as nearly as possible of its air. There

could therefore be no hesitation in assigning the whole of the retardation of

motion to the influence of the obstacles; and since, after subducting this

retardation from the total phenomenon, the remainder was a uniform velocity,

the result was the proposition known as the first law of motion.

              There is also another characteristic uncertainty affecting the

inference that the law of variation which the quantities observe within ourlimits of observation, will hold beyond those limits. There is, of course, in the

first instance, the possibility that beyond the limits, and in circumstances

therefore of which we have no direct experience, some counteracting cause

might develop itself; either a new agent or a new property of the agents

concerned, which lies dormant in the circumstances we are able to observe.

This is an element of uncertainty which enters largely into all our predictions

of effects; but it is not peculiarly applicable to the Method of Concomitant

Variations. The uncertainty, however, of which I am about to speak, is

characteristic of that method; especially in the cases in which the extreme

limits of our observation are very narrow, in comparison with the possible

variations in the quantities of the phenomena. Any one who has the slightest

acquaintance with mathematics, is aware that very different laws of variation

may produce numerical results which differ but slightly from one another

within narrow limits; and it is often only when the absolute amounts of

variation are considerable, that the difference between the results given by

one law and by another becomes appreciable. When, therefore, such

variations in the quantity of the antecedents as we have the means of

observing are small in comparison with the total quantities, there is much

danger lest we should mistake the numerical law, and be led to miscalculate

the variations which would take place beyond the limits; a miscalculation

which would vitiate any conclusion respecting the dependence of the effect

upon the cause, that could be founded on those variations. Examples are not
                                                                              136
wanting of such mistakes. “The formulæ,” says Sir John Herschel, “which

have been empirically deduced for the elasticity of steam (till very recently),

and those for the resistance of fluids, and other similar subjects,” when relied

on beyond the limits of the observations from which they were deduced,

“have almost invariably failed to support the theoretical structures which

have been erected on them.”

              In this uncertainty, the conclusion we may draw from the

concomitant variations of a and A, to the existence of an invariable and

exclusive connection between them, or to the permanency of the same

numerical relation between their variations when the quantities are much

greater or smaller than those which we have had the means of observing, can

not be considered to rest on a complete induction. All that in such a case can

be regarded as proved on the subject of causation is, that there is some

connection between the two phenomena; that A, or something which can

influence A, must be one of the causes which collectively determine a . Wemay, however, feel assured that the relation which we have observed to exist

between the variations of A and a , will hold true in all cases which fall

between the same extreme limits; that is, wherever the utmost increase or

diminution in which the result has been found by observation to coincide

with the law, is not exceeded.

              The four methods which it has now been attempted to describe, are

the only possible modes of experimental inquiry — of direct induction a

posteriori , as distinguished from deduction: at least, I know not, nor am able

to imagine any others. And even of these, the Method of Residues, as we

have seen, is not independent of deduction; though, as it also requires specific

experience, it may, without impropriety, be included among methods of

direct observation and experiment.

              These, then, with such assistance as can be obtained from Deduction,

compose the available resources of the human mind for ascertaining the laws

of the succession of phenomena. Before proceeding to point out certain

circumstances by which the employment of these methods is subjected to an

immense increase of complication and of difficulty, it is expedient to

illustrate the use of the methods, by suitable examples drawn from actual

physical investigations. These, accordingly, will form the subject of the

succeeding chapter.

 

 

       Chapter IX. – Miscellaneous Examples Of The Four Methods.

 

 

              § 1. I shall select, as a first example, an interesting speculation of

one of the most eminent of theoretical chemists, Baron Liebig. The object in

view is to ascertain the immediate cause of the death produced by metallic

poisons.

              Arsenious acid, and the salts of lead, bismuth, copper, and mercury,

if introduced into the animal organism, except in the smallest doses, destroy

life. These facts have long been known, as insulated truths of the lowest order

of generalization; but it was reserved for Liebig, by an apt employment of the

first two of our methods of experimental inquiry, to connect these truths

together by a higher induction, pointing out what property, common to all

these deleterious substances, is the really operating cause of their fatal effect.

              When solutions of these substances are placed in sufficiently close

contact with many animal products, albumen, milk, muscular fibre, and

animal membranes, the acid or salt leaves the water in which it was

dissolved, and enters into combination with the animal substance, which

substance, after being thus acted upon, is found to have lost its tendency to

spontaneous decomposition, or putrefaction.

              Observation also shows, in cases where death has been produced by

these poisons, that the parts of the body with which the poisonous substances

have been brought into contact, do not afterward putrefy.

              And, finally, when the poison has been supplied in too small a

quantity to destroy life, eschars are produced, that is, certain superficial

portions of the tissues are destroyed, which are afterward thrown off by the

reparative process taking place in the healthy parts.

              These three sets of instances admit of being treated according to the

Method of Agreement. In all of them the metallic compounds are brought

into contact with the substances which compose the human or animal body;

and the instances do not seem to agree in any other circumstance. The

remaining antecedents are as different, and even opposite, as they could

possibly be made; for in some the animal substances exposed to the action ofthe poisons are in a state of life, in others only in a state of organization, in

others not even in that. And what is the result which follows in all the cases?

The conversion of the animal substance (by combination with the poison)

into a chemical compound, held together by so powerful a force as to resist

the subsequent action of the ordinary causes of decomposition. Now, organic

life (the necessary condition of sensitive life) consisting in a continual state of

decomposition and recomposition of the different organs and tissues,

whatever incapacitates them for this decomposition destroys life. And thus

the proximate cause of the death produced by this description of poisons is

ascertained, as far as the Method of Agreement can ascertain it.

              Let us now bring our conclusion to the test of the Method of

Difference. Setting out from the cases already mentioned, in which the

antecedent is the presence of substances forming with the tissues a compound

incapable of putrefaction, (and a fortiori incapable of the chemical actions

which constitute life), and the consequent is death, either of the whole

organism, or of some portion of it; let us compare with these cases other

cases, as much resembling them as possible, but in which that effect is not

produced. And, first, “many insoluble basic salts of arsenious acid are known

not to be poisonous. The substance called alkargen, discovered by Bunsen,

which contains a very large quantity of arsenic, and approaches very closely

in composition to the organic arsenious compounds found in the body, has

not the slightest injurious action upon the organism.” Now when these

substances are brought into contact with the tissues in any way, they do not

combine with them; they do not arrest their progress to decomposition. As

far, therefore, as these instances go, it appears that when the effect is absent,

it is by reason of the absence of that antecedent which we had already good

ground for considering as the proximate cause.

              But the rigorous conditions of the Method of Difference are not yet

satisfied; for we can not be sure that these unpoisonous bodies agree with the

poisonous substances in every property, except the particular one of entering

into a difficultly decomposable compound with the animal tissues. To render

the method strictly applicable, we need an instance, not of a different

substance, but of one of the very same substances, in circumstances which

would prevent it from forming, with the tissues, the sort of compound in

question; and then, if death does not follow, our case is made out. Now such

instances are afforded by the antidotes to these poisons. For example, in caseof poisoning by arsenious acid, if hydrated peroxide of iron is administered,

the destructive agency is instantly checked. Now this peroxide is known to

combine with the acid, and form a compound, which, being insoluble, can not

act at all on animal tissues. So, again, sugar is a well-known antidote to

poisoning by salts of copper; and sugar reduces those salts either into metallic

copper, or into the red sub-oxide, neither of which enters into combination

with animal matter. The disease called painter’s colic, so common in

manufactories of white-lead, is unknown where the workmen are accustomed

to take, as a preservative, sulphuric acid lemonade (a solution of sugar

rendered acid by sulphuric acid). Now diluted sulphuric acid has the property

of decomposing all compounds of lead with organic matter, or of preventing

them from being formed.

              There is another class of instances, of the nature required by the

Method of Difference, which seem at first sight to conflict with the theory.

Soluble salts of silver, such for instance as the nitrate, have the same

stiffening antiseptic effect on decomposing animal substances as corrosive

sublimate and the most deadly metallic poisons; and when applied to the

external parts of the body, the nitrate is a powerful caustic, depriving those

parts of all active vitality, and causing them to be thrown off by the

neighboring living structures, in the form of an eschar. The nitrate and the

other salts of silver ought, then, it would seem, if the theory be correct, to be

poisonous; yet they may be administered internally with perfect impunity.

From this apparent exception arises the strongest confirmation which the

theory has yet received. Nitrate of silver, in spite of its chemical properties,

does not poison when introduced into the stomach; but in the stomach, as in

all animal liquids, there is common salt; and in the stomach there is also free

muriatic acid. These substances operate as natural antidotes, combining with

the nitrate, and if its quantity is not too great, immediately converting it into

chloride of silver, a substance very slightly soluble, and therefore incapable

of combining with the tissues, although to the extent of its solubility it has a

medicinal influence, though an entirely different class of organic actions.

              The preceding instances have afforded an induction of a high order

of conclusiveness, illustrative of the two simplest of our four methods;

though not rising to the maximum of certainty which the Method of

Difference, in its most perfect exemplification, is capable of affording. For

(let us not forget) the positive instance and the negative one which the rigorof that method requires, ought to differ only in the presence or absence of one

single circumstance. Now, in the preceding argument, they differ in the

presence or absence not of a single circumstance , but of a single substance :

and as every substance has innumerable properties, there is no knowing what

number of real differences are involved in what is nominally and apparently

only one difference. It is conceivable that the antidote, the peroxide of iron

for example, may counteract the poison through some other of its properties

than that of forming an insoluble compound with it; and if so, the theory

would fall to the ground, so far as it is supported by that instance. This source

of uncertainty, which is a serious hinderance to all extensive generalizations

in chemistry, is, however, reduced in the present case to almost the lowest

degree possible, when we find that not only one substance, but many

substances, possess the capacity of acting as antidotes to metallic poisons,

and that all these agree in the property of forming insoluble compounds with

the poisons, while they can not be ascertained to agree in any other property

whatsoever. We have thus, in favor of the theory, all the evidence which can

be obtained by what we termed the Indirect Method of Difference, or the

Joint Method of Agreement and Difference; the evidence of which, though it

never can amount to that of the Method of Difference properly so called, may

approach indefinitely near to it.

                                  137
              § 2. Let the object be to ascertain the law of what is termed

induced electricity; to find under what conditions any electrified body,

whether positively or negatively electrified, gives rise to a contrary electric

state in some other body adjacent to it.

              The most familiar exemplification of the phenomenon to be

investigated is the following. Around the prime conductors of an electrical

machine the atmosphere to some distance, or any conducting surface

suspended in that atmosphere, is found to be in an electric condition opposite

to that of the prime conductor itself. Near and around the positive prime

conductor there is negative electricity, and near and around the negative

prime conductor there is positive electricity. When pith balls are brought near

to either of the conductors, they become electrified with the opposite

electricity to it; either receiving a share from the already electrified

atmosphere by conduction, or acted upon by the direct inductive influence of

the conductor itself: they are then attracted by the conductor to which they

are in opposition; or, if withdrawn in their electrified state, they will beattracted by any other oppositely charged body. In like manner the hand, if

brought near enough to the conductor, receives or gives an electric discharge;

now we have no evidence that a charged conductor can be suddenly

discharged unless by the approach of a body oppositely electrified. In the

case, therefore, of the electric machine, it appears that the accumulation of

electricity in an insulated conductor is always accompanied by the excitement

of the contrary electricity in the surrounding atmosphere, and in every

conductor placed near the former conductor. It does not seem possible, in this

case, to produce one electricity by itself.

              Let us now examine all the other instances which we can obtain,

resembling this instance in the given consequent, namely, the evolution of an

opposite electricity in the neighborhood of an electrified body. As one

remarkable instance we have the Leyden jar; and after the splendid

experiments of Faraday in complete and final establishment of the substantial

identity of magnetism and electricity, we may cite the magnet, both the

natural and the electro-magnet, in neither of which it is possible to produce

one kind of electricity by itself, or to charge one pole without charging an

opposite pole with the contrary electricity at the same time. We can not have

a magnet with one pole: if we break a natural loadstone into a thousand

pieces, each piece will have its two oppositely electrified poles complete

within itself. In the voltaic circuit, again, we can not have one current without

its opposite. In the ordinary electric machine, the glass cylinder or plate, and

the rubber, acquire opposite electricities.

              From all these instances, treated by the Method of Agreement, a

general law appears to result. The instances embrace all the known modes in

which a body can become charged with electricity; and in all of them there is

found, as a concomitant or consequent, the excitement of the opposite electric

state in some other body or bodies. It seems to follow that the two facts are

invariably connected, and that the excitement of electricity in any body has

for one of its necessary conditions the possibility of a simultaneous

excitement of the opposite electricity in some neighboring body.

              As the two contrary electricities can only be produced together, so

they can only cease together. This may be shown by an application of the

Method of Difference to the example of the Leyden jar. It needs scarcely be

here remarked that in the Leyden jar, electricity can be accumulated and

retained in considerable quantity, by the contrivance of having twoconducting surfaces of equal extent, and parallel to each other through the

whole of that extent, with a non-conducting substance such as glass between

them. When one side of the jar is charged positively, the other is charged

negatively, and it was by virtue of this fact that the Leyden jar served just

now as an instance in our employment of the Method of Agreement. Now it

is impossible to discharge one of the coatings unless the other can be

discharged at the same time. A conductor held to the positive side can not

convey away any electricity unless an equal quantity be allowed to pass from

the negative side: if one coating be perfectly insulated, the charge is safe. The

dissipation of one must proceed pari passu with that of the other.

              The law thus strongly indicated admits of corroboration by the

Method of Concomitant Variations. The Leyden jar is capable of receiving a

much higher charge than can ordinarily be given to the conductor of an

electrical machine. Now in the case of the Leyden jar, the metallic surface

which receives the induced electricity is a conductor exactly similar to that

which receives the primary charge, and is therefore as susceptible of

receiving and retaining the one electricity, as the opposite surface of

receiving and retaining the other; but in the machine, the neighboring body

which is to be oppositely electrified is the surrounding atmosphere, or any

body casually brought near to the conductor; and as these are generally much

inferior in their capacity of becoming electrified, to the conductor itself, their

limited power imposes a corresponding limit to the capacity of the conductor

for being charged. As the capacity of the neighboring body for supporting the

opposition increases, a higher charge becomes possible: and to this appears to

be owing the great superiority of the Leyden jar.

              A further and most decisive confirmation by the Method of

Difference, is to be found in one of Faraday’s experiments in the course of

his researches on the subject of Induced Electricity.

              Since common or machine electricity, and voltaic electricity, may be

considered for the present purpose to be identical, Faraday wished to know

whether, as the prime conductor develops opposite electricity upon a

conductor in its vicinity, so a voltaic current running along a wire would

induce an opposite current upon another wire laid parallel to it at a short

distance. Now this case is similar to the cases previously examined, in every

circumstance except the one to which we have ascribed the effect. We found

in the former instances that whenever electricity of one kind was excited inone body, electricity of the opposite kind must be excited in a neighboring

body. But in Faraday’s experiment this indispensable opposition exists within

the wire itself. From the nature of a voltaic charge, the two opposite currents

necessary to the existence of each other are both accommodated in one wire;

and there is no need of another wire placed beside it to contain one of them,

in the same way as the Leyden jar must have a positive and a negative

surface. The exciting cause can and does produce all the effect which its laws

require, independently of any electric excitement of a neighboring body. Now

the result of the experiment with the second wire was, that no opposite

current was produced. There was an instantaneous effect at the closing and

breaking of the voltaic circuit; electric inductions appeared when the two

wires were moved to and from one another; but these are phenomena of a

different class. There was no induced electricity in the sense in which this is

predicated of the Leyden jar; there was no sustained current running up the

one wire while an opposite current ran down the neighboring wire; and this

alone would have been a true parallel case to the other.

              It thus appears by the combined evidence of the Method of

Agreement, the Method of Concomitant Variations, and the most rigorous

form of the Method of Difference, that neither of the two kinds of electricity

can be excited without an equal excitement of the other and opposite kind:

that both are effects of the same cause; that the possibility of the one is a

condition of the possibility of the other, and the quantity of the one an

impassable limit to the quantity of the other. A scientific result of

considerable interest in itself, and illustrating those three methods in a
                                                          138
manner both characteristic and easily intelligible.

              § 3. Our third example shall be extracted from Sir John Herschel’s

Discourse course on the Study of Natural Philosophy , a work replete with

happily-selected exemplifications of inductive processes from almost every

department of physical science, and in which alone, of all books which I have

met with, the four methods of induction are distinctly recognized, though not

so clearly characterized and defined, nor their correlation so fully shown, as

has appeared to me desirable. The present example is described by Sir John

Herschel as “one of the most beautiful specimens” which can be cited “of

inductive experimental inquiry lying within a moderate compass;” the theory

of dew, first promulgated by the late Dr. Wells, and now universally adopted

by scientific authorities. The passages in inverted commas are extracted                                  139
verbatim from the Discourse.

              “Suppose dew were the phenomenon proposed, whose cause we

would know. In the first place” we must determine precisely what we mean

by dew: what the fact really is whose cause we desire to investigate. “We

must separate dew from rain, and the moisture of fogs, and limit the

application of the term to what is really meant, which is the spontaneous

appearance of moisture on substances exposed in the open air when no rain or

visible wet is falling.” This answers to a preliminary operation which will be

characterized in the ensuing book, treating of operations subsidiary to
          140
induction.

              “Now, here we have analogous phenomena in the moisture which

bedews a cold metal or stone when we breathe upon it; that which appears on

a glass of water fresh from the well in hot weather; that which appears on the

inside of windows when sudden rain or hail chills the external air; that which

runs down our walls when, after a long frost, a warm, moist thaw comes on.”

Comparing these cases, we find that they all contain the phenomenon which

was proposed as the subject of investigation. Now “all these instances agree

in one point, the coldness of the object dewed, in comparison with the air in

contact with it.” But there still remains the most important case of all, that of

nocturnal dew: does the same circumstance exist in this case? “Is it a fact that

the object dewed is colder than the air? Certainly not, one would at first be

inclined to say; for what is to make it so? But ... the experiment is easy: we

have only to lay a thermometer in contact with the dewed substance, and

hang one at a little distance above it, out of reach of its influence. The

experiment has been therefore made, the question has been asked, and the

answer has been invariably in the affirmative. Whenever an object contracts

dew, it is colder than the air.”

              Here, then, is a complete application of the Method of Agreement,

establishing the fact of an invariable connection between the deposition of

dew on a surface, and the coldness of that surface compared with the external

air. But which of these is cause, and which effect? or are they both effects of

something else? On this subject the Method of Agreement can afford us no

light: we must call in a more potent method. “We must collect more facts, or,

which comes to the same thing, vary the circumstances; since every instance

in which the circumstances differ is a fresh fact: and especially, we must note

the contrary or negative cases, i.e. , where no dew is produced:” a comparisonbetween instances of dew and instances of no dew, being the condition

necessary to bring the Method of Difference into play.

              “Now, first, no dew is produced on the surface of polished metals,

but it is very copiously on glass, both exposed with their faces upward, and in

some cases the under side of a horizontal plate of glass is also dewed.” Here

is an instance in which the effect is produced, and another instance in which

it is not produced; but we can not yet pronounce, as the canon of the Method

of Difference requires, that the latter instance agrees with the former in all its

circumstances except one; for the differences between glass and polished

metals are manifold, and the only thing we can as yet be sure of is, that the

cause of dew will be found among the circumstances by which the former

substance is distinguished from the latter. But if we could be sure that glass,

and the various other substances on which dew is deposited, have only one

quality in common, and that polished metals and the other substances on

which dew is not deposited, have also nothing in common but the one

circumstance of not having the one quality which the others have; the

requisitions of the Method of Difference would be completely satisfied, and

we should recognize, in that quality of the substances, the cause of dew. This,

accordingly, is the path of inquiry which is next to be pursued.

              “In the cases of polished metal and polished glass, the contrast

shows evidently that the substance has much to do with the phenomenon;

therefore let the substance alone be diversified as much as possible, by

exposing polished surfaces of various kinds. This done, a scale of intensity

becomes obvious. Those polished substances are found to be most strongly

dewed which conduct heat worst; while those which conduct heat well, resist

dew most effectually.” The complication increases; here is the Method of

Concomitant Variations called to our assistance; and no other method was

practicable on this occasion; for the quality of conducting heat could not be

excluded, since all substances conduct heat in some degree. The conclusion

obtained is, that cæteris paribus the deposition of dew is in some proportion

to the power which the body possesses of resisting the passage of heat; and

that this, therefore (or something connected with this), must be at least one of

the causes which assist in producing the deposition of dew on the surface.

              “But if we expose rough surfaces instead of polished, we sometimes

find this law interfered with. Thus, roughened iron, especially if painted over

or blackened, becomes dewed sooner than varnished paper; the kind ofsurface , therefore, has a great influence. Expose, then, the same material in

very diversified states, as to surface” (that is, employ the Method of

Difference to ascertain concomitance of variations), “and another scale of

intensity becomes at once apparent; those surfaces which part with their heat

most readily by radiation are found to contract dew most copiously.” Here,

therefore, are the requisites for a second employment of the Method of

Concomitant Variations; which in this case also is the only method available,

since all substances radiate heat in some degree or other. The conclusion

obtained by this new application of the method is, that cæteris paribus the

deposition of dew is also in some proportion to the power of radiating heat;

and that the quality of doing this abundantly (or some cause on which that

quality depends) is another of the causes which promote the deposition of

dew on the substance.

              “Again, the influence ascertained to exist of substance and surface

leads us to consider that of texture : and here, again, we are presented on trial

with remarkable differences, and with a third scale of intensity, pointing out

substances of a close, firm texture, such as stones, metals, etc., as

unfavorable, but those of a loose one, as cloth, velvet, wool, eider-down,

cotton, etc., as eminently favorable to the contraction of dew.” The Method

of Concomitant Variations is here, for the third time, had recourse to; and, as

before, from necessity, since the texture of no substance is absolutely firm or

absolutely loose. Looseness of texture, therefore, or something which is the

cause of that quality, is another circumstance which promotes the deposition

of dew; but this third course resolves itself into the first, viz., the quality of

resisting the passage of heat: for substances of loose texture “are precisely

those which are best adapted for clothing, or for impeding the free passage of

heat from the skin into the air, so as to allow their outer surfaces to be very

cold, while they remain warm within;” and this last is, therefore, an induction

(from fresh instances) simply corroborative of a former induction.

              It thus appears that the instances in which much dew is deposited,

which are very various, agree in this, and, so far as we are able to observe, in

this only, that they either radiate heat rapidly or conduct it slowly: qualities

between which there is no other circumstance of agreement than that by

virtue of either, the body tends to lose heat from the surface more rapidly

than it can be restored from within. The instances, on the contrary, in which

no dew, or but a small quantity of it, is formed, and which are also extremelyvarious, agree (as far as we can observe) in nothing except in not having this

same property. We seem, therefore, to have detected the characteristic

difference between the substances on which dew is produced and those on

which it is not produced. And thus have been realized the requisitions of what

we have termed the Indirect Method of Difference, or the Joint Method of

Agreement and Difference. The example afforded of this indirect method,

and of the manner in which the data are prepared for it by the Methods of

Agreement and of Concomitant Variations, is the most important of all the

illustrations of induction afforded by this interesting speculation.

              We might now consider the question, on what the deposition of dew

depends, to be completely solved, if we could be quite sure that the

substances on which dew is produced differ from those on which it is not, in

nothing but in the property of losing heat from the surface faster than the loss

can be repaired from within. And though we never can have that complete

certainty, this is not of so much importance as might at first be supposed; for

we have, at all events, ascertained that even if there be any other quality

hitherto unobserved which is present in all the substances which contract

dew, and absent in those which do not, this other property must be one which,

in all that great number of substances, is present or absent exactly where the

property of being a better radiator than conductor is present or absent; an

extent of coincidence which affords a strong presumption of a community of

cause, and a consequent invariable co-existence between the two properties;

so that the property of being a better radiator than conductor, if not itself the

cause, almost certainly always accompanies the cause, and for purposes of

prediction, no error is likely to be committed by treating it as if it were really

such.

              Reverting now to an earlier stage of the inquiry, let us remember that

we had ascertained that, in every instance where dew is formed, there is

actual coldness of the surface below the temperature of the surrounding air;

but we were not sure whether this coldness was the cause of dew, or its

effect. This doubt we are now able to resolve. We have found that, in every

such instance, the substance is one which, by its own properties or laws,

would, if exposed in the night, become colder than the surrounding air. The

coldness, therefore, being accounted for independently of the dew, while it is

proved that there is a connection between the two, it must be the dew which

depends on the coldness; or, in other words, the coldness is the cause of thedew.

              This law of causation, already so amply established, admits,

however, of efficient additional corroboration in no less than three ways.

First, by deduction from the known laws of aqueous vapor when diffused

through air or any other gas; and though we have not yet come to the

Deductive Method, we will not omit what is necessary to render this

speculation complete. It is known by direct experiment that only a limited

quantity of water can remain suspended in the state of vapor at each degree of

temperature, and that this maximum grows less and less as the temperature

diminishes. From this it follows, deductively, that if there is already as much

vapor suspended as the air will contain at its existing temperature, any

lowering of that temperature will cause a portion of the vapor to be

condensed, and become water. But again, we know deductively, from the

laws of heat, that the contact of the air with a body colder than itself will

necessarily lower the temperature of the stratum of air immediately applied to

its surface; and will, therefore, cause it to part with a portion of its water,

which accordingly will, by the ordinary laws of gravitation or cohesion,

attach itself to the surface of the body, thereby constituting dew. This

deductive proof, it will have been seen, has the advantage of at once proving

causation as well as co-existence; and it has the additional advantage that it

also accounts for the exceptions to the occurrence of the phenomenon, the

cases in which, although the body is colder than the air, yet no dew is

deposited; by showing that this will necessarily be the case when the air is so

under-supplied with aqueous vapor, comparatively to its temperature, that

even when somewhat cooled by the contact of the colder body it can still

continue to hold in suspension all the vapor which was previously suspended

in it: thus in a very dry summer there are no dews, in a very dry winter no

hoar-frost. Here, therefore, is an additional condition of the production of

dew, which the methods we previously made use of failed to detect, and

which might have remained still undetected, if recourse had not been had to

the plan of deducing the effect from the ascertained properties of the agents

known to be present.

              The second corroboration of the theory is by direct experiment,

according to the canon of the Method of Difference. We can, by cooling the

surface of any body, find in all cases some temperature (more or less inferior

to that of the surrounding air, according to its hygrometric condition) atwhich dew will begin to be deposited. Here, too, therefore, the causation is

directly proved. We can, it is true, accomplish this only on a small scale, but

we have ample reason to conclude that the same operation, if conducted in

nature’s great laboratory, would equally produce the effect.

              And, finally, even on that great scale we are able to verify the result.

The case is one of those rare cases, as we have shown them to be, in which

nature works the experiment for us in the same manner in which we ourselves

perform it; introducing into the previous state of things a single and perfectly

definite new circumstance, and manifesting the effect so rapidly that there is

not time for any other material change in the pre-existing circumstances. “It

is observed that dew is never copiously deposited in situations much screened

from the open sky, and not at all in a cloudy night; but if the clouds withdraw

even for a few minutes, and leave a clear opening, a deposition of dew

presently begins , and goes on increasing... Dew formed in clear intervals will

often even evaporate again when the sky becomes thickly overcast.” The

proof, therefore, is complete, that the presence or absence of an uninterrupted

communication with the sky causes the deposition or non-deposition of dew.

Now, since a clear sky is nothing but the absence of clouds, and it is a known

property of clouds, as of all other bodies between which and any given object

nothing intervenes but an elastic fluid, that they tend to raise or keep up the

superficial temperature of the object by radiating heat to it, we see at once

that the disappearance of clouds will cause the surface to cool; so that nature,

in this case, produces a change in the antecedent by definite and known

means, and the consequent follows accordingly: a natural experiment which
                                                              141
satisfies the requisitions of the Method of Difference.

              The accumulated proof of which the Theory of Dew has been found

susceptible, is a striking instance of the fullness of assurance which the

inductive evidence of laws of causation may attain, in cases in which the

invariable sequence is by no means obvious to a superficial view.

              § 4. The admirable physiological investigations of Dr. Brown-

Séquard afford brilliant examples of the application of the Inductive Methods

to a class of inquiries in which, for reasons which will presently be given,

direct induction takes place under peculiar difficulties and disadvantages. As

one of the most apt instances, I select his speculation (in the proceedings of

the Royal Society for May 16, 1861) on the relations between muscular

irritability, cadaveric rigidity, and putrefaction.              The law which Dr. Brown-Séquard’s investigation tends to establish,

is the following: “The greater the degree of muscular irritability at the time of

death, the later the cadaveric rigidity sets in, and the longer it lasts, and the

later also putrefaction appears, and the slower it progresses.” One would say

at first sight that the method here required must be that of Concomitant

Variations. But this is a delusive appearance, arising from the circumstance

that the conclusion to be tested is itself a fact of concomitant variations. For

the establishment of that fact any of the Methods may be put in requisition,

and it will be found that the fourth Method, though really employed, has only

a subordinate place in this particular investigation.

              The evidences by which Dr. Brown-Séquard establishes the law may

be enumerated as follows:

              1st. Paralyzed muscles have greater irritability than healthy muscles.

Now, paralyzed muscles are later in assuming the cadaveric rigidity than

healthy muscles, the rigidity lasts longer, and putrefaction sets in later, and

proceeds more slowly.

              Both these propositions had to be proved by experiment; and for the

experiments which prove them, science is also indebted to Dr. Brown-

Séquard. The former of the two — that paralyzed muscles have greater

irritability than healthy muscles — he ascertained in various ways, but most

decisively by “comparing the duration of irritability in a paralyzed muscle

and in the corresponding healthy one of the opposite side, while they are both

submitted to the same excitation.” He “often found, in experimenting in that

way, that the paralyzed muscle remained irritable twice, three times, or even

four times as long as the healthy one.” This is a case of induction by the

Method of Difference. The two limbs, being those of the same animal, were

presumed to differ in no circumstance material to the case except the

paralysis, to the presence and absence of which, therefore, the difference in

the muscular irritability was to be attributed. This assumption of complete

resemblance in all material circumstances save one, evidently could not be

safely made in any one pair of experiments, because the two legs of any

given animal might be accidentally in very different pathological conditions;

but if, besides taking pains to avoid any such difference, the experiment was

repeated sufficiently often in different animals to exclude the supposition that

any abnormal circumstance could be present in them all, the conditions of the

Method of Difference were adequately secured.              In the same manner in which Dr. Brown-Séquard proved that

paralyzed muscles have greater irritability, he also proved the correlative

proposition respecting cadaveric rigidity and putrefaction. Having, by section

of the roots of the sciatic nerve, and again of a lateral half of the spinal cord,

produced paralysis in one hind leg of an animal while the other remained

healthy, he found that not only did muscular irritability last much longer in

the paralyzed limb, but rigidity set in later and ended later, and putrefaction

began later and was less rapid than on the healthy side. This is a common

case of the Method of Difference, requiring no comment. A further and very

important corroboration was obtained by the same method. When the animal

was killed, not shortly after the section of the nerve, but a month later, the

effect was reversed; rigidity set in sooner, and lasted a shorter time, than in

the healthy muscles. But after this lapse of time, the paralyzed muscles,

having been kept by the paralysis in a state of rest, had lost a great part of

their irritability, and instead of more, had become less irritable than those on

the healthy side. This gives the A B C, a b c , and B C, b c, of the Method of

Difference. One antecedent, increased irritability, being changed, and the

other circumstances being the same, the consequence did not follow; and,

moreover, when a new antecedent, contrary to the first, was supplied, it was

followed by a contrary consequent. This instance is attended with the special

advantage of proving that the retardation and prolongation of the rigidity do

not depend directly on the paralysis, since that was the same in both the

instances; but specifically on one effect of the paralysis, namely, the

increased irritability; since they ceased when it ceased, and were reversed

when it was reversed.

              2d. Diminution of the temperature of muscles before death increases

their irritability. But diminution of their temperature also retards cadaveric

rigidity and putrefaction.

              Both these truths were first made known by Dr. Brown-Séquard

himself, through experiments which conclude according to the Method of

Difference. There is nothing in the nature of the process requiring specific

analysis.

              3d. Muscular exercise, prolonged to exhaustion, diminishes the

muscular irritability. This is a well-known truth, dependent on the most

general laws of muscular action, and proved by experiments under the

Method of Difference, constantly repeated. Now, it has been shown byobservation that overdriven cattle, if killed before recovery from their fatigue,

become rigid and putrefy in a surprisingly short time. A similar fact has been

observed in the case of animals hunted to death; cocks killed during or

shortly after a fight; and soldiers slain in the field of battle. These various

cases agree in no circumstance, directly connected with the muscles, except

that these have just been subjected to exhausting exercise. Under the canon,

therefore, of the Method of Agreement, it may be inferred that there is a

connection between the two facts. The Method of Agreement, indeed, as has

been shown, is not competent to prove causation. The present case, however,

is already known to be a case of causation, it being certain that the state of the

body after death must somehow depend upon its state at the time of death.

We are, therefore, warranted in concluding that the single circumstance in

which all the instances agree, is the part of the antecedent which is the cause

of that particular consequent.

              4th. In proportion as the nutrition of muscles is in a good state, their

irritability is high. This fact also rests on the general evidence of the laws of

physiology, grounded on many familiar applications of the Method of

Difference. Now, in the case of those who die from accident or violence, with

their muscles in a good state of nutrition, the muscular irritability continues

long after death, rigidity sets in late, and persists long without the

putrefactive change. On the contrary, in cases of disease in which nutrition

has been diminished for a long time before death, all these effects are

reversed. These are the conditions of the Joint Method of Agreement and

Difference. The cases of retarded and long continued rigidity here in question

agree only in being preceded by a high state of nutrition of the muscles; the

cases of rapid and brief rigidity agree only in being preceded by a low state of

muscular nutrition; a connection is, therefore, inductively proved between the

degree of the nutrition, and the slowness and prolongation of the rigidity.

              5th. Convulsions, like exhausting exercise, but in a still greater

degree, diminish the muscular irritability. Now, when death follows violent

and prolonged convulsions, as in tetanus, hydrophobia, some cases of

cholera, and certain poisons, rigidity sets in very rapidly, and after a very

brief duration, gives place to putrefaction. This is another example of the

Method of Agreement, of the same character with No. 3.

              6th. The series of instances which we shall take last, is of a more

complex character, and requires a more minute analysis.              It has long been observed that in some cases of death by lightning,

cadaveric rigidity either does not take place at all, or is of such extremely

brief duration as to escape notice, and that in these cases putrefaction is very

rapid. In other cases, however, the usual cadaveric rigidity appears. There

must be some difference in the cause, to account for this difference in the

effect. Now, “death by lightning may be the result of, 1st, a syncope by

fright, or in consequence of a direct or reflex influence of lightning on the par

vagum; 2d, hemorrhage in or around the brain, or in the lungs, the

pericardium, etc.; 3d, concussion, or some other alteration in the brain;” none

of which phenomena have any known property capable of accounting for the

suppression, or almost suppression, of the cadaveric rigidity. But the cause of

death may also be that the lightning produces “a violent convulsion of every

muscle in the body,” of which, if of sufficient intensity, the known effect

would be that “muscular irritability ceases almost at once.” If Dr. Brown-

Séquard’s generalization is a true law, these will be the very cases in which

rigidity is so much abridged as to escape notice; and the cases in which, on

the contrary, rigidity takes place as usual, will be those in which the stroke of

lightning operates in some of the other modes which have been enumerated.

How, then, is this brought to the test? By experiments, not on lightning,

which can not be commanded at pleasure, but on the same natural agency in a

manageable form, that of artificial galvanism. Dr. Brown-Séquard galvanized

the entire bodies of animals immediately after death. Galvanism can not

operate in any of the modes in which the stroke of lightning may have

operated, except the single one of producing muscular convulsions. If,

therefore, after the bodies have been galvanized, the duration of rigidity is

much shortened and putrefaction much accelerated, it is reasonable to ascribe

the same effects when produced by lightning to the property which galvanism

shares with lightning, and not to those which it does not. Now this Dr.

Brown-Séquard found to be the fact. The galvanic experiment was tried with

charges of very various degrees of strength; and the more powerful the

charge, the shorter was found to be the duration of rigidity, and the more

speedy and rapid the putrefaction. In the experiment in which the charge was

strongest, and the muscular irritability most promptly destroyed, the rigidity

only lasted fifteen minutes. On the principle, therefore, of the Method of

Concomitant Variations, it may be inferred that the duration of the rigidity

depends on the degree of the irritability; and that if the charge had been as

much stronger than Dr. Brown-Séquard’s strongest, as a stroke of lightningmust be stronger than any electric shock which we can produce artificially,

the rigidity would have been shortened in a corresponding ratio, and might

have disappeared altogether. This conclusion having been arrived at, the case

of an electric shock, whether natural or artificial, becomes an instance, in

addition to all those already ascertained, of correspondence between the

irritability of the muscle and the duration of rigidity.

              All these instances are summed up in the following statement: “That

when the degree of muscular irritability at the time of death is considerable,

either in consequence of a good state of nutrition, as in persons who die in

full health from an accidental cause, or in consequence of rest, as in cases of

paralysis, or on account of the influence of cold, cadaveric rigidity in all these

cases sets in late and lasts long, and putrefaction appears late, and progresses

slowly;” but “that when the degree of muscular irritability at the time of death

is slight, either in consequence of a bad state of nutrition, or of exhaustion

from overexertion, or from convulsions caused by disease or poison,

cadaveric rigidity sets in and ceases soon, and putrefaction appears and

progresses quickly.” These facts present, in all their completeness, the

conditions of the Joint Method of Agreement and Difference. Early and brief

rigidity takes place in cases which agree only in the circumstance of a low

state of muscular irritability. Rigidity begins late and lasts long in cases

which agree only in the contrary circumstance, of a muscular irritability high

and unusually prolonged. It follows that there is a connection through

causation between the degree of muscular irritability after death, and the

tardiness and prolongation of the cadaveric rigidity.

              This investigation places in a strong light the value and efficacy of

the Joint Method. For, as we have already seen, the defect of that Method is,

that like the Method of Agreement, of which it is only an improved form, it

can not prove causation. But in the present case (as in one of the steps in the

argument which led up to it) causation is already proved; since there could

never be any doubt that the rigidity altogether, and the putrefaction which

follows it, are caused by the fact of death: the observations and experiments

on which this rests are too familiar to need analysis, and fall under the

Method of Difference. It being, therefore, beyond doubt that the aggregate

antecedent, the death, is the actual cause of the whole train of consequents,

whatever of the circumstances attending the death can be shown to be

followed in all its variations by variations in the effect under investigation,must be the particular feature of the fact of death on which that effect

depends. The degree of muscular irritability at the time of death fulfills this

condition. The only point that could be brought into question, would be

whether the effect depended on the irritability itself, or on something which

always accompanied the irritability: and this doubt is set at rest by

establishing, as the instances do, that by whatever cause the high or low

irritability is produced, the effect equally follows; and can not, therefore,

depend upon the causes of irritability, nor upon the other effects of those

causes, which are as various as the causes themselves, but upon the

irritability, solely.

              § 5. The last two examples will have conveyed to any one by whom

they have been duly followed, so clear a conception of the use and practical

management of three of the four methods of experimental inquiry, as to

supersede the necessity of any further exemplification of them. The

remaining method, that of Residues, not having found a place in any of the

preceding investigations, I shall quote from Sir John Herschel some examples

of that method, with the remarks by which they are introduced.

              “It is by this process, in fact, that science, in its present advanced

state, is chiefly promoted. Most of the phenomena which Nature presents are

very complicated; and when the effects of all known causes are estimated

with exactness, and subducted, the residual facts are constantly appearing in

the form of phenomena altogether new, and leading to the most important

conclusions.

              “For example: the return of the comet predicted by Professor Eucke

a great many times in succession, and the general good agreement of its

calculated with its observed place during any one of its periods of visibility,

would lead us to say that its gravitation toward the sun and planets is the sole

and sufficient cause of all the phenomena of its orbitual motion; but when the

effect of this cause is strictly calculated and subducted from the observed

motion, there is found to remain behind a residual phenomenon , which

would never have been otherwise ascertained to exist, which is a small

anticipation of the time of its re-appearance, or a diminution of its periodic

time, which can not be accounted for by gravity, and whose cause is therefore

to be inquired into. Such an anticipation would be caused by the resistance of

a medium disseminated through the celestial regions; and as there are other

good reasons for believing this to be a vera causa ” (an actually existing                                                                          142
antecedent), “it has therefore been ascribed to such a resistance.

              “M. Arago, having suspended a magnetic needle by a silk thread,

and set it in vibration, observed, that it came much sooner to a state of rest

when suspended over a plate of copper, than when no such plate was beneath

it. Now, in both cases there were two veræ causæ ” (antecedents known to

exist) “why it should come at length to rest, viz., the resistance of the air,

which opposes, and at length destroys, all motions performed in it; and the

want of perfect mobility in the silk thread. But the effect of these causes

being exactly known by the observation made in the absence of the copper,

and being thus allowed for and subducted, a residual phenomenon appeared,

in the fact that a retarding influence was exerted by the copper itself; and this

fact, once ascertained, speedily led to the knowledge of an entirely new and

unexpected class of relations.” This example belongs, however, not to the

Method of Residues but to the Method of Difference, the law being

ascertained by a direct comparison of the results of two experiments, which

differed in nothing but the presence or absence of the plate of copper. To

have made it exemplify the Method of Residues, the effect of the resistance

of the air and that of the rigidity of the silk should have been calculated a

priori , from the laws obtained by separate and foregone experiments.

              “Unexpected and peculiarly striking confirmations of inductive laws

frequently occur in the form of residual phenomena, in the course of

investigations of a widely different nature from those which gave rise to the

inductions themselves. A very elegant example may be cited in the

unexpected confirmation of the law of the development of heat in elastic

fluids by compression, which is afforded by the phenomena of sound. The

inquiry into the cause of sound had led to conclusions respecting its mode of

propagation, from which its velocity in the air could be precisely calculated.

The calculations were performed; but, when compared with fact, though the

agreement was quite sufficient to show the general correctness of the cause

and mode of propagation assigned, yet the whole velocity could not be shown

to arise from this theory. There was still a residual velocity to be accounted

for, which placed dynamical philosophers for a long time in great dilemma.

At length Laplace struck on the happy idea, that this might arise from the

heat developed in the act of that condensation which necessarily takes place

at every vibration by which sound is conveyed. The matter was subjected to

exact calculation, and the result was at once the complete explanation of theresidual phenomenon, and a striking confirmation of the general law of the

development of heat by compression, under circumstances beyond artificial

imitation.”

              “Many of the new elements of chemistry have been detected in the

investigation of residual phenomena. Thus Arfwedson discovered lithia by

perceiving an excess of weight in the sulphate produced from a small portion

of what he considered as magnesia present in a mineral he had analyzed. It is

on this principle, too, that the small concentrated residues of great operations

in the arts are almost sure to be the lurking-places of new chemical

ingredients: witness iodine, brome, selenium, and the new metals

accompanying platina in the experiments of Wollaston and Tennant. It was a
                                                                                      143
happy thought of Glauber to examine what every body else threw away.”

              “Almost all the greatest discoveries in Astronomy,” says the same
      144
author, “have resulted from the consideration of residual phenomena of a

quantitative or numerical kind.... It was thus that the grand discovery of the

precession of the equinoxes resulted as a residual phenomenon, from the

imperfect explanation of the return of the seasons by the return of the sun to

the same apparent place among the fixed stars. Thus, also, aberration and

nutation resulted as residual phenomena from that portion of the changes of

the apparent places of the fixed stars which was left unaccounted for by

precession. And thus again the apparent proper motions of the stars are the

observed residues of their apparent movements outstanding and unaccounted

for by strict calculation of the effects of precession, nutation, and aberration.

The nearest approach which human theories can make to perfection is to

diminish this residue, this caput mortuum of observation, as it may be

considered, as much as practicable, and, if possible, to reduce it to nothing,

either by showing that something has been neglected in our estimation of

known causes, or by reasoning upon it as a new fact, and on the principle of

the inductive philosophy ascending from the effect to its cause or causes.”

              The disturbing effects mutually produced by the earth and planets

upon each other’s motions were first brought to light as residual phenomena,

by the difference which appeared between the observed places of those

bodies, and the places calculated on a consideration solely of their gravitation

toward the sun. It was this which determined astronomers to consider the law

of gravitation as obtaining between all bodies whatever, and therefore

between all particles of matter; their first tendency having been to regard it asa force acting only between each planet or satellite and the central body to

whose system it belonged. Again, the catastrophists, in geology, be their

opinion right or wrong, support it on the plea, that after the effect of all

causes now in operation has been allowed for, there remains in the existing

constitution of the earth a large residue of facts, proving the existence at

former periods either of other forces, or of the same forces in a much greater

degree of intensity. To add one more example: those who assert, what no one

has shown any real ground for believing, that there is in one human

individual, one sex, or one race of mankind over another, an inherent and

inexplicable superiority in mental faculties, could only substantiate their

proposition by subtracting from the differences of intellect which we in fact

see, all that can be traced by known laws either to the ascertained differences

of physical organization, or to the differences which have existed in the

outward circumstances in which the subjects of the comparison have hitherto

been placed. What these causes might fail to account for would constitute a

residual phenomenon, which and which alone would be evidence of an

ulterior original distinction, and the measure of its amount. But the asserters

of such supposed differences have not provided themselves with these

necessary logical conditions of the establishment of their doctrine.

              The spirit of the Method of Residues being, it is hoped, sufficiently

intelligible from these examples, and the other three methods having already

been so fully exemplified, we may here close our exposition of the four

methods, considered as employed in the investigation of the simpler and

more elementary order of the combinations of phenomena.

              § 6. Dr. Whewell has expressed a very unfavorable opinion of the

utility of the Four Methods, as well as of the aptness of the examples by
                                                                          145
which I have attempted to illustrate them. His words are these:

              “Upon these methods, the obvious thing to remark is, that they take

for granted the very thing which is most difficult to discover, the reduction of

the phenomena to formulæ such as are here presented to us. When we have

any set of complex facts offered to us; for instance, those which were offered

in the cases of discovery which I have mentioned — the facts of the planetary

paths, of falling bodies, of refracted rays, of cosmical motions, of chemical

analysis; and when, in any of these cases, we would discover the law of

nature which governs them, or, if any one chooses so to term it, the feature in

which all the cases agree, where are we to look for our A, B, C, and a , b , c ?Nature does not present to us the cases in this form; and how are we to reduce

them to this form? You say when we find the combination of A B C with a b

c and A B D with a b d , then we may draw our inference. Granted; but when

and where are we to find such combinations? Even now that the discoveries

are made, who will point out to us what are the A, B, C, and a , b , c ,

elements of the cases which have just been enumerated? Who will tell us

which of the methods of inquiry those historically real and successful

inquiries exemplify? Who will carry these formulæ through the history of the

sciences, as they have really grown up, and show us that these four methods

have been operative in their formation; or that any light is thrown upon the

steps of their progress by reference to these formulæ?”

              He adds that, in this work, the methods have not been applied “to a

large body of conspicuous and undoubted examples of discovery, extending

along the whole history of science;” which ought to have been done in order

that the methods might be shown to possess the “advantage” (which he

claims as belonging to his own) of being those “by which all great

discoveries in science have really been made.” — (P. 277.)

              There is a striking similarity between the objections here made

against Canons of Induction, and what was alleged, in the last century, by as

able men as Dr. Whewell, against the acknowledged Canon of Ratiocination.

Those who protested against the Aristotelian Logic said of the Syllogism,

what Dr. Whewell says of the Inductive Methods, that it “takes for granted

the very thing which is most difficult to discover, the reduction of the

argument to formulæ such as are here presented to us.” The grand difficulty,

they said, is to obtain your syllogism, not to judge of its correctness when

obtained. On the matter of fact, both they and Dr. Whewell are right. The

greatest difficulty in both cases is, first, that of obtaining the evidence, and

next, of reducing it to the form which tests its conclusiveness. But if we try to

reduce it without knowing what it is to be reduced to, we are not likely to

make much progress. It is a more difficult thing to solve a geometrical

problem, than to judge whether a proposed solution is correct: but if people

were not able to judge of the solution when found, they would have little

chance of finding it. And it can not be pretended that to judge of an induction

when found is perfectly easy, is a thing for which aids and instruments are

superfluous; for erroneous inductions, false inferences from experience, are

quite as common, on some subjects much commoner than true ones. Thebusiness of Inductive Logic is to provide rules and models (such as the

Syllogism and its rules are for ratiocination) to which if inductive arguments

conform, those arguments are conclusive, and not otherwise. This is what the

Four Methods profess to be, and what I believe they are universally

considered to be by experimental philosophers, who had practiced all of them

long before any one sought to reduce the practice to theory.

              The assailants of the Syllogism had also anticipated Dr. Whewell in

the other branch of his argument. They said that no discoveries were ever

made by syllogism; and Dr. Whewell says, or seems to say, that none were

ever made by the Four Methods of Induction. To the former objectors,

Archbishop Whately very pertinently answered, that their argument, if good

at all, was good against the reasoning process altogether; for whatever can

not be reduced to syllogism, is not reasoning. And Dr. Whewell’s argument,

if good at all, is good against all inferences from experience. In saying that no

discoveries were ever made by the Four Methods, he affirms that none were

ever made by observation and experiment; for assuredly if any were, it was

by processes reducible to one or other of those methods.

              This difference between us accounts for the dissatisfaction which my

examples give him; for I did not select them with a view to satisfy any one

who required to be convinced that observation and experiment are modes of

acquiring knowledge: I confess that in the choice of them I thought only of

illustration, and of facilitating the conception of the Methods by concrete

instances. If it had been my object to justify the processes themselves as

means of investigation, there would have been no need to look far off, or

make use of recondite or complicated instances. As a specimen of a truth

ascertained by the Method of Agreement, I might have chosen the

proposition, “Dogs bark.” This dog, and that dog, and the other dog, answer

to A B C, A D E, A F G. The circumstance of being a dog answers to A.

Barking answers to a . As a truth made known by the Method of Difference,

“Fire burns” might have sufficed. Before I touch the fire I am not burned; this

is B C: I touch it, and am burned; this is A B C, a B C.

              Such familiar experimental processes are not regarded as inductions

by Dr. Whewell; but they are perfectly homogeneous with those by which,

even on his own showing, the pyramid of science is supplied with its base. In

vain he attempts to escape from this conclusion by laying the most arbitrary

restrictions on the choice of examples admissible as instances of Induction:they must neither be such as are still matter of discussion (p. 265), nor must

any of them be drawn from mental and social subjects (p. 269), nor from

ordinary observation and practical life (pp. 241–247). They must be taken

exclusively from the generalizations by which scientific thinkers have

ascended to great and comprehensive laws of natural phenomena. Now it is

seldom possible, in these complicated inquiries, to go much beyond the initial

steps, without calling in the instrument of Deduction, and the temporary aid

of hypothesis; as I myself, in common with Dr. Whewell, have maintained

against the purely empirical school. Since, therefore, such cases could not

conveniently be selected to illustrate the principles of mere observation and

experiment, Dr. Whewell is misled by their absence into representing the

Experimental Methods as serving no purpose in scientific investigation;

forgetting that if those methods had not supplied the first generalizations,

there would have been no materials for his own conception of Induction to

work upon.

              His challenge, however, to point out which of the four methods are

exemplified in certain important cases of scientific inquiry, is easily

answered. “The planetary paths,” as far as they are a case of induction at
  146
all, fall under the Method of Agreement. The law of “falling bodies,”

namely, that they describe spaces proportional to the squares of the times,

was historically a deduction from the first law of motion; but the experiments

by which it was verified, and by which it might have been discovered, were

examples of the Method of Agreement; and the apparent variation from the

true law, caused by the resistance of the air, was cleared up by experiments in

vacuo , constituting an application of the Method of Difference. The law of

“refracted rays” (the constancy of the ratio between the sines of incidence and

of refraction for each refracting substance) was ascertained by direct

measurement, and therefore by the Method of Agreement. The “cosmical

motions” were determined by highly complex processes of thought, in which

Deduction was predominant, but the Methods of Agreement and of

Concomitant Variations had a large part in establishing the empirical laws.

Every case without exception of “chemical analysis” constitutes a well-

marked example of the Method of Difference. To any one acquainted with

the subjects — to Dr. Whewell himself, there would not be the smallest

difficulty in setting out “the A B C and a b c elements” of these cases.

              If discoveries are ever made by observation and experiment withoutDeduction, the four methods are methods of discovery: but even if they were

not methods of discovery, it would not be the less true that they are the sole

methods of Proof; and in that character, even the results of deduction are

amenable to them. The great generalizations which begin as Hypotheses,

must end by being proved, and are in reality (as will be shown hereafter)

proved, by the Four Methods. Now it is with Proof, as such, that Logic is

principally concerned. This distinction has indeed no chance of finding favor

with Dr. Whewell; for it is the peculiarity of his system, not to recognize, in

cases of Induction, any necessity for proof. If, after assuming an hypothesis

and carefully collating it with facts, nothing is brought to light inconsistent

with it, that is, if experience does not dis prove it, he is content: at least until

a simpler hypothesis, equally consistent with experience, presents itself. If

this be Induction, doubtless there is no necessity for the four methods. But to

suppose that it is so, appears to me a radical misconception of the nature of

the evidence of physical truths.

              So real and practical is the need of a test for induction, similar to the

syllogistic test of ratiocination, that inferences which bid defiance to the most

elementary notions of inductive logic are put forth without misgiving by

persons eminent in physical science, as soon as they are off the ground on

which they are conversant with the facts, and not reduced to judge only by

the arguments; and as for educated persons in general, it may be doubted if

they are better judges of a good or a bad induction than they were before

Bacon wrote. The improvement in the results of thinking has seldom

extended to the processes; or has reached, if any process, that of investigation

only, not that of proof. A knowledge of many laws of nature has doubtless

been arrived at, by framing hypotheses and finding that the facts

corresponded to them; and many errors have been got rid of by coming to a

knowledge of facts which were inconsistent with them, but not by

discovering that the mode of thought which led to the errors was itself faulty,

and might have been known to be such independently of the facts which

disproved the specific conclusion. Hence it is, that while the thoughts of

mankind have on many subjects worked themselves practically right, the

thinking power remains as weak as ever: and on all subjects on which the

facts which would check the result are not accessible, as in what relates to the

invisible world, and even, as has been seen lately, to the visible world of the

planetary regions, men of the greatest scientific acquirements argue as

pitiably as the merest ignoramus. For though they have made many soundinductions, they have not learned from them (and Dr. Whewell thinks there is

no necessity that they should learn) the principles of inductive evidence .

 

 

 