                                      Chapter 14

 

 

            Of the Executive in a Representative Government.

 

 

              IT WOULD be out of place, in this treatise, to discuss the question

into what departments or branches the executive business of government may

most conveniently be divided. In this respect the exigencies of different

governments are different; and there is little probability that any great

mistake will be made in the classification of the duties when men are willing

to begin at the beginning, and do not hold themselves bound by the series of

accidents which, in an old government like ours, has produced the existing

division of the public business. It may be sufficient to say that the

classification of functionaries should correspond to that of subjects, and that

there should not be several departments independent of one another to

superintend different parts of the same natural whole; as in our own military

administration down to a recent period, and in a less degree even at present.

Where the object to be attained is single (such as that of having an efficient

army), the authority commissioned to attend to it should be single likewise.

The entire aggregate of means provided for one end should be under one and

the same control and responsibility. If they are divided among independent

authorities, the means, with each of those authorities, become ends, and it is

the business of nobody except the head of the Government, who is probably

without the appropriate departmental experience, to take care of the real end.

The different classes of means are not combined and adapted to one another

under the guidance of any leading idea; and while every department pushes

forward its own requirements, regardless of those of the rest, the purpose of

the work is perpetually sacrificed to the work itself.

              As a general rule, every executive function, whether superior or

subordinate, should be the appointed duty of some given individual. It should

be apparent to all the world who did everything, and through whose default

anything was left undone. Responsibility is null when nobody knows who is

responsible. Nor, even when real, can it be divided without being weakened.To maintain it at its highest there must be one person who receives the whole

praise of what is well done, the whole blame of what is ill. There are,

however, two modes of sharing responsibility: by one it is only enfeebled, by

the other, absolutely destroyed. It is enfeebled when the concurrence of more

than one functionary is required to the same act. Each one among them has

still a real responsibility; if a wrong has been done, none of them can say he

did not do it; he is as much a participant as an accomplice is in an offence: if

there has been legal criminality they may all be punished legally, and their

punishment needs not be less severe than if there had been only one person

concerned. But it is not so with the penalties, any more than with the rewards,

of opinion: these are always diminished by being shared. Where there has

been no definite legal offence, no corruption or malversation, only an error or

an imprudence, or what may pass for such, every participator has an excuse

to himself and to the world, in the fact that other persons are jointly involved

with him. There is hardly anything, even to pecuniary dishonesty, for which

men will not feel themselves almost absolved, if those whose duty it was to

resist and remonstrate have failed to do it, still more if they have given a

formal assent.

              In this case, however, though responsibility is weakened, there still

is responsibility: every one of those implicated has in his individual capacity

assented to, and joined in, the act. Things are much worse when the act itself

is only that of a majority — a Board, deliberating with closed doors, nobody

knowing, or, except in some extreme case, being ever likely to know,

whether an individual member voted for the act or against it. Responsibility

in this case is a mere name. "Boards," it is happily said by Bentham, "are

screens." What "the Board" does is the act of nobody; and nobody can be

made to answer for it. The Board suffers, even in reputation, only in its

collective character; and no individual member feels this further than his

disposition leads him to identify his own estimation with that of the body —

a feeling often very strong when the body is a permanent one, and he is

wedded to it for better for worse; but the fluctuations of a modern official

career give no time for the formation of such an esprit de corps; which if it

exists at all, exists only in the obscure ranks of the permanent subordinates.

Boards, therefore, are not a fit instrument for executive business; and are only

admissible in it when, for other reasons, to give full discretionary power to a

single minister would be worse.              On the other hand, it is also a maxim of experience that in the

multitude of counsellors there is wisdom; and that a man seldom judges right,

even in his own concerns, still less in those of the public, when he makes

habitual use of no knowledge but his own, or that of some single adviser.

There is no necessary incompatibility between this principle and the other. It

is easy to give the effective power, and the full responsibility, to one,

providing him when necessary with advisers, each of whom is responsible

only for the opinion he gives.

              In general, the head of a department of the executive government is a

mere politician. He may be a good politician, and a man of merit; and unless

this is usually the case, the government is bad. But his general capacity, and

the knowledge he ought to possess of the general interests of the country, will

not, unless by occasional accident, be accompanied by adequate, and what

may be called professional, knowledge of the department over which he is

called to preside. Professional advisers must therefore be provided for him.

Wherever mere experience and attainments are sufficient wherever the

qualities required in a professional adviser may possibly be united in a single

well-selected individual (as in the case, for example, of a law officer), one

such person for general purposes, and a staff of clerks to supply knowledge

of details, meet the demands of the case. But, more frequently, it is not

sufficient that the minister should consult some one competent person, and,

when himself not conversant with the subject, act implicitly on that person's

advice. It is often necessary that he should, not only occasionally but

habitually, listen to a variety of opinions, and inform his judgment by the

discussions among a body of advisers. This, for example, is emphatically

necessary in military and naval affairs. The military and naval ministers,

therefore, and probably several others, should be provided with a Council,

composed, at least in those two departments, of able and experienced

professional men. As a means of obtaining the best men for the purpose

under every change of administration, they ought to be permanent: by which I

mean, that they ought not, like the Lords of the Admiralty, to be expected to

resign with the ministry by whom they were appointed: but it is a good rule

that all who hold high appointments to which they have risen by selection,

and not by the ordinary course of promotion, should retain their office only

for a fixed term, unless reappointed; as is now the rule with Staff

appointments in the British army. This rule renders appointments somewhat

less likely to be jobbed, not being a provision for life, and the same timeaffords a means, without affront to any one, of getting rid of those who are

least worth keeping, and bringing in highly qualified persons of younger

standing, for whom there might never be room if death vacancies, or

voluntary resignations, were waited for.

              The Councils should be consultative merely, in this sense, that the

ultimate decision should rest undividedly with the minister himself: but

neither ought they to be looked upon, or to look upon themselves, as ciphers,

or as capable of being reduced to such at his pleasure. The advisers attached

to a powerful and perhaps self-willed man ought to be placed under

conditions which make it impossible for them, without discredit, not to

express an opinion, and impossible for him not to listen to and consider their

recommendations, whether he adopts them or not. The relation which ought

to exist between a chief and this description of advisers is very accurately hit

by the constitution of the Council of the Governor-General and those of the

different Presidencies in India. These Councils are composed of persons who

have professional knowledge of Indian affairs, which the Governor-General

and Governors usually lack, and which it would not be desirable to require of

them. As a rule, every member of Council is expected to give an opinion,

which is of course very often a simple acquiescence: but if there is a

difference of sentiment, it is at the option of every member, and is the

invariable practice, to record the reasons of his opinion: the Governor-

General, or Governor, doing the same. In ordinary cases the decision is

according to the sense of the majority; the Council, therefore, has a

substantial part in the government: but if the Governor-General, or Governor,

thinks fit, he may set aside even their unanimous opinion, recording his

reasons. The result is, that the chief is individually and effectively responsible

for every act of the Government. The members of Council have only the

responsibility of advisers; but it is always known, from documents capable of

being produced, and which if called for by Parliament or public opinion

always are produced, what each has advised, and what reasons he gave for his

advice: while, from their dignified position, and ostensible participation in all

acts of government, they have nearly as strong motives to apply themselves

to the public business, and to form and express a well-considered opinion on

every part of it, as if the whole responsibility rested with themselves.

              This mode of conducting the highest class of administrative business

is one of the most successful instances of the adaptation of means to endswhich political history, not hitherto very prolific in works of skill and

contrivance, has yet to show. It is one of the acquisitions with which the art

of politics has been enriched by the experience of the East India Company's

rule; and, like most of the other wise contrivances by which India has been

preserved to this country, and an amount of good government produced

which is truly wonderful considering the circumstances and the materials, it

is probably destined to perish in the general holocaust which the traditions of

Indian government seem fated to undergo, since they have been placed at the

mercy of public ignorance, and the presumptuous vanity of political men.

Already an outcry is raised for abolishing the Councils, as a superfluous and

expensive clog on the wheels of government: while the clamour has long

been urgent, and is daily obtaining more countenance in the highest quarters,

for the abrogation of the professional civil service which breeds the men that

compose the Councils, and the existence of which is the sole guarantee for

their being of any value.

              A most important principle of good government in a popular

constitution is that no executive functionaries should be appointed by popular

election: neither by the votes of the people themselves, nor by those of their

representatives. The entire business of government is skilled employment; the

qualifications for the discharge of it are of that special and professional kind

which cannot be properly judged of except by persons who have themselves

some share of those qualifications, or some practical experience of them. The

business of finding the fittest persons to fill public employments — not

merely selecting the best who offer, but looking out for the absolutely best,

and taking note of all fit persons who are met with, that they may be found

when wanted — is very laborious, and requires a delicate as well as highly

conscientious discernment; and as there is no public duty which is in general

so badly performed, so there is none for which it is of greater importance to

enforce the utmost practicable amount of personal responsibility, by

imposing it as a special obligation on high functionaries in the several

departments. All subordinate public officers who are not appointed by some

mode of public competition should be selected on the direct responsibility of

the minister under whom they serve. The ministers, all but the chief, will

naturally be selected by the chief; and the chief himself, though really

designated by Parliament, should be, in a regal government, officially

appointed by the Crown. The functionary who appoints should be the sole

person empowered to remove any subordinate officer who is liable toremoval; which the far greater number ought not to be, except for personal

misconduct; since it would be vain to expect that the body of persons by

whom the whole detail of the public business is transacted, and whose

qualifications are generally of much more importance to the public than those

of the minister himself, will devote themselves to their profession, and

acquire the knowledge and skill on which the minister must often place entire

dependence, if they are liable at any moment to be turned adrift for no fault,

that the minister may gratify himself, or promote his political interest, by

appointing somebody else.

              To the principle which condemns the appointment of executive

officers by popular suffrage, ought the chief of the executive, in a republican

government, to be an exception? Is it a good rule, which, in the American

Constitution, provides for the election of the President once in every four

years by the entire people? The question is not free from difficulty. There is

unquestionably some advantage, in a country like America, where no

apprehension needs be entertained of a coup d'etat, in making the chief

minister constitutionally independent of the legislative body, and rendering

the two great branches of the government, while equally popular both in their

origin and in their responsibility, an effective check on one another. The plan

is in accordance with that sedulous avoidance of the concentration of great

masses of power in the same hands, which is a marked characteristic of the

American Federal Constitution. But the advantage, in this instance, is

purchased at a price above all reasonable estimates of its value. It seems far

better that the chief magistrate in a republic should be appointed avowedly, as

the chief minister in a constitutional monarchy is virtually, by the

representative body. In the first place, he is certain, when thus appointed, to

be a more eminent man. The party which has the majority in Parliament

would then, as a rule, appoint its own leader; who is always one of the

foremost, and often the very foremost person in political life: while the

President of the United States, since the last survivor of the founders of the

republic disappeared from the scene, is almost always either an obscure man,

or one who has gained any reputation he may possess in some other field than

politics. And this, as I have before observed, is no accident, but the natural

effect of the situation. The eminent men of a party, in an election extending to

the whole country, are never its most available candidates. All eminent men

have made personal enemies, or have done something, or at the lowest

professed some opinion, obnoxious to some local or other considerabledivision of the community, and likely to tell with fatal effect upon the

number of votes; whereas a man without antecedents, of whom nothing is

known but that he professes the creed of the party, is readily voted for by its

entire strength. Another important consideration is the great mischief of

unintermitted electioneering. When the highest dignity in the State is to be

conferred by popular election once in every few years, the whole intervening

time is spent in what is virtually a canvass. President, ministers, chiefs of

parties, and their followers, are all electioneerers: the whole community is

kept intent on the mere personalities of politics, and every public question is

discussed and decided with less reference to its merits than to its expected

bearing on the presidential election. If a system had been devised to make

party spirit the ruling principle of action in all public affairs, and create an

inducement not only to make every question a party question, but to raise

questions for the purpose of founding parties upon them, it would have been

difficult to contrive any means better adapted to the purpose.

              I will not affirm that it would at all times and places be desirable that

the head of the executive should be so completely dependent upon the votes

of a representative assembly as the Prime Minister is in England, and is

without inconvenience. If it were thought best to avoid this, he might, though

appointed by Parliament, hold his office for a fixed period, independent of a

parliamentary vote: which would be the American system, minus the popular

election and its evils. There is another mode of giving the head of the

administration as much independence of the legislature as is at all compatible

with the essentials of free government. He never could be unduly dependent

on a vote of Parliament, if he had, as the British Prime Minister practically

has, the power to dissolve the House and appeal to the people: if instead of

being turned out of office by a hostile vote, he could only be reduced by it to

the alternative of resignation or dissolution. The power of dissolving

Parliament is one which I think it desirable he should possess, even under the

system by which his own tenure of office is secured to him for a fixed period.

There ought not to be any possibility of that deadlock in politics which would

ensue on a quarrel breaking out between a President and an Assembly,

neither of whom, during an interval which might amount to years, would

have any legal means of ridding itself of the other. To get through such a

period without a coup d'etat being attempted, on either side or on both,

requires such a combination of the love of liberty and the habit of self-

restraint as very few nations have yet shown themselves capable of: andthough this extremity were avoided, to expect that the two authorities would

not paralyse each other's operations is to suppose that the political life of the

country will always be pervaded by a spirit of mutual forbearance and

compromise, imperturbable by the passions and excitements of the keenest

party struggles. Such a spirit may exist, but even where it does there is

imprudence in trying it too far.

              Other reasons make it desirable that some power in the state (which

can only be the executive) should have the liberty of at any time, and at

discretion, calling a new Parliament. When there is a real doubt which of two

contending parties has the strongest following, it is important that there

should exist a constitutional means of immediately testing the point, and

setting it at rest. No other political topic has a chance of being properly

attended to while this is undecided: and such an interval is mostly an

interregnum for purposes of legislative or administrative improvement;

neither party having sufficient confidence in its strength to attempt things

likely to promote opposition in any quarter that has either direct or indirect

influence in the pending struggle.

              I have not taken account of the case in which the vast power

centralised in the chief magistrate, and the insufficient attachment of the mass

of the people to free institutions, give him a chance of success in an attempt

to subvert the Constitution, and usurp sovereign power. Where such peril

exists, no first magistrate is admissible whom the Parliament cannot, by a

single vote, reduce to a private station. In a state of things holding out any

encouragement to that most audacious and profligate of all breaches of trust,

even this entireness of constitutional dependence is but a weak protection.

              Of all officers of government, those in whose appointment any

participation of popular suffrage is the most objectionable are judicial

officers. While there are no functionaries whose special and professional

qualifications the popular judgment is less fitted to estimate, there are none in

whose case absolute impartiality, and freedom from connection with

politicians or sections of politicians, are of anything like equal importance.

Some thinkers, among others Mr. Bentham, have been of opinion that,

although it is better that judges should not be appointed by popular election,

the people of their district ought to have the power, after sufficient

experience, of removing them from their trust. It cannot be denied that the

irremovability of any public officer, to whom great interests are entrusted, isin itself an evil. It is far from desirable that there should be no means of

getting rid of a bad or incompetent judge, unless for such misconduct as he

can be made to answer for in a criminal court; and that a functionary on

whom so much depends should have the feeling of being free from

responsibility except to opinion and his own conscience. The question

however is, whether in the peculiar position of a judge, and supposing that all

practicable securities have been taken for an honest appointment,

irresponsibility, except to his own and the public conscience, has not on the

whole less tendency to pervert his conduct than responsibility to the

government, or to a popular vote. Experience has long decided this point in

the affirmative as regards responsibility to the executive; and the case is quite

equally strong when the responsibility sought to be enforced is to the

suffrages of electors. Among the good qualities of a popular constituency,

those peculiarly incumbent upon a judge, calmness and impartiality, are not

numbered. Happily, in that intervention of popular suffrage which is essential

to freedom they are not the qualities required. Even the quality of justice,

though necessary to all human beings, and therefore to all electors, is not the

inducement which decides any popular election. Justice and impartiality are

as little wanted for electing a member of Parliament as they can be in any

transaction of men. The electors have not to award something which either

candidate has a right to, nor to pass judgment on the general merits of the

competitors, but to declare which of them has most of their personal

confidence, or best represents their political convictions. A judge is bound to

treat his political friend, or the person best known to him, exactly as he treats

other people; but it would be a breach of duty as well as an absurdity if an

elector did so. No argument can be grounded on the beneficial effect

produced on judges, as on all other functionaries, by the moral jurisdiction of

opinion; for even in this respect, that which really exercises a useful control

over the proceedings of a judge, when fit for the judicial office, is not (except

sometimes in political cases) the opinion of the community generally, but that

of the only public by whom his conduct or qualifications can be duly

estimated, the bar of his own court.

              I must not be understood to say that the participation of the general

public in the administration of justice is of no importance; it is of the greatest:

but in what manner? By the actual discharge of a part of the judicial office, in

the capacity of jurymen. This is one of the few cases in politics in which it is

better that the people should act directly and personally than through theirrepresentatives; being almost the only case in which the errors that a person

exercising authority may commit can be better borne than the consequences

of making him responsible for them. If a judge could be removed from office

by a popular vote, whoever was desirous of supplanting him would make

capital for that purpose out of all his judicial decisions; would carry all of

them, as far as he found practicable, by irregular appeal before a public

opinion wholly incompetent, for want of having heard the case, or from

having heard it without either the precautions or the impartiality belonging to

a judicial hearing; would play upon popular passion and prejudice where they

existed, and take pains to arouse them where they did not. And in this, if the

case were interesting, and he took sufficient trouble, he would infallibly be

successful, unless the judge or his friends descended into the arena, and made

equally powerful appeals on the other side. Judges would end by feeling that

they risked their office upon every decision they gave in a case susceptible of

general interest, and that it was less essential for them to consider what

decision was just than what would be most applauded by the public, or would

least admit of insidious misrepresentation. The practice introduced by some

of the new or revised State Constitutions in America, of submitting judicial

officers to periodical popular re-election, will be found, I apprehend, to be

one of the most dangerous errors ever yet committed by democracy: and,

were it not that the practical good sense which never totally deserts the

people of the United States is said to be producing a reaction, likely in no

long time to lead to the retraction of the error, it might with reason be

regarded as the first great downward step in the degeneration of modern
                          12
democratic government.

        12
               I have been informed, however, that in the States which have made

their judges elective, the choice is not really made by the people, but by the

leaders of parties; no elector ever thinking of voting for any one but the party

candidate: and that, in consequence, the person elected is usually in effect the

same who would have been appointed to the office by the President or by the

Governor of the State. Thus one bad practice limits and corrects another; and

the habit of voting en masse under a party banner, which is so full of evil in

all cases in which the function of electing is rightly vested in the people,

tends to alleviate a still greater mischief in a case where the officer to be

elected is one who ought to be chosen not by the people but for them.

              With regard to that large and important body which constitutes thepermanent strength of the public service, those who do not change with

changes of politics, but remain to aid every minister by their experience and

traditions, inform him by their knowledge of business, and conduct official

details under his general control; those, in short, who form the class of

professional public servants, entering their profession as others do while

young, in the hope of rising progressively to its higher grades as they advance

in life; it is evidently inadmissible that these should be liable to be turned out,

and deprived of the whole benefit of their previous service, except for

positive, proved, and serious misconduct. Not, of course, such delinquency

only as makes them amenable to the law; but voluntary neglect of duty, or

conduct implying untrustworthiness for the purposes for which their trust is

given them. Since, therefore, unless in case of personal culpability, there is

no way of getting rid of them except by quartering them on the public as

pensioners, it is of the greatest importance that the appointments should be

well made in the first instance; and it remains to be considered by what mode

of appointment this purpose can best be attained.

              In making first appointments, little danger is to be apprehended from

want of special skill and knowledge in the choosers, but much from partiality,

and private or political interest. Being, as a rule, appointed at the

commencement of manhood, not as having learnt, but in order that they may

learn, their profession, the only thing by which the best candidates can be

discriminated is proficiency in the ordinary branches of liberal education: and

this can be ascertained without difficulty, provided there be the requisite

pains and the requisite impartiality in those who are appointed to inquire into

it. Neither the one nor the other can reasonably be expected from a minister;

who must rely wholly on recommendations, and however disinterested as to

his personal wishes, never will be proof against the solicitations of persons

who have the power of influencing his own election, or whose political

adherence is important to the ministry to which he belongs. These

considerations have introduced the practice of submitting all candidates for

first appointments to a public examination, conducted by persons not engaged

in politics, and of the same class and quality with the examiners for honours

at the Universities. This would probably be the best plan under any system;

and under our parliamentary government it is the only one which affords a

chance, I do not say of honest appointment, but even of abstinence from such

as are manifestly and flagrantly profligate.              It is also absolutely necessary that the examinations should be

competitive, and the appointments given to those who are most successful. A

mere pass examination never, in the long run, does more than exclude

absolute dunces. When the question, in the mind of an examiner, lies between

blighting the prospects of an individual, and neglecting a duty to the public

which, in the particular instance, seldom appears of first rate importance; and

when he is sure to be bitterly reproached for doing the first, while in general

no one will either know or care whether he has done the latter; the balance,

unless he is a man of very unusual stamp, inclines to the side of good nature.

A relaxation in one instance establishes a claim to it in others, which every

repetition of indulgence makes it more difficult to resist; each of these in

succession becomes a precedent for more, until the standard of proficiency

sinks gradually to something almost contemptible. Examinations for degrees

at the two great Universities have generally been as slender in their

requirements as those for honours are trying and serious. Where there is no

inducement to exceed a certain minimum, the minimum comes to be the

maximum: it becomes the general practice not to aim at more, and as in

everything there are some who do not attain all they aim at, however low the

standard may be pitched, there are always several who fall short of it. When,

on the contrary, the appointments are given to those, among a great number

of candidates, who most distinguish themselves, and where the successful

competitors are classed in order of merit, not only each is stimulated to do his

very utmost, but the influence is felt in every place of liberal education

throughout the country. It becomes with every schoolmaster an object of

ambition, and an avenue to success, to have furnished pupils who have

gained a high place in these competitions; and there is hardly any other mode

in which the State can do so much to raise the quality of educational

institutions throughout the country.

              Though the principle of competitive examinations for public

employment is of such recent introduction in this country, and is still so

imperfectly carried out, the Indian service being as yet nearly the only case in

which it exists in its completeness, a sensible effect has already begun to be

produced on the places of middle-class education; notwithstanding the

difficulties which the principle has encountered from the disgracefully low

existing state of education in the country, which these very examinations

have brought into strong light. So contemptible has the standard of

acquirement been found to be among the youths who obtain the nominationfrom the minister which entitles them to offer themselves as candidates, that

the competition of such candidates produces almost a poorer result than

would be obtained from a mere pass examination; for no one would think of

fixing the conditions of a pass examination so low as is actually found

sufficient to enable a young man to surpass his fellow-candidates.

Accordingly, it is said that successive years show on the whole a decline of

attainments, less effort being made because the results of former

examinations have proved that the exertions then used were greater than

would have been sufficient to attain the object. Partly from this decrease of

effort, and partly because, even at the examinations which do not require a

previous nomination, conscious ignorance reduces the number of competitors

to a mere handful, it has so happened that though there have always been a

few instances of great proficiency, the lower part of the list of successful

candidates represents but a very moderate amount of acquirement; and we

have it on the word of the Commissioners that nearly all who have been

unsuccessful have owed their failure to ignorance not of the higher branches

of instruction, but of its very humblest elements — spelling and arithmetic.

              The outcries which continue to be made against these examinations

by some of the organs of opinion, are often, I regret to say, as little creditable

to the good faith as to the good sense of the assailants. They proceed partly

by misrepresentation of the kind of ignorance which, as a matter of fact,

actually leads to failure in the examinations. They quote with emphasis the
                            13
most recondite questions which can be shown to have been ever asked, and

make it appear as if unexceptionable answers to all these were made the sine

qua non of success. Yet it has been repeated to satiety that such questions are

not put because it is expected of every one that he should answer them, but in

order that whoever is able to do so may have the means of proving and

availing himself of that portion of his knowledge. It is not as a ground of

rejection, but as an additional means of success, that this opportunity is given.

We are then asked whether the kind of knowledge supposed in this, that, or

the other question is calculated to be of any use to the candidate after he has

attained his object. People differ greatly in opinion as to what knowledge is

useful. There are persons in existence, and a late Foreign Secretary of State is

one of them, who think English spelling a useless accomplishment in a

diplomatic attache, or a clerk in a government office. About one thing the

objectors seem to be unanimous, that general mental cultivation is not useful

in these employments, whatever else may be so. If, however (as I presume tothink), it is useful, or if any education at all is useful, it must be tested by the

tests most likely to show whether the candidate possesses it or not. To

ascertain whether he has been well educated, he must be interrogated in the

things which he is likely to know if he has been well educated, even though

not directly pertinent to the work to which he is to be appointed. Will those

who object to his being questioned in classics and mathematics, in a country

where the only things regularly taught are classics and mathematics, tell us

what they would have him questioned in? There seems, however, to be equal

objection to examining him in these, and to examining him in anything but

these. If the Commissioners — anxious to open a door of admission to those

who have not gone through the routine of a grammar school, or who make up

for the smallness of their knowledge of what is there taught by greater

knowledge of something else — allow marks to be gained by proficiency in

any other subject of real utility, they are reproached for that too. Nothing will

satisfy the objectors but free admission of total ignorance.

        13
               Not always, however, the most recondite; for a late denouncer of

competitive examination in the House of Commons had the naivete to

produce a set of almost elementary questions in algebra, history, and

geography, as a proof of the exorbitant amount of high scientific attainment

which the Commissioners were so wild as to exact.

              We are triumphantly told that neither Clive nor Wellington could

have passed the test which is prescribed for an aspirant to an engineer

cadetship. As if, because Clive and Wellington did not do what was not

required of them, they could not have done it if it had been required. If it be

only meant to inform us that it is possible to be a great general without these

things, so it is without many other things which are very useful to great

generals. Alexander the Great had never heard of Vauban's rules, nor could

Julius Caesar speak French. We are next informed that bookworms, a term

which seems to be held applicable to whoever has the smallest tincture of

book — knowledge, may not be good at bodily exercises, or have the habits

of gentlemen. This is a very common line of remark with dunces of

condition; but whatever the dunces may think, they have no monopoly of

either gentlemanly habits or bodily activity. Wherever these are needed, let

them be inquired into and separately provided for, not to the exclusion of

mental qualifications, but in addition. Meanwhile, I am credibly informed,

that in the Military Academy at Woolwich the competition cadets are assuperior to those admitted on the old system of nomination in these respects

as in all others; that they learn even their drill more quickly; as indeed might

be expected, for an intelligent person learns all things sooner than a stupid

one: and that in general demeanour they contrast so favourably with their

predecessors, that the authorities of the institutions are impatient for the day

to arrive when the last remains of the old leaven shall have disappeared from

the place. If this be so, and it is easy to ascertain whether it is so, it is to be

hoped we shall soon have heard for the last time that ignorance is a better

qualification than knowledge for the military and a fortiori for every other,

profession; or that any one good quality, however little apparently connected

with liberal education, is at all likely to be promoted by going without it.

              Though the first admission to government employment be decided

by competitive examination, it would in most cases be impossible that

subsequent promotion should be so decided: and it seems proper that this

should take place, as it usually does at present, on a mixed system of

seniority and selection. Those whose duties are of a routine character should

rise by seniority to the highest point to which duties merely of that

description can carry them; while those to whom functions of particular trust,

and requiring special capacity, are confided, should be selected from the body

on the discretion of the chief of the office. And this selection will generally

be made honestly by him if the original appointments take place by open

competition: for under that system his establishment will generally consist of

individuals to whom, but for the official connection, he would have been a

stranger. If among them there be any in whom he, or his political friends and

supporters, take an interest, it will be but occasionally, and only when, to this

advantage of connection, is added, as far as the initiatory examination could

test it, at least equality of real merit. And, except when there is a very strong

motive to job these appointments, there is always a strong one to appoint the

fittest person; being the one who gives to his chief the most useful assistance,

saves him most trouble, and helps most to build up that reputation for good

management of public business which necessarily and properly redounds to

the credit of the minister, however much the qualities to which it is

immediately owing may be those of his subordinates.

 

                                        Chapter 15

 

 

                        Of Local Representative Bodies.

 

 

              IT IS BUT a small portion of the public business of a country which

can be well done, or safely attempted, by the central authorities; and even in

our own government, the least centralised in Europe, the legislative portion at

least of the governing body busies itself far too much with local affairs,

employing the supreme power of the State in cutting small knots which there

ought to be other and better means of untying. The enormous amount of

private business which takes up the time of Parliament, and the thoughts of

its individual members, distracting them from the proper occupations of the

great council of the nation, is felt by all thinkers and observers as a serious

evil, and what is worse, an increasing one.

              It would not be appropriate to the limited design of this treatise to

discuss at large the great question, in no way peculiar to representative

government, of the proper limits of governmental action. I have said
          14
elsewhere what seemed to me most essential respecting the principles by

which the extent of that action ought to be determined. But after subtracting

from the functions performed by most European governments those which

ought not to be undertaken by public authorities at all, there still remains so

great and various an aggregate of duties that, if only on the principle of

division of labour, it is indispensable to share them between central and local

authorities. Not only are separate executive officers required for purely local

duties (an amount of separation which exists under all governments), but the

popular control over those officers can only be advantageously exerted

through a separate organ. Their original appointment, the function of

watching and checking them, the duty of providing, or the discretion of

withholding, the supplies necessary for their operations, should rest, not with

the national Parliament or the national executive, but with the people of the

locality. In some of the New England States these functions are still exercised

directly by the assembled people; it is said with better results than might beexpected; and those highly educated communities are so well satisfied with

this primitive mode of local government, that they have no desire to exchange

it for the only representative system they are acquainted with, by which all

minorities are disfranchised. Such very peculiar circumstances, however, are

required to make this arrangement work tolerably in practice, that recourse

must generally be had to the plan of representative sub-Parliaments for local

affairs. These exist in England, but very incompletely, and with great

irregularity and want of system: in some other countries much less popularly

governed their constitution is far more rational. In England there has always

been more liberty, but worse organisation, while in other countries there is

better organisation, but less liberty. It is necessary, then, that in addition to

the national representation there should be municipal and provincial

representations: and the two questions which remain to be resolved are, how

the local representative bodies should be constituted, and what should be the

extent of their functions.

        14
               On Liberty, concluding chapter; and, at greater length, in the final

chapter of Principles of Political Economy.

              In considering these questions two points require an equal degree of

our attention: how the local business itself can be best done; and how its

transaction can be made most instrumental to the nourishment of public spirit

and the development of intelligence. In an earlier part of this inquiry I have

dwelt in strong language — hardly any language is strong enough to express

the strength of my conviction — on the importance of that portion of the

operation of free institutions which may be called the public education of the

citizens. Now, of this operation the local administrative institutions are the

chief instrument. Except by the part they may take as jurymen in the

administration of justice, the mass of the population have very little

opportunity of sharing personally in the conduct of the general affairs of the

community. Reading newspapers, and perhaps writing to them, public

meetings, and solicitations of different sorts addressed to the political

authorities, are the extent of the participation of private citizens in general

politics during the interval between one parliamentary election and another.

Though it is impossible to exaggerate the importance of these various

liberties, both as securities for freedom and as means of general cultivation,

the practice which they give is more in thinking than in action, and in

thinking without the responsibilities of action; which with most peopleamounts to little more than passively receiving the thoughts of some one else.

But in the case of local bodies, besides the function of electing, many citizens

in turn have the chance of being elected, and many, either by selection or by

rotation, fill one or other of the numerous local executive offices. In these

positions they have to act for public interests, as well as to think and to speak,

and the thinking cannot all be done by proxy. It may be added, that these

local functions, not being in general sought by the higher ranks, carry down

the important political education which they are the means of conferring to a

much lower grade in society. The mental discipline being thus a more

important feature in local concerns than in the general affairs of the State,

while there are not such vital interests dependent on the quality of the

administration, a greater weight may be given to the former consideration,

and the latter admits much more frequently of being postponed to it than in

matters of general legislation and the conduct of imperial affairs.

              The proper constitution of local representative bodies does not

present much difficulty. The principles which apply to it do not differ in any

respect from those applicable to the national representation. The same

obligation exists, as in the case of the more important function, for making

the bodies elective; and the same reasons operate as in that case, but with still

greater force, for giving them a widely democratic basis: the dangers being

less, and the advantages, in point of popular education and cultivation, in

some respects even greater. As the principal duty of the local bodies consists

of the imposition and expenditure of local taxation, the electoral franchise

should vest in all who contribute to the local rates, to the exclusion of all who

do not. I assume that there is no indirect taxation, no octroi duties, or that if

there are, they are supplementary only; those on whom their burden falls

being also rated to a direct assessment. The representation of minorities

should be provided for in the same manner as in the national Parliament, and

there are the same strong reasons for plurality of votes. Only, there is not so

decisive an objection, in the inferior as in the higher body, to making the

plural voting depend (as in some of the local elections of our own country) on

a mere money qualification: for the honest and frugal dispensation of money

forms so much larger a part of the business of the local than of the national

body, that there is more justice as well as policy in allowing a greater

proportional influence to those who have a larger money interest at stake.

              In the most recently established of our local representativeinstitutions, the Boards of Guardians, the justices of peace of the district sit

ex officio along with the elected members, in number limited by law to a

third of the whole. In the peculiar constitution of English society I have no

doubt of the beneficial effect of this provision. It secures the presence, in

these bodies, of a more educated class than it would perhaps be practicable to

attract thither on any other terms; and while the limitation in number of the ex

officio members precludes them from acquiring predominance by mere

numerical strength, they, as a virtual representation of another class, having

sometimes a different interest from the rest, are a check upon the class

interests of the farmers or petty shopkeepers who form the bulk of the elected

Guardians. A similar commendation cannot be given to the constitution of the

only provincial boards we possess, the Quarter Sessions, consisting of the

justices of peace alone; on whom, over and above their judicial duties, some

of the most important parts of the administrative business of the country

depend for their performance. The mode of formation of these bodies is most

anomalous, they being neither elected, nor, in any proper sense of the term,

nominated, but holding their important functions, like the feudal lords to

whom they succeeded, virtually by right of their acres: the appointment

vested in the Crown (or, speaking practically, in one of themselves, the Lord

Lieutenant) being made use of only as a means of excluding any one who it is

thought would do discredit to the body, or, now and then, one who is on the

wrong side in politics. The institution is the most aristocratic in principle

which now remains in England; far more so than the House of Lords, for it

grants public money and disposes of important public interests, not in

conjunction with a popular assembly, but alone. It is clung to with

proportionate tenacity by our aristocratic classes; but is obviously at variance

with all the principles which are the foundation of representative government.

In a County Board there is not the same justification as in Boards of

Guardians, for even an admixture of ex officio with elected members: since

the business of a county being on a sufficiently large scale to be an object of

interest and attraction to country gentlemen, they would have no more

difficulty in getting themselves elected to the Board than they have in being

returned to Parliament as county members. In regard to the proper

circumscription of the constituencies which elect the local representative

bodies; the principle which, when applied as an exclusive and unbending rule

to parliamentary representation, is inappropriate, namely community of local

interests, is here the only just and applicable one. The very object of having alocal representation is in order that those who have any interest in common,

which they do not share with the general body of their countrymen, may

manage that joint interest by themselves: and the purpose is contradicted if

the distribution of the local representation follows any other rule than the

grouping of those joint interests. There are local interests peculiar to every

town, whether great or small, and common to all its inhabitants: every town,

therefore, without distinction of size, ought to have its municipal council. It is

equally obvious that every town ought to have but one. The different quarters

of the same town have seldom or never any material diversities of local

interest; they all require to have the same things done, the same expenses

incurred; and, except as to their churches, which it is probably desirable to

leave under simply parochial management, the same arrangements may be

made to serve for all. Paving, lighting, water supply, drainage, port and

market regulations, cannot without great waste and inconvenience be

different for different quarters of the same town. The subdivision of London

into six or seven independent districts, each with its separate arrangements

for local business (several of them without unity of administration even

within themselves), prevents the possibility of consecutive or well regulated

cooperation for common objects, precludes any uniform principle for the

discharge of local duties, compels the general government to take things upon

itself which would be best left to local authorities if there were any whose

authority extended to the entire metropolis, and answers no purpose but to

keep up the fantastical trappings of that union of modern jobbing and

antiquated foppery, the Corporation of the City of London.

              Another equally important principle is, that in each local

circumscription there should be but one elected body for all local business,

not different bodies for different parts of it. Division of labour does not mean

cutting up every business into minute fractions; it means the union of such

operations as are fit to be performed by the same persons, and the separation

of such as can be better performed by different persons. The executive duties

of the locality do indeed require to be divided into departments, for the same

reason as those of the State; because they are of diverse kinds, each requiring

knowledge peculiar to itself, and needing, for its due performance, the

undivided attention of a specially qualified functionary. But the reasons for

subdivision which apply to the execution do not apply to the control. The

business of the elective body is not to do the work, but to see that it is

properly done, and that nothing necessary is left undone. This function can befulfilled for all departments by the same superintending body; and by a

collective and comprehensive far better than by a minute and microscopic

view. It is as absurd in public affairs as it would be in private that every

workman should be looked after by a superintendent to himself. The

Government of the Crown consists of many departments, and there are many

ministers to conduct them, but those ministers have not a Parliament apiece to

keep them to their duty. The local, like the national Parliament, has for its

proper business to consider the interest of the locality as a whole, composed

of parts all of which must be adapted to one another, and attended to in the

order and ratio of their importance.

              There is another very weighty reason for uniting the control of all

the business of a locality under one body. The greatest imperfection of

popular local institutions, and the chief cause of the failure which so often

attends them, is the low calibre of the men by whom they are almost always

carried on. That these should be of a very miscellaneous character is, indeed,

part of the usefulness of the institution; it is that circumstance chiefly which

renders it a school of political capacity and general intelligence. But a school

supposes teachers as well as scholars; the utility of the instruction greatly

depends on its bringing inferior minds into contact with superior, a contact

which in the ordinary course of life is altogether exceptional, and the want of

which contributes more than anything else to keep the generality of mankind

on one level of contented ignorance. The school, moreover, is worthless, and

a school of evil instead of good, if through the want of due surveillance, and

of the presence within itself of a higher order of characters, the action of the

body is allowed, as it so often is, to degenerate into an equally unscrupulous

and stupid pursuit of the self-interest of its members. Now it is quite hopeless

to induce persons of a high class, either socially or intellectually, to take a

share of local administration in a corner by piece-meal, as members of a

Paving Board or a Drainage Commission. The entire local business of their

town is not more than a sufficient object to induce men whose tastes incline

them and whose knowledge qualifies them for national affairs to become

members of a mere local body, and devote to it the time and study which are

necessary to render their presence anything more than a screen for the

jobbing of inferior persons under the shelter of their responsibility. A mere

Board of Works, though it comprehend the entire metropolis, is sure to be

composed of the same class of persons as the vestries of the London parishes;

nor is it practicable, or even desirable, that such should not form the majority;but it is important for every purpose which local bodies are designed to serve,

whether it be the enlightened and honest performance of their special duties,

or the cultivation of the political intelligence of the nation, that every such

body should contain a portion of the very best minds of the locality: who are

thus brought into perpetual contact, of the most useful kind, with minds of a

lower grade, receiving from them what local or professional knowledge they

have to give, and in return inspiring them with a portion of their own more

enlarged ideas, and higher and more enlightened purposes.

              A mere village has no claim to a municipal representation. By a

village I mean a place whose inhabitants are not markedly distinguished by

occupation or social relations from those of the rural districts adjoining, and

for whose local wants the arrangements made for the surrounding territory

will suffice. Such small places have rarely a sufficient public to furnish a

tolerable municipal council: if they contain any talent or knowledge

applicable to public business, it is apt to be all concentrated in some one man,

who thereby becomes the dominator of the place. It is better that such places

should be merged in a larger circumscription. The local representation of

rural districts will naturally be determined by geographical considerations;

with due regard to those sympathies of feeling by which human beings are so

much aided to act in concert, and which partly follow historical boundaries,

such as those of counties or provinces, and partly community of interest and

occupation, as in agriculture, maritime, manufacturing, or mining districts.

Different kinds of local business require different areas of representation. The

Unions of parishes have been fixed on as the most appropriate basis for the

representative bodies which superintend the relief of indigence; while, for the

proper regulation of highways, or prisons, or police, a large extent, like that

of an average county, is not more than sufficient. In these large districts,

therefore, the maxim, that an elective body constituted in any locality should

have authority over all the local concerns common to the locality, requires

modification from another principle — as well as from the competing

consideration of the importance of obtaining for the discharge of the local

duties the highest qualifications possible. For example, if it be necessary (as I

believe it to be) for the proper administration of the Poor Laws that the area

of rating should not be more extensive than most of the present Unions, a

principle which requires a Board of Guardians for each Union — yet, as a

much more highly qualified class of persons is likely to be obtainable for a

County Board than those who compose an average Board of Guardians, itmay on that ground be expedient to reserve for the County Boards some

higher descriptions of local business, which might otherwise have been

conveniently managed within itself by each separate Union.

              Besides the controlling council, or local sub-Parliament, local

business has its executive department. With respect to this, the same

questions arise as with respect to the executive authorities in the State; and

they may, for the most part, be answered in the same manner. The principles

applicable to all public trusts are in substance the same. In the first place,

each executive officer should be single, and singly responsible for the whole

of the duty committed to his charge. In the next place, he should be

nominated, not elected. It is ridiculous that a surveyor, or a health officer, or

even a collector of rates, should be appointed by popular suffrage. The

popular choice usually depends on interest with a few local leaders, who, as

they are not supposed to make the appointment, are not responsible for it; or

on an appeal to sympathy, founded on having twelve children, and having

been a rate-payer in the parish for thirty years. If in cases of this description

election by the population is a farce, appointment by the local representative

body is little less objectionable. Such bodies have a perpetual tendency to

become joint-stock associations for carrying into effect the private jobs of

their various members. Appointments should be made on the individual

responsibility of the Chairman of the body, let him be called Mayor,

Chairman of Quarter Sessions, or by whatever other title. He occupies in the

locality a position analogous to that of the prime minister in the State, and

under a well organised system the appointment and watching of the local

officers would be the most important part of his duty: he himself being

appointed by the Council from its own number, subject either to annual re-

election, or to removal by a vote of the body.

              From the constitution of the local bodies I now pass to the equally

important and more difficult subject of their proper attributions. This question

divides itself into two parts: what should be their duties, and whether they

should have full authority within the sphere of those duties, or should be

liable to any, and what, interference on the part of the central government.

              It is obvious, to begin with, that all business purely local — all

which concerns only a single locality — should devolve upon the local

authorities. The paving, lighting, and cleansing of the streets of a town, and in

ordinary circumstances the draining of its houses, are of little consequence toany but its inhabitants. The nation at large is interested in them in no other

way than that in which it is interested in the private well-being of all its

individual citizens. But among the duties classed as local, or performed by

local functionaries, there are many which might with equal propriety be

termed national, being the share, belonging to the locality, of some branch of

the public administration in the efficiency of which the whole nation is alike

interested: the gaols, for instance, most of which in this country are under

county management; the local police; the local administration of justice,

much of which, especially in corporate towns, is performed by officers

elected by the locality, and paid from local funds. None of these can be said

to be matters of local, as distinguished from national, importance. It would

not be a matter personally indifferent to the rest of the country if any part of it

became a nest of robbers or a focus of demoralisation, owing to the

maladministration of its police; or if, through the bad regulations of its gaol,

the punishment which the courts of justice intended to inflict on the criminals

confined therein (who might have come from, or committed their offences in,

any other district) might be doubled in intensity, or lowered to practical

impunity. The points, moreover, which constitute good management of these

things are the same everywhere; there is no good reason why police, or gaols,

or the administration of justice, should be differently managed in one part of

the kingdom and in another; while there is great peril that in things so

important, and to which the most instructed minds available to the State are

not more than adequate, the lower average of capacities which alone can be

counted on for the service of the localities might commit errors of such

magnitude as to be a serious blot upon the general administration of the

country.

              Security of person and property, and equal justice between

individuals, are the first needs of society, and the primary ends of

government: if these things can be left to any responsibility below the

highest, there is nothing, except war and treaties, which requires a general

government at all. Whatever are the best arrangements for securing these

primary objects should be made universally obligatory, and, to secure their

enforcement, should be placed under central superintendence. It is often

useful, and with the institutions of our own country even necessary, from the

scarcity, in the localities, of officers representing the general government,

that the execution of duties imposed by the central authority should be

entrusted to functionaries appointed for local purposes by the locality. Butexperience is daily forcing upon the public a conviction of the necessity of

having at least inspectors appointed by the general government to see that the

local officers do their duty. If prisons are under local management, the central

government appoints inspectors of prisons to take care that the rules laid

down by Parliament are observed, and to suggest others if the state of the

gaols shows them to be requisite: as there are inspectors of factories, and

inspectors of schools, to watch over the observance of the Acts of Parliament

relating to the first, and the fulfilment of the conditions on which State

assistance is granted to the latter.

              But, if the administration of justice, police and gaols included, is

both so universal a concern, and so much a matter of general science

independent of local peculiarities, that it may be, and ought to be, uniformly

regulated throughout the country, and its regulation enforced by more trained

and skilful hands than those of purely local authorities — there is also

business, such as the administration of the poor laws, sanitary regulation, and

others, which, while really interesting to the whole country, cannot

consistently with the very purposes of local administration, be, managed

otherwise than by the localities. In regard to such duties the question arises,

how far the local authorities ought to be trusted with discretionary power,

free from any superintendence or control of the State.

              To decide this question it is essential to consider what is the

comparative position of the central and the local authorities as capacity for

the work, and security against negligence or abuse. In the first place, the local

representative bodies and their officers are almost certain to be of a much

lower grade of intelligence and knowledge than Parliament and the national

executive. Secondly, besides being themselves of inferior qualifications, they

are watched by, and accountable to, an inferior public opinion. The public

under whose eyes they act, and by whom they are criticised, is both more

limited in extent, and generally far less enlightened, than that which

surrounds and admonishes the highest authorities at the capital; while the

comparative smallness of the interests involved causes even that inferior

public to direct its thoughts to the subject less intently, and with less

solicitude. Far less interference is exercised by the press and by public

discussion, and that which is exercised may with much more impunity be

disregarded in the proceedings of local than in those of national authorities.

              Thus far the advantage seems wholly on the side of management bythe central government. But, when we look more closely, these motives of

preference are found to be balanced by others fully as substantial. If the local

authorities and public are inferior to the central ones in knowledge of the

principles of administration, they have the compensating advantage of a far

more direct interest in the result. A man's neighbours or his landlord may be

much cleverer than himself, and not without an indirect interest in his

prosperity, but for all that his interests will be better attended to in his own

keeping than in theirs. It is further to be remembered, that even supposing the

central government to administer through its own officers, its officers do not

act at the centre, but in the locality: and however inferior the local public may

be to the central, it is the local public alone which has any opportunity of

watching them, and it is the local opinion alone which either acts directly

upon their own conduct, or calls the attention of the government to the points

in which they may require correction. It is but in extreme cases that the

general opinion of the country is brought to bear at all upon details of local

administration, and still more rarely has it the means of deciding upon them

with any just appreciation of the case. Now, the local opinion necessarily acts

far more forcibly upon purely local administrators. They, in the natural

course of things, are permanent residents, not expecting to be withdrawn

from the place when they cease to exercise authority in it; and their authority

itself depends, by supposition, on the will of the local public. I need not dwell

on the deficiencies of the central authority in detailed knowledge of local

persons and things, and the too great engrossment of its time and thoughts by

other concerns, to admit of its acquiring the quantity and quality of local

knowledge necessary even for deciding on complaints, and enforcing

responsibility from so great a number of local agents. In the details of

management, therefore, the local bodies will generally have the advantage;

but in comprehension of the principles even of purely local management, the

superiority of the central government, when rightly constituted, ought to be

prodigious: not only by reason of the probably great personal superiority of

the individuals composing it, and the multitude of thinkers and writers who

are at all times engaged in pressing useful ideas upon their notice, but also

because the knowledge and experience of any local authority is but local

knowledge and experience, confined to their own part of the country and its

modes of management, whereas the central government has the means of

knowing all that is to be learnt from the united experience of the whole

kingdom, with the addition of easy access to that of foreign countries.              The practical conclusion from these premises is not difficult to draw.

The authority which is most conversant with principles should be supreme

over principles, while that which is most competent in details should have the

details left to it. The principal business of the central authority should be to

give instruction, of the local authority to apply it. Power may be localised,

but knowledge, to be most useful, must be centralised; there must be

somewhere a focus at which all its scattered rays are collected, that the

broken and coloured lights which exist elsewhere may find there what is

necessary to complete and purify them. To every branch of local

administration which affects the general interest there should be a

corresponding central organ, either a minister, or some specially appointed

functionary under him; even if that functionary does no more than collect

information from all quarters, and bring the experience acquired in one

locality to the knowledge of another where it is wanted. But there is also

something more than this for the central authority to do. It ought to keep open

a perpetual communication with the localities: informing itself by their

experience, and them by its own; giving advice freely when asked,

volunteering it when seen to be required; compelling publicity and

recordation of proceedings, and enforcing obedience to every general law

which the legislature has laid down on the subject of local management.

              That some such laws ought to be laid down few are likely to deny.

The localities may be allowed to mismanage their own interests, but not to

prejudice those of others, nor violate those principles of justice between one

person and another of which it is the duty of the State to maintain the rigid

observance. If the local majority attempts to oppress the minority, or one

class another, the State is bound to interpose. For example, all local rates

ought to be voted exclusively by the local representative body; but that body,

though elected solely by rate-payers, may raise its revenues by imposts of

such a kind, or assess them in such a manner, as to throw an unjust share of

the burden on the poor, the rich, or some particular class of the population: it

is the duty, therefore, of the legislature, while leaving the mere amount of the

local taxes to the discretion of the local body, to lay down authoritatively the

modes of taxation, and rules of assessment, which alone the localities shall be

permitted to use.

              Again, in the administration of public charity the industry and

morality of the whole labouring population depend, to a most serious extent,upon adherence to certain fixed principles in awarding relief. Though it

belongs essentially to the local functionaries to determine who, according to

those principles, is entitled to be relieved, the national Parliament is the

proper authority to prescribe the principles themselves; and it would neglect a

most important part of its duty if it did not, in a matter of such grave national

concern, lay down imperative rules, and make effectual provision that those

rules should not be departed from. What power of actual interference with the

local administrators it may be necessary to retain, for the due enforcement of

the laws, is a question of detail into which it would be useless to enter. The

laws themselves will naturally define the penalties, and fix the mode of their

enforcement. It may be requisite, to meet extreme cases, that the power of the

central authority should extend to dissolving the local representative council,

or dismissing the local executive: but not to making new appointments, or

suspending the local institutions. Where Parliament has not interfered, neither

ought any branch of the executive to interfere with authority; but as an

adviser and critic, an enforcer of the laws, and a denouncer to Parliament or

the local constituencies of conduct which it deems condemnable, the

functions of the executive are of the greatest possible value.

              Some may think that however much the central authority surpasses

the local in knowledge of the principles of administration, the great object

which has been so much insisted on, the social and political education of the

citizens, requires that they should be left to manage these matters by their

own, however imperfect, lights. To this it might be answered, that the

education of the citizens is not the only thing to be considered; government

and administration do not exist for that alone, great as its importance is. But

the objection shows a very imperfect understanding of the function of popular

institutions as a means of political instruction. It is but a poor education that

associates ignorance with ignorance, and leaves them, if they care for

knowledge, to grope their way to it without help, and to do without it if they

do not. What is wanted is, the means of making ignorance aware of itself, and

able to profit by knowledge; accustoming minds which know only routine to

act upon, and feel the value of principles: teaching them to compare different

modes of action, and learn, by the use of their reason, to distinguish the best.

When we desire to have a good school, we do not eliminate the teacher. The

old remark, "as the schoolmaster is, so will be the school," is as true of the

indirect schooling of grown people by public business as of the schooling of

youth in academies and colleges. A government which attempts to doeverything is aptly compared by M. Charles de Remusat to a schoolmaster

who does all the pupils' tasks for them; he may be very popular with the

pupils, but he will teach them little. A government, on the other hand, which

neither does anything itself that can possibly be done by any one else, nor

shows any one else how to do anything, is like a school in which there is no

schoolmaster, but only pupil teachers who have never themselves been

taught.

 

 

                                       Chapter 16

 

 

    Of Nationality, as connected with Representative Government.

 

 

              A PORTION of mankind may be said to constitute a Nationality if

they are united among themselves by common sympathies which do not exist

between them and any others — which make them co-operate with each other

more willingly than with other people, desire to be under the same

government, and desire that it should be government by themselves or a

portion of themselves exclusively. This feeling of nationality may have been

generated by various causes. Sometimes it is the effect of identity of race and

descent. Community of language, and community of religion, greatly

contribute to it. Geographical limits are one of its causes. But the strongest of

all is identity of political antecedents; the possession of a national history,

and consequent community of recollections; collective pride and humiliation,

pleasure and regret, connected with the same incidents in the past. None of

these circumstances, however, are either indispensable, or necessarily

sufficient by themselves. Switzerland has a strong sentiment of nationality,

though the cantons are of different races, different languages, and different

religions. Sicily has, throughout history, felt itself quite distinct in nationality

from Naples, notwithstanding identity of religion, almost identity of

language, and a considerable amount of common historical antecedents. The

Flemish and the Walloon provinces of Belgium, notwithstanding diversity of

race and language, have a much greater feeling of common nationality than

the former have with Holland, or the latter with France. Yet in general the

national feeling is proportionally weakened by the failure of any of the causes

which contribute to it. Identity of language, literature, and, to some extent, of

race and recollections, have maintained the feeling of nationality in

considerable strength among the different portions of the German name,

though they have at no time been really united under the same government;

but the feeling has never reached to making the separate states desire to get

rid of their autonomy. Among Italians an identity far from complete, oflanguage and literature, combined with a geographical position which

separates them by a distinct line from other countries, and, perhaps more than

everything else, the possession of a common name, which makes them all

glory in the past achievements in arts, arms, politics, religious primacy,

science, and literature, of any who share the same designation, give rise to an

amount of national feeling in the population which, though still imperfect,

has been sufficient to produce the great events now passing before us,

notwithstanding a great mixture of races, and although they have never, in

either ancient or modern history, been under the same government, except

while that government extended or was extending itself over the greater part

of the known world.

              Where the sentiment of nationality exists in any force, there is a

prima facie case for uniting all the members of the nationality under the same

government, and a government to themselves apart. This is merely saying

that the question of government ought to be decided by the governed. One

hardly knows what any division of the human race should be free to do if not

to determine with which of the various collective bodies of human beings

they choose to associate themselves.

              But, when a people are ripe for free institutions, there is a still more

vital consideration. Free institutions are next to impossible in a country made

up of different nationalities. Among a people without fellow-feeling,

especially if they read and speak different languages, the united public

opinion, necessary to the working of representative government, cannot exist.

The influences which form opinions and decide political acts are different in

the different sections of the country. An altogether different set of leaders

have the confidence of one part of the country and of another. The same

books, newspapers, pamphlets, speeches, do not reach them. One section

does not know what opinions, or what instigations, are circulating in another.

The same incidents, the same acts, the same system of government, affect

them in different ways; and each fears more injury to itself from the other

nationalities than from the common arbiter, the state. Their mutual antipathies

are generally much stronger than jealousy of the government. That any one of

them feels aggrieved by the policy of the common ruler is sufficient to

determine another to support that policy. Even if all are aggrieved, none feel

that they can rely on the others for fidelity in a joint resistance; the strength of

none is sufficient to resist alone, and each may reasonably think that itconsults its own advantage most by bidding for the favour of the government

against the rest. Above all, the grand and only effectual security in the last

resort against the despotism of the government is in that case wanting: the

sympathy of the army with the people. The military are the part of every

community in whom, from the nature of the case, the distinction between

their fellow-countrymen and foreigners is the deepest and strongest. To the

rest of the people foreigners are merely strangers; to the soldier, they are men

against whom he may be called, at a week's notice, to fight for life or death.

The difference to him is that between friends and foes — we may almost say

between fellow-men and another kind of animals: for as respects the enemy,

the only law is that of force, and the only mitigation the same as in the case

of other animals — that of simple humanity. Soldiers to whose feelings half

or three-fourths of the subjects of the same government are foreigners will

have no more scruple in mowing them down, and no more desire to ask the

reason why, than they would have in doing the same thing against declared

enemies. An army composed of various nationalities has no other patriotism

than devotion to the flag. Such armies have been the executioners of liberty

through the whole duration of modern history. The sole bond which holds

them together is their officers and the government which they serve; and their

only idea, if they have any, of public duty is obedience to orders. A

government thus supported, by keeping its Hungarian regiments in Italy and

its Italian in Hungary, can long continue to rule in both places with the iron

rod of foreign conquerors.

              If it be said that so broadly marked a distinction between what is due

to a fellow-countryman and what is due merely to a human creature is more

worthy of savages than of civilised beings, and ought, with the utmost

energy, to be contended against, no one holds that opinion more strongly than

myself. But this object, one of the worthiest to which human endeavour can

be directed, can never, in the present state of civilisation, be promoted by

keeping different nationalities of anything like equivalent strength under the

same government. In a barbarous state of society the case is sometimes

different. The government may then be interested in softening the antipathies

of the races that peace may be preserved and the country more easily

governed. But when there are either free institutions or a desire for them, in

any of the peoples artificially tied together, the interest of the government lies

in an exactly opposite direction. It is then interested in keeping up and

envenoming their antipathies that they may be prevented from coalescing,and it may be enabled to use some of them as tools for the enslavement of

others. The Austrian Court has now for a whole generation made these tactics

its principal means of government; with what fatal success, at the time of the

Vienna insurrection and the Hungarian contest, the world knows too well.

Happily there are now signs that improvement is too far advanced to permit

this policy to be any longer successful.

              For the preceding reasons, it is in general a necessary condition of

free institutions that the boundaries of governments should coincide in the

main with those of nationalities. But several considerations are liable to

conflict in practice with this general principle. In the first place, its

application is often precluded by geographical hindrances. There are parts

even of Europe in which different nationalities are so locally intermingled

that it is not practicable for them to be under separate governments. The

population of Hungary is composed of Magyars, Slovaks, Croats, Serbs,

Roumans, and in some districts Germans, so mixed up as to be incapable of

local separation; and there is no course open to them but to make a virtue of

necessity, and reconcile themselves to living together under equal rights and

laws. Their community of servitude, which dates only from the destruction of

Hungarian independence in 1849, seems to be ripening and disposing them

for such an equal union. The German colony of East Prussia is cut off from

Germany by part of the ancient Poland, and being too weak to maintain

separate independence, must, if geographical continuity is to be maintained,

be either under a non-German government, or the intervening Polish territory

must be under a German one. Another considerable region in which the

dominant element of the population is German, the provinces of Courland,

Esthonia, and Livonia, is condemned by its local situation to form part of a

Slavonian state. In Eastern Germany itself there is a large Slavonic

population: Bohemia is principally Slavonic, Silesia and other districts

partially so. The most united country in Europe, France, is far from being

homogeneous: independently of the fragments of foreign nationalities at its

remote extremities, it consists, as language and history prove, of two

portions, one occupied almost exclusively by a Gallo-Roman population,

while in the other the Frankish, Burgundian, and other Teutonic races form a

considerable ingredient.

              When proper allowance has been made for geographical exigencies,

another more purely moral and social consideration offers itself. Experienceproves that it is possible for one nationality to merge and be absorbed in

another: and when it was originally an inferior and more backward portion of

the human race the absorption is greatly to its advantage. Nobody can

suppose that it is not more beneficial to a Breton, or a Basque of French

Navarre, to be brought into the current of the ideas and feelings of a highly

civilised and cultivated people — to be a member of the French nationality,

admitted on equal terms to all the privileges of French citizenship, sharing the

advantages of French protection, and the dignity and prestige of French

power — than to sulk on his own rocks, the half-savage relic of past times,

revolving in his own little mental orbit, without participation or interest in the

general movement of the world. The same remark applies to the Welshman or

the Scottish Highlander as members of the British nation.

              Whatever really tends to the admixture of nationalities, and the

blending of their attributes and peculiarities in a common union, is a benefit

to the human race. Not by extinguishing types, of which, in these cases,

sufficient examples are sure to remain, but by softening their extreme forms,

and filling up the intervals between them. The united people, like a crossed

breed of animals (but in a still greater degree, because the influences in

operation are moral as well as physical), inherits the special aptitudes and

excellences of all its progenitors, protected by the admixture from being

exaggerated into the neighbouring vices. But to render this admixture

possible, there must be peculiar conditions. The combinations of

circumstances which occur, and which effect the result, are various.

              The nationalities brought together under the same government may

be about equal in numbers and strength, or they may be very unequal. If

unequal, the least numerous of the two may either be the superior in

civilisation, or the inferior. Supposing it to be superior, it may either, through

that superiority, be able to acquire ascendancy over the other, or it may be

overcome by brute strength and reduced to subjection. This last is a sheer

mischief to the human race, and one which civilised humanity with one

accord should rise in arms to prevent. The absorption of Greece by

Macedonia was one of the greatest misfortunes which ever happened to the

world: that of any of the principal countries of Europe by Russia would be a

similar one.

              If the smaller nationality, supposed to be the more advanced in

improvement, is able to overcome the greater, as the Macedonians, reinforcedby the Greeks, did Asia, and the English India, there is often a gain to

civilisation: but the conquerors and the conquered cannot in this case live

together under the same free institutions. The absorption of the conquerors in

the less advanced people would be an evil: these, must be governed as

subjects, and the state of things is either a benefit or a misfortune, according

as the subjugated people have or have not reached the state in which it is an

injury not to be under a free government, and according as the conquerors do

or do not use their superiority in a manner calculated to fit the conquered for

a higher stage of improvement. This topic will be particularly treated of in a

subsequent chapter.

              When the nationality which succeeds in overpowering the other is

both the most numerous and the most improved; and especially if the

subdued nationality is small, and has no hope of reasserting its independence;

then, if it is governed with any tolerable justice, and if the members of the

more powerful nationality are not made odious by being invested with

exclusive privileges, the smaller nationality is gradually reconciled to its

position, and becomes amalgamated with the larger. No Bas-Breton, nor even

any Alsatian, has the smallest wish at the present day to be separated from

France. If all Irishmen have not yet arrived at the same disposition towards

England, it is partly because they are sufficiently numerous to be capable of

constituting a respectable nationality by themselves; but principally because,

until of late years, they had been so atrociously governed, that all their best

feelings combined with their bad ones in rousing bitter resentment against the

Saxon rule. This disgrace to England, and calamity to the whole empire, has,

it may be truly said, completely ceased for nearly a generation. No Irishman

is now less free than an Anglo-Saxon, nor has a less share of every benefit

either to his country or to his individual fortunes than if he were sprung from

any other portion of the British dominions. The only remaining real grievance

of Ireland, that of the State Church, is one which half, or nearly half, the

people of the larger island have in common with them. There is now next to

nothing, except the memory of the past, and the difference in the predominant

religion, to keep apart two races, perhaps the most fitted of any two in the

world to be the completing counterpart of one another. The consciousness of

being at last treated not only with equal justice but with equal consideration is

making such rapid way in the Irish nation as to be wearing off all feelings

that could make them insensible to the benefits which the less numerous and

less wealthy people must necessarily derive from being fellow-citizensinstead of foreigners to those who are not only their nearest neighbours, but

the wealthiest, and one of the freest, as well as most civilised and powerful,

nations of the earth.

              The cases in which the greatest practical obstacles exist to the

blending of nationalities are when the nationalities which have been bound

together are nearly equal in numbers and in the other elements of power. In

such cases, each, confiding in its strength, and feeling itself capable of

maintaining an equal struggle with any of the others, is unwilling to be

merged in it: each cultivates with party obstinacy its distinctive peculiarities;

obsolete customs, and even declining languages, are revived to deepen the

separation; each deems itself tyrannised over if any authority is exercised

within itself by functionaries of a rival race; and whatever is given to one of

the conflicting nationalities is considered to be taken from all the rest. When

nations, thus divided, are under a despotic government which is a stranger to

all of them, or which, though sprung from one, yet feeling greater interest in

its own power than in any sympathies of nationality, assigns no privilege to

either nation, and chooses its instruments indifferently from all; in the course

of a few generations, identity of situation often produces harmony of feeling,

and the different races come to feel towards each other as fellow-countrymen;

particularly if they are dispersed over the same tract of country. But if the era

of aspiration to free government arrives before this fusion has been effected,

the opportunity has gone by for effecting it. From that time, if the

unreconciled nationalities are geographically separate, and especially if their

local position is such that there is no natural fitness or convenience in their

being under the same government (as in the case of an Italian province under

a French or German yoke), there is not only an obvious propriety, but, if

either freedom or concord is cared for, a necessity, for breaking the

connection altogether. There may be cases in which the provinces, after

separation, might usefully remain united by a federal tie: but it generally

happens that if they are willing to forego complete independence, and

become members of a federation, each of them has other neighbours with

whom it would prefer to connect itself, having more sympathies in common,

if not also greater community of interest.

 

                                        Chapter 17

 

 

                  Of Federal Representative Governments.

 

 

              PORTIONS OF mankind who are not fitted, or not disposed, to live

under the same internal government, may often with advantage be federally

united as to their relations with foreigners: both to prevent wars among

themselves, and for the sake of more effectual protection against the

aggression of powerful States.

              To render a federation advisable, several conditions are necessary.

The first is, that there should be a sufficient amount of mutual sympathy

among the populations. The federation binds them always to fight on the

same side; and if they have such feelings towards one another, or such

diversity of feeling towards their neighbours, that they would generally prefer

to fight on opposite sides, the federal tie is neither likely to be of long

duration, not to be well observed while it subsists. The sympathies available

for the purpose are those of race, language, religion, and, above all, of

political institutions, as conducing most to a feeling of identity of political

interest. When a few free states, separately insufficient for their own defence,

are hemmed in on all sides by military or feudal monarchs, who hate and

despise freedom even in a neighbour, those states have no chance for

preserving liberty and its blessings but by a federal union. The common

interest arising from this cause has in Switzerland, for several centuries, been

found adequate to maintain efficiently the federal bond, in spite not only of

difference of religion when religion was the grand source of irreconcilable

political enmity throughout Europe, but also in spite of great weakness in the

constitution of the federation itself. In America, where all the conditions for

the maintenance of union existed at the highest point, with the sole drawback

of difference of institutions in the single but most important article of

Slavery, this one difference has gone so far in alienating from each other's

sympathies the two divisions of the Union, that the maintenance or disruption

of a tie of so much value to them both depends on the issue of an obstinatecivil war.

              A second condition of the stability of a federal government is that

the separate states be not so powerful as to be able to rely, for protection

against foreign encroachment, on their individual strength. If they are, they

will be apt to think that they do not gain, by union with others, the equivalent

of what they sacrifice in their own liberty of action; and consequently,

whenever the policy of the Confederation, in things reserved to its

cognisance, is different from that which any one of its members would

separately pursue, the internal and sectional breach will, through absence of

sufficient anxiety to preserve the union, be in danger of going so far as to

dissolve it.

              A third condition, not less important than the two others, is that there

be not a very marked inequality of strength among the several contracting

states. They cannot, indeed, be exactly equal in resources: in all federations

there will be a gradation of power among the members; some will be more

populous, rich, and civilised than others. There is a wide difference in wealth

and population between New York and Rhode Island; between Bern and Zug

or Glaris. The essential is, that there should not be any one State so much

more powerful than the rest as to be capable of vying in strength with many

of them combined. If there be such a one, and only one, it will insist on being

master of the joint deliberations: if there be two, they will be irresistible when

they agree; and whenever they differ everything will be decided by a struggle

for ascendancy between the rivals. This cause is alone enough to reduce the

German Bund to almost a nullity, independently of its wretched internal

constitution. It effects none of the real purposes of a confederation. It has

never bestowed on Germany a uniform system of customs, nor so much as a

uniform coinage; and has served only to give Austria and Prussia a legal right

of pouring in their troops to assist the local sovereigns in keeping their

subjects obedient to despotism: while in regard to external concerns, the

Bund would make all Germany a dependency of Prussia if there were no

Austria, and of Austria if there were no Prussia: and in the meantime each

petty prince has little choice but to be a partisan of one or the other, or to

intrigue with foreign governments against both.

              There are two different modes of organising a Federal Union. The

federal authorities may represent the Governments solely, and their acts may

be obligatory only on the Governments as such; or they may have the powerof enacting laws and issuing orders which are binding directly on individual

citizens. The former is the plan of the German so-called Confederation, and

of the Swiss Constitution previous to 1847. It was tried in America for a few

years immediately following the War of Independence. The other principle is

that of the existing Constitution of the United States, and has been adopted

within the last dozen years by the Swiss Confederacy. The Federal Congress

of the American Union is a substantive part of the government of every

individual State. Within the limits of its attributions, it makes laws which are

obeyed by every citizen individually, executes them through its own officers,

and enforces them by its own tribunals. This is the only principle which has

been found, or which is ever likely, to produce an effective federal

government. A union between the governments only is a mere alliance, and

subject to all the contingencies which render alliances precarious. If the acts

of the President and of Congress were binding solely on the Governments of

New York, Virginia, or Pennsylvania, and could only be carried into effect

through orders issued by those Governments to officers appointed by them,

under responsibility to their own courts of justice no mandates of the Federal

Government which were disagreeable to a local majority would ever be

executed. Requisitions issued to a government have no other sanction, or

means of enforcement, than war: and a federal army would have to be always

in readiness to enforce the decrees of the Federation against any recalcitrant

State; subject to the probability that other States, sympathising with the

recusant, and perhaps sharing its sentiments on the particular point in dispute,

would withhold their contingents, if not send them to fight in the ranks of the

disobedient State.

              Such a federation is more likely to be a cause than a preventive of

internal wars: and if such was not its effect in Switzerland until the events of

the years immediately preceding 1847, it was only because the Federal

Government felt its weakness so strongly that it hardly ever attempted to

exercise any real authority. In America, the experiment of a Federation on

this principle broke down in the first few years of its existence; happily while

the men of enlarged knowledge and acquired ascendancy, who founded the

independence of the Republic, were still alive to guide it through the difficult

transition. The Federalist, a collection of papers by three of these eminent

men, written in explanation and defence of the new Federal Constitution

while still awaiting the national acceptance, is even now the most instructive
                                                  15
treatise we possess on federal government.        15
               Mr. Freeman's History of Federal Governments, of which only the

first volume has yet appeared, is already an accession to the literature of the

subject, equally valuable by its enlightened principles and its mastery of

historical details.

              In Germany, the more imperfect kind of federation, as all know, has

not even answered the purpose of maintaining an alliance. It has never, in any

European war, prevented single members of the Confederation from allying

themselves with foreign powers against the rest. Yet this is the only

federation which seems possible among monarchical states. A king, who

holds his power by inheritance, not by delegation, and who cannot be

deprived of it, nor made responsible to any one for its use, is not likely to

renounce having a separate army, or to brook the exercise of sovereign

authority over his own subjects, not through him but directly, by another

power. To enable two or more countries under kingly government to be

joined together in an effectual confederation it seems necessary that they

should all be under the same king. England and Scotland were a federation of

this description during the interval of about a century between the union of

the Crowns and that of the Parliaments. Even this was effective, not through

federal institutions, for none existed, but because the regal power in both

Constitutions was during the greater part of that time so nearly absolute as to

enable the foreign policy of both to be shaped according to a single will.

              Under the more perfect mode of federation, where every citizen of

each particular State owes obedience to two Governments, that of his own

state and that of the federation, it is evidently necessary not only that the

constitutional limits of the authority of each should be precisely and clearly

defined, but that the power to decide between them in any case of dispute

should not reside in either of the Governments, or in any functionary subject

to it, but in an umpire independent of both. There must be a Supreme Court

of justice, and a system of subordinate Courts in every State of the Union,

before whom such questions shall be carried, and whose judgment on them,

in the last stage of appeal, shall be final. Every State of the Union, and the

Federal Government itself, as well as every functionary of each, must be

liable to be sued in those Courts for exceeding their powers, or for non-

performance of their federal duties, and must in general be obliged to employ

those Courts as the instrument for enforcing their federal rights. This involves

the remarkable consequence, actually realised in the United States, that aCourt of justice, the highest federal tribunal, is supreme over the various

Governments, both State and Federal; having the right to declare that any law

made, or act done by them, exceeds the powers assigned to them by the

Federal Constitution, and, in consequence, has no legal validity. It was

natural to feel strong doubts, before trial had been made, how such a

provision would work; whether the tribunal would have the courage to

exercise its constitutional power; if it did, whether it would exercise it wisely

and whether the Governments would consent to submit peaceably to its

decision. The discussions on the American Constitution, before its final

adoption, give evidence that these natural apprehensions were strongly felt;

but they are now entirely quieted, since, during the two generations and more

which have subsequently elapsed, nothing has occurred to verify them,

though there have at times been disputes of considerable acrimony, and

which became the badges of parties, respecting the limits of the authority of

the Federal and State Governments.

              The eminently beneficial working of so singular a provision is

probably, as M. de Tocqueville remarks, in a great measure attributable to the

peculiarity inherent in a Court of justice acting as such — namely, that it does

not declare the law eo nomine and in the abstract, but waits until a case

between man and man is brought before it judicially involving the point in

dispute: from which arises the happy effect that its declarations are not made

in a very early stage of the controversy; that much popular discussion usually

precedes them; that the Court decides after hearing the point fully argued on

both sides by lawyers of reputation; decides only as much of the question at a

time as is required by the case before it, and its decision, instead of being

volunteered for political purposes, is drawn from it by the duty which it

cannot refuse to fulfil, of dispensing justice impartially between adverse

litigants. Even these grounds of confidence would not have sufficed to

produce the respectful submission with which all authorities have yielded to

the decisions of the Supreme Court on the interpretation of the Constitution,

were it not that complete reliance has been felt, not only on the intellectual

pre-eminence of the judges composing that exalted tribunal, but on their

entire superiority over either private or sectional partialities. This reliance has

been in the main justified; but there is nothing which more vitally imports the

American people than to guard with the most watchful solicitude against

everything which has the remotest tendency to produce deterioration in the

quality of this great national institution. The confidence on which dependsthe stability of federal institutions was for the first time impaired by the

judgment declaring slavery to be of common right, and consequently lawful

in the Territories while not yet constituted as States, even against the will of a

majority of their inhabitants. This memorable decision has probably done

more than anything else to bring the sectional division to the crisis which has

issued in civil war. The main pillar of the American Constitution is scarcely

strong enough to bear many more such shocks.

              The tribunals which act as umpires between the Federal and the State

Governments naturally also decide all disputes between two States, or

between a citizen of one State and the government of another. The usual

remedies between nations, war and diplomacy, being precluded by the federal

union, it is necessary that a judicial remedy should supply their place. The

Supreme Court of the Federation dispenses international law, and is the first

great example of what is now one of the most prominent wants of civilised

society, a real International Tribunal.

              The powers of a Federal Government naturally extend not only to

peace and war, and all questions which arise between the country and foreign

governments, but to making any other arrangements which are, in the opinion

of the States, necessary to their enjoyment of the full benefits of union. For

example, it is a great advantage to them that their mutual commerce should

be free, without the impediment of frontier duties and custom-houses. But

this internal freedom cannot exist if each State has the power of fixing the

duties on interchange of commodities between itself and foreign countries;

since every foreign product let in by one State would be let into all the rest.

And hence all custom duties and trade regulations, in the United States, are

made or repealed by the Federal Government exclusively. Again, it is a great

convenience to the States to have but one coinage, and but one system of

weights and measures; which can only be ensured if the regulation of these

matters is entrusted to the Federal Government. The certainty and celerity of

Post Office communication is impeded, and its expense increased, if a letter

has to pass through half a dozen sets of public offices, subject to different

supreme authorities: it is convenient, therefore, that all Post Offices should be

under the Federal Government. But on such questions the feelings of

different communities are liable to be different. One of the American States,

under the guidance of a man who has displayed powers as a speculative

political thinker superior to any who has appeared in American politics since                                16
the authors of the Federalist, claimed a veto for each State on the custom

laws of the Federal Congress: and that statesman, in a posthumous work of

great ability, which has been printed and widely circulated by the legislature

of South Carolina, vindicated this pretension on the general principle of

limiting the tyranny of the majority, and protecting minorities by admitting

them to a substantial participation in political power. One of the most

disputed topics in American politics, during the early part of this century, was

whether the power of the Federal Government ought to extend, and whether

by the Constitution it did extend, to making roads and canals at the cost of the

Union. It is only in transactions with foreign powers that the authority of the

Federal Government is of necessity complete. On every other subject, the

question depends on how closely the people in general wish to draw the

federal tie; what portion of their local freedom of action they are willing to

surrender, in order to enjoy more fully the benefit of being one nation.

        16
               Mr. Calhoun.

              Respecting the fitting constitution of a federal government within

itself much need not be said. It of course consists of a legislative branch and

an executive, and the constitution of each is amenable to the same principles

as that of representative governments generally. As regards the mode of

adapting these general principles to a federal government, the provision of

the American Constitution seems exceedingly judicious, that Congress should

consist of two Houses, and that while one of them is constituted according to

population, each State being entitled to representatives in the ratio of the

number of its inhabitants, the other should represent not the citizens, but the

State Governments, and every State, whether large or small, should be

represented in it by the same number of members. This provision precludes

any undue power from being exercised by the more powerful States over the

rest, and guarantees the reserved rights of the State Governments, by making

it impossible, as far as the mode of representation can prevent, that any

measure should pass Congress unless approved not only by a majority of the

citizens, but by a majority of the States. I have before adverted to the further

incidental advantage obtained of raising the standard of qualifications in one

of the Houses. Being nominated by select bodies, the Legislatures of the

various States, whose choice, for reasons already indicated, is more likely to

fall on eminent men than any popular election — who have not only the

power of electing such, but a strong motive to do so, because the influence oftheir State in the general deliberations must be materially affected by the

personal weight and abilities of its representatives; the Senate of the United

States, thus chosen, has always contained nearly all the political men of

established and high reputation in the Union: while the Lower House of

Congress has, in the opinion of competent observers, been generally as

remarkable for the absence of conspicuous personal merit as the Upper House

for its presence.

              When the conditions exist for the formation of efficient and durable

Federal Unions, the multiplication of them is always a benefit to the world. It

has the same salutary effect as any other extension of the practice of co-

operation, through which the weak, by uniting, can meet on equal terms with

the strong. By diminishing the number of those petty states which are not

equal to their own defence, it weakens the temptations to an aggressive

policy, whether working directly by arms, or through the prestige of superior

power. It of course puts an end to war and diplomatic quarrels, and usually

also to restrictions on commerce, between the States composing the Union;

while, in reference to neighbouring nations, the increased military strength

conferred by it is of a kind to be almost exclusively available for defensive,

scarcely at all for aggressive, purposes. A federal government has not a

sufficiently concentrated authority to conduct with much efficiency any war

but one of self-defence, in which it can rely on the voluntary co-operation of

every citizen: nor is there anything very flattering to national vanity or

ambition in acquiring, by a successful war, not subjects, nor even fellow-

citizens, but only new, and perhaps troublesome, independent members of the

confederation. The warlike proceedings of the Americans in Mexico were

purely exceptional, having been carried on principally by volunteers, under

the influence of the migratory propensity which prompts individual

Americans to possess themselves of unoccupied land; and stimulated, if by

any public motive, not by that of national aggrandisement, but by the purely

sectional purpose of extending slavery. There are few signs in the

proceedings of Americans, nationally or individually, that the desire of

territorial acquisition for their country as such has any considerable power

over them. Their hankering after Cuba is, in the same manner, merely

sectional, and the northern States, those opposed to slavery, have never in any

way favoured it.

              The question may present itself (as in Italy at its present uprising)whether a country, which is determined to be united, should form a complete

or a merely federal union. The point is sometimes necessarily decided by the

mere territorial magnitude of the united whole. There is a limit to the extent

of country which can advantageously be governed, or even whose

government can be conveniently superintended, from a single centre. There

are vast countries so governed; but they, or at least their distant provinces, are

in general deplorably ill administered, and it is only when the inhabitants are

almost savages that they could not manage their affairs better separately. This

obstacle does not exist in the case of Italy, the size of which does not come

up to that of several very efficiently governed single states in past and present

times. The question then is whether the different parts of the nation require to

be governed in a way so essentially different that it is not probable the same

Legislature, and the same ministry or administrative body, will give

satisfaction to them all. Unless this be the case, which is a question of fact, it

is better for them to be completely united. That a totally different system of

laws, and very different administrative institutions, may exist in two portions

of a country without being any obstacle to legislative unity is proved by the

case of England and Scotland. Perhaps, however, this undisturbed co-

existence of two legal systems, under one united legislature, making different

laws for the two sections of the country in adaptation to the previous

differences, might not be so well preserved, or the same confidence might not

be felt in its preservation, in a country whose legislators were more possessed

(as is apt to be the case on the Continent) with the mania for uniformity. A

people having that unbounded toleration which is characteristic of this

country for every description of anomaly, so long as those whose interests it

concerns do not feel aggrieved by it, afforded an exceptionally advantageous

field for trying this difficult experiment. In most countries, if it was an object

to retain different systems of law, it might probably be necessary to retain

distinct legislatures as guardians of them; which is perfectly compatible with

a national Parliament and King, or a national Parliament without a King,

supreme over the external relations of all the members of the body.

              Whenever it is not deemed necessary to maintain permanently, in the

different provinces, different systems of jurisprudence, and fundamental

institutions grounded on different principles, it is always practicable to

reconcile minor diversities with the maintenance of unity of government. All

that is needful is to give a sufficiently large sphere of action to the local

authorities. Under one and the same central government there may be localgovernors, and provincial assemblies for local purposes. It may happen, for

instance, that the people of different provinces may have preferences in

favour of different modes of taxation. If the general legislature could not be

depended on for being guided by the members for each province in

modifying the general system of taxation to suit that province, the

Constitution might provide that as many of the expenses of the government

as could by any possibility be made local should be defrayed by local rates

imposed by the provincial assemblies, and that those which must of necessity

be general, such as the support of an army and navy, should, in the estimates

for the year, be apportioned among the different provinces according to some

general estimate of their resources, the amount assigned to each being levied

by the local assembly on the principles most acceptable to the locality, and

paid en bloc into the national treasury. A practice approaching to this existed

even in the old French monarchy, so far as regarded the pays d'etats; each of

which, having consented or been required to furnish a fixed sum, was left to

assess it upon the inhabitants by its own officers, thus escaping the grinding

despotism of the royal intendants and subdelegues; and this privilege is

always mentioned as one of the advantages which mainly contributed to

render them, as some of them were, the most flourishing provinces of France.

              Identity of central government is compatible with many different

degrees of centralisation, not only administrative, but even legislative. A

people may have the desire, and the capacity, for a closer union than one

merely federal, while yet their local peculiarities and antecedents render

considerable diversities desirable in the details of their government. But if

there is a real desire on all hands to make the experiment successful, there

needs seldom be any difficulty in not only preserving these diversities, but

giving them the guarantee of a constitutional provision against any attempt at

assimilation, except by the voluntary act of those who would be affected by

the change.

 

 

                                       Chapter 18

 

 

          Of the Government of Dependencies by a Free State.

 

 

              FREE STATES, like all others, may possess dependencies, acquired

either by conquest or by colonisation; and our own is the greatest instance of

the kind in modern history. It is a most important question how such

dependencies ought to be governed.

              It is unnecessary to discuss the case of small posts, like Gibraltar,

Aden, or Heligoland, which are held only as naval or military positions. The

military or naval object is in this case paramount, and the inhabitants cannot,

consistently with it, be admitted to the government of the place; though they

ought to be allowed all liberties and privileges compatible with that

restriction, including the free management of municipal affairs; and as a

compensation for being locally sacrificed to the convenience of the governing

State, should be admitted to equal rights with its native subjects in all other

parts of the empire.

              Outlying territories of some size and population, which are held as

dependencies, that is, which are subject, more or less, to acts of sovereign

power on the part of the paramount country, without being equally

represented (if represented at all) in its legislature, may be divided into two

classes. Some are composed of people of similar civilisation to the ruling

country, capable of, and ripe for, representative government: such as the

British possessions in America and Australia. Others, like India, are still at a

great distance from that state.

              In the case of dependencies of the former class, this country has at

length realised, in rare completeness, the true principle of government.

England has always felt under a certain degree of obligation to bestow on

such of her outlying populations as were of her own blood and language, and

on some who were not, representative institutions formed in imitation of her

own: but until the present generation, she has been on the same bad level withother countries as to the amount of self-government which she allowed them

to exercise through the representative institutions that she conceded to them.

She claimed to be the supreme arbiter even of their purely internal concerns,

according to her own, not their, ideas of how those concerns could be best

regulated. This practice was a natural corollary from the vicious theory of

colonial policy — once common to all Europe, and not yet completely

relinquished by any other people — which regarded colonies as valuable by

affording markets for our commodities, that could be kept entirely to

ourselves: a privilege we valued so highly that we thought it worth

purchasing by allowing to the colonies the same monopoly of our market for

their own productions which we claimed for our commodities in theirs. This

notable plan for enriching them and ourselves, by making each pay enormous

sums to the other, dropping the greatest part by the way, has been for some

time abandoned. But the bad habit of meddling in the internal government of

the colonies did not at once terminate when we relinquished the idea of

making any profit by it. We continued to torment them, not for any benefit to

ourselves, but for that of a section or faction among the colonists: and this

persistence in domineering cost us a Canadian rebellion before we had the

happy thought of giving it up. England was like an ill-brought-up elder

brother, who persists in tyrannising over the younger ones from mere habit,

till one of them, by a spirited resistance, though with unequal strength, gives

him notice to desist. We were wise enough not to require a second warning.

A new era in the colonial policy of nations began with Lord Durham's

Report; the imperishable memorial of that nobleman's courage, patriotism,

and enlightened liberality, and of the intellect and practical sagacity of its
                                                                        17
joint authors, Mr. Wakefield and the lamented Charles Buller.

        17
               I am speaking here of the adoption of this improved policy, not, of

course, of its original suggestion. The honour of having been its earliest

champion belongs unquestionably to Mr. Roebuck.

              It is now a fixed principle of the policy of Great Britain, professed in

theory and faithfully adhered to in practice, that her colonies of European

race, equally with the parent country, possess the fullest measure of internal

self-government. They have been allowed to make their own free

representative constitutions by altering in any manner they thought fit the

already very popular constitutions which we had given them. Each is

governed by its own legislature and executive, constituted on highlydemocratic principles. The veto of the Crown and of Parliament, though

nominally reserved, is only exercised (and that very rarely) on questions

which concern the empire, and not solely the particular colony. How liberal a

construction has been given to the distinction between imperial and colonial

questions is shown by the fact that the whole of the unappropriated lands in

the regions behind our American and Australian colonies have been given up

to the uncontrolled disposal of the colonial communities; though they might,

without injustice, have been kept in the hands of the Imperial Government, to

be administered for the greatest advantage of future emigrants from all parts

of the empire. Every colony has thus as full power over its own affairs as it

could have if it were a member of even the loosest federation; and much

fuller than would belong to it under the Constitution of the United States,

being free even to tax at its pleasure the commodities imported from the

mother country. Their union with Great Britain is the slightest kind of federal

union; but not a strictly equal federation, the mother country retaining to

itself the powers of a Federal Government, though reduced in practice to their

very narrowest limits. This inequality is, of course, as far as it goes, a

disadvantage to the dependencies, which have no voice in foreign policy, but

are bound by the decisions of the superior country. They are compelled to

join England in war, without being in any way consulted previous to

engaging in it.

              Those (now happily not a few) who think that justice is as binding

on communities as it is on individuals, and that men are not warranted in

doing to other countries, for the supposed benefit of their own country, what

they would not be justified in doing to other men for their own benefit — feel

even this limited amount of constitutional subordination on the part of the

colonies to be a violation of principle, and have often occupied themselves in

looking out for means by which it may be avoided. With this view it has been

proposed by some that the colonies should return representatives to the

British legislature; and by others, that the powers of our own, as well as of

their Parliaments, should be confined to internal policy, and that there should

be another representative body for foreign and imperial concerns, in which

last the dependencies of Great Britain should be represented in the same

manner, and with the same completeness, as Great Britain itself. On this

system there would be perfectly equal federation between the mother country

and her colonies, then no longer dependencies.              The feelings of equity, and conceptions of public morality, from

which these suggestions emanate, are worthy of all praise; but the

suggestions themselves are so inconsistent with rational principles of

government that it is doubtful if they have been seriously accepted as a

possibility by any reasonable thinker. Countries separated by half the globe

do not present the natural conditions for being under one government, or even

members of one federation. If they had sufficiently the same interests, they

have not, and never can have, a sufficient habit of taking counsel together.

They are not part of the same public; they do not discuss and deliberate in the

same arena, but apart, and have only a most imperfect knowledge of what

passes in the minds of one another. They neither know each other's objects,

nor have confidence in each other's principles of conduct. Let any

Englishman ask himself how he should like his destinies to depend on an

assembly of which one-third was British American, and another third South

African and Australian. Yet to this it must come if there were anything like

fair or equal representation; and would not every one feel that the

representatives of Canada and Australia, even in matters of an imperial

character, could not know, or feel any sufficient concern for, the interests,

opinions, or wishes of English, Irish, and Scotch? Even for strictly federative

purposes the conditions do not exist which we have seen to be essential to a

federation. England is sufficient for her own protection without the colonies;

and would be in a much stronger, as well as more dignified position, if

separated from them, than when reduced to be a single member of an

American, African, and Australian confederation. Over and above the

commerce which she might equally enjoy after separation, England derives

little advantage, except in prestige, from her dependencies; and the little she

does derive is quite outweighed by the expense they cost her, and the

dissemination they necessitate of her naval and military force, which in case

of war, or any real apprehension of it, requires to be double or treble what

would be needed for the defence of this country alone.

              But though Great Britain could do perfectly well without her

colonies, and though on every principle of morality and justice she ought to

consent to their separation, should the time come when, after full trial of the

best form of union, they deliberately desire to be dissevered — there are

strong reasons for maintaining the present slight bond of connection, so long

as not disagreeable to the feelings of either party. It is a step, as far as it goes,

towards universal peace, and general friendly cooperation among nations. Itrenders war impossible among a large number of otherwise independent

communities; and moreover hinders any of them from being absorbed into a

foreign state, and becoming a source of additional aggressive strength to

some rival power, either more despotic or closer at hand, which might not

always be so unambitious or so pacific as Great Britain. It at least keeps the

markets of the different countries open to one another, and prevents that

mutual exclusion by hostile tariffs, which none of the great communities of

mankind, except England, have yet completely outgrown. And in the case of

the British possessions it has the advantage, especially valuable at the present

time, of adding to the moral influence, and weight in the councils of the

world, of the Power which, of all in existence, best understands liberty — and

whatever may have been its errors in the past, has attained to more of

conscience and moral principle in its dealings with foreigners than any other

great nation seems either to conceive as possible or recognise as desirable.

Since, then, the union can only continue, while it does continue, on the

footing of an unequal federation, it is important to consider by what means

this small amount of inequality can be prevented from being either onerous or

humiliating to the communities occupying the less exalted position.

              The only inferiority necessarily inherent in the case is that the

mother country decides, both for the colonies and for herself, on questions of

peace and war. They gain, in return, the obligation on the mother country to

repel aggressions directed against them; but, except when the minor

community is so weak that the protection of a stronger power is indispensable

to it, reciprocity of obligation is not a full equivalent for non-admission to a

voice in the deliberations. It is essential, therefore, that in all wars, save those

which, like the Caffre or New Zealand wars, are incurred for the sake of the

particular colony, the colonists should not (without their own voluntary

request) be called on to contribute anything to the expense, except what may

be required for the specific local defence of their ports, shores, and frontiers

against invasion. Moreover, as the mother country claims the privilege, at her

sole discretion, of taking measures or pursuing a policy which may expose

them to attack, it is just that she should undertake a considerable portion of

the cost of their military defence even in time of peace; the whole of it, so far

as it depends upon a standing army.

              But there is a means, still more effectual than these, by which, and in

general by which alone, a full equivalent can be given to a smallercommunity for sinking its individuality, as a substantive power among

nations, in the greater individuality of a wide and powerful empire. This one

indispensable and, at the same time, sufficient expedient, which meets at once

the demands of justice and the growing exigencies of policy, is to open the

service of Government in all its departments, and in every part of the empire,

on perfectly equal terms, to the inhabitants of the Colonies. Why does no one

ever hear a breath of disloyalty from the Islands in the British Channel? By

race, religion, and geographical position they belong less to England than to

France. But, while they enjoy, like Canada and New South Wales, complete

control over their internal affairs and their taxation, every office or dignity in

the gift of the Crown is freely open to the native of Guernsey or Jersey.

Generals, admirals, peers of the United Kingdom, are made, and there is

nothing which hinders prime ministers to be made, from those insignificant

islands. The same system was commenced in reference to the Colonies

generally by an enlightened Colonial Secretary, too early lost, Sir William

Molesworth, when he appointed Mr. Hinckes, a leading Canadian politician,

to a West Indian government. It is a very shallow view of the springs of

political action in a community which thinks such things unimportant

because the number of those in a position actually to profit by the concession

might not be very considerable. That limited number would be composed

precisely of those who have most moral power over the rest: and men are not

so destitute of the sense of collective degradation as not to feel the

withholding of an advantage from even one person, because of a

circumstance which they all have in common with him, an affront to all. If we

prevent the leading men of a community from standing forth to the world as

its chiefs and representatives in the general councils of mankind, we owe it

both to their legitimate ambition, and to the just pride of the community, to

give them in return an equal chance of occupying the same prominent

position in a nation of greater power and importance.

              Thus far of the dependencies whose population is in a sufficiently

advanced state to be fitted for representative government. But there are others

which have not attained that state, and which, if held at all, must be governed

by the dominant country, or by persons delegated for that purpose by it. This

mode of government is as legitimate as any other if it is the one which in the

existing state of civilisation of the subject people most facilitates their

transition to a higher stage of improvement. There are, as we have already

seen, conditions of society in which a vigorous despotism is in itself the bestmode of government for training the people in what is specifically wanting to

render them capable of a higher civilisation. There are others, in which the

mere fact of despotism has indeed no beneficial effect, the lessons which it

teaches having already been only too completely learnt; but in which, there

being no spring of spontaneous improvement in the people themselves, their

almost only hope of making any steps in advance depends on the chances of a

good despot. Under a native despotism, a good despot is a rare and transitory

accident: but when the dominion they are under is that of a more civilised

people, that people ought to be able to supply it constantly. The ruling

country ought to be able to do for its subjects all that could be done by a

succession of absolute monarchs, guaranteed by irresistible force against the

precariousness of tenure attendant on barbarous despotisms, and qualified by

their genius to anticipate all that experience has taught to the more advanced

nation. Such is the ideal rule of a free people over a barbarous or semi-

barbarous one. We need not expect to see that ideal realised; but unless some

approach to it is, the rulers are guilty of a dereliction of the highest moral

trust which can devolve upon a nation: and if they do not even 'him at it, they

are selfish usurpers, on a par in criminality with any of those whose ambition

and rapacity have sported from age to age with the destiny of masses of

mankind.

              As it is already a common, and is rapidly tending to become the

universal, condition of the more backward populations, to be either held in

direct subjection by the more advanced, or to be under their complete

political ascendancy; there are in this age of the world few more important

problems than how to organise this rule, so as to make it a good instead of an

evil to the subject people; providing them with the best attainable present

government, and with the conditions most favourable to future permanent

improvement. But the mode of fitting the government for this purpose is by

no means so well understood as the conditions of good government in a

people capable of governing themselves. We may even say that it is not

understood at all.

              The thing appears perfectly easy to superficial observers. If India

(for example) is not fit to govern itself, all that seems to them required is that

there should be a minister to govern it: and that this minister, like all other

British ministers, should be responsible to the British Parliament.

Unfortunately this, though the simplest mode of attempting to govern adependency, is about the worst; and betrays in its advocates a total want of

comprehension of the conditions of good government. To govern a country

under responsibility to the people of that country, and to govern one country

under responsibility to the people of another, are two very different things.

What makes the excellence of the first is that freedom is preferable to

despotism: but the last is despotism. The only choice the case admits is a

choice of despotisms: and it is not certain that the despotism of twenty

millions is necessarily better than that of a few, or of one. But it is quite

certain that the despotism of those who neither hear, nor see, nor know

anything about their subjects, has many chances of being worse than that of

those who do. It is not usually thought that the immediate agents of authority

govern better because they govern in the name of an absent master, and of

one who has a thousand more pressing interests to attend to. The master may

hold them to a strict responsibility, enforced by heavy penalties; but it is very

questionable if those penalties will often fall in the right place.

              It is always under great difficulties, and very imperfectly, that a

country can be governed by foreigners; even when there is no extreme

disparity, in habits and ideas, between the rulers and the ruled. Foreigners do

not feel with the people. They cannot judge, by the light in which a thing

appears to their own minds, or the manner in which it affects their feelings,

how it will affect the feelings or appear to the minds of the subject

population. What a native of the country, of average practical ability, knows

as it were by instinct, they have to learn slowly, and after all imperfectly, by

study and experience. The laws, the customs, the social relations, for which

they have to legislate, instead of being familiar to them from childhood, are

all strange to them. For most of their detailed knowledge they must depend

on the information of natives; and it is difficult for them to know whom to

trust. They are feared, suspected, probably disliked by the population; seldom

sought by them except for interested purposes; and they are prone to think

that the servilely submissive are the trustworthy. Their danger is of despising

the natives; that of the natives is of disbelieving that anything the strangers do

can be intended for their good. These are but a part of the difficulties that any

rulers have to struggle with who honestly attempt to govern well a country in

which they are foreigners. To overcome these difficulties in any degree will

always be a work of much labour, requiring a very superior degree of

capacity in the chief administrators, and a high average among the

subordinates: and the best organisation of such a government is that whichwill best ensure the labour, develop the capacity, and place the highest

specimens of it in the situations of greatest trust. Responsibility to an

authority which bas gone through none of the labour, acquired none of the

capacity, and for the most part is not even aware that either, in any peculiar

degree, is required, cannot be regarded as a very effectual expedient for

accomplishing these ends.

              The government of a people by itself has a meaning and a reality;

but such a thing as government of one people by another does not and cannot

exist. One people may keep another as a warren or preserve for its own use, a

place to make money in, a human cattle farm to be worked for the profit of its

own inhabitants. But if the good of the governed is the proper business of a

government, it is utterly impossible that a people should directly attend to it.

The utmost they can do is to give some of their best men a commission to

look after it; to whom the opinion of their own country can neither be much

of a guide in the performance of their duty, nor a competent judge of the

mode in which it has been performed. Let any one consider how the English

themselves would be governed if they knew and cared no more about their

own affairs than they know and care about the affairs of the Hindoos. Even

this comparison gives no adequate idea of the state of the case: for a people

thus indifferent to politics altogether would probably be simply acquiescent

and let the government alone: whereas in the case of India, a politically active

people like the English, amidst habitual acquiescence, are every now and then

interfering, and almost always in the wrong place. The real causes which

determine the prosperity or wretchedness, the improvement or deterioration,

of the Hindoos are too far off to be within their ken. They have not the

knowledge necessary for suspecting the existence of those causes, much less

for judging of their operation. The most essential interests of the country may

be well administered without obtaining any of their approbation, or

mismanaged to almost any excess without attracting their notice.

              The purposes for which they are principally tempted to interfere and

control the proceedings of their delegates are of two kinds. One is to force

English ideas down the throats of the natives; for instance, by measures of

proselytism, or acts intentionally or unintentionally offensive to the religious

feelings of the people. This misdirection of opinion in the ruling country is

instructively exemplified (the more so, because nothing is meant but justice

and fairness, and as much impartiality as can be expected from persons reallyconvinced) by the demand now so general in England for having the Bible

taught, at the option of pupils or of their parents, in the Government schools.

From the European point of view nothing can wear a fairer aspect, or seem

less open to objection on the score of religious freedom. To Asiatic eyes it is

quite another thing. No Asiatic people ever believes that a government puts

its paid officers and official machinery into motion unless it is bent upon an

object; and when bent on an object, no Asiatic believes that any government,

except a feeble and contemptible one, pursues it by halves. If Government

schools and schoolmasters taught Christianity, whatever pledges might be

given of teaching it only to those who spontaneously sought it, no amount of

evidence would ever persuade the parents that improper means were not used

to make their children Christians, or at all events, outcasts from Hindooism.

If they could, in the end, be convinced of the contrary, it would only be by

the entire failure of the schools, so conducted, to make any converts. If the

teaching had the smallest effect in promoting its object it would compromise

not only the utility and even existence of the government education, but

perhaps the safety of the government itself. An English Protestant would not

be easily induced, by disclaimers of proselytism, to place his children in a

Roman Catholic seminary: Irish Catholics will not send their children to

schools in which they can be made Protestants: and we expect that Hindoos,

who believe that the privileges of Hindooism can be forfeited by a merely

physical act, will expose theirs to the danger of being made Christians!

              Such is one of the modes in which the opinion of the dominant

country tends to act more injuriously than beneficially on the conduct of its

deputed governors. In other respects, its interference is likely to be oftenest

exercised where it will be most pertinaciously demanded, and that is on

behalf of some interest of the English settlers. English settlers have friends at

home, have organs, have access to the public; they have a common language

and common ideas with their countrymen: any complaint by an Englishman

is more sympathetically heard, even if no unjust preference is intentionally

accorded to it. Now, if there be a fact to which all experience testifies, it is

that when a country holds another in subjection, the individuals of the ruling

people who resort to the foreign country to make their fortunes are of all

others those who most need to be held under powerful restraint. They are

always one of the chief difficulties of the government. Armed with the

prestige and filled with the scornful overbearingness of the conquering

nation, they have the feelings inspired by absolute power without its sense ofresponsibility.

              Among a people like that India the utmost efforts of the public

authorities are not enough for the effectual protection of the weak against the

strong; and of all the strong, the European settlers are the strongest. Wherever

the demoralising effect of the situation is not in a most remarkable degree

corrected by the personal character of the individual, they think the people of

the country mere dirt under their feet: it seems to them monstrous that any

rights of the natives should stand in the way of their smallest pretensions: the

simplest act of protection to the inhabitants against any act of power on their

part which they may consider useful to their commercial objects, they

denounce, and sincerely regard, as an injury. So natural is this state of feeling

in a situation like theirs that even under the discouragement which it has

hitherto met with from the ruling authorities it is impossible that more or less

of the spirit should not perpetually break out. The Government, itself free

from this spirit, is never able sufficiently to keep it down in the young and

raw even of its own civil and military officers, over whom it has so much

more control than over the independent residents.

              As it is with the English in India, so, according to trustworthy

testimony, it is with the French in Algiers; so with the Americans in the

countries conquered from Mexico; so it seems to be with the Europeans in

China, and already even in Japan: there is no necessity to recall how it was

with the Spaniards in South America. In all these cases, the government to

which these private adventurers are subject is better than they, and does the

most it can to protect the natives against them. Even the Spanish Government

did this, sincerely and earnestly, though ineffectually, as is known to every

reader of Mr. Helps' instructive history. Had the Spanish Government been

directly accountable to Spanish opinion we may question if it would have

made the attempt: for the Spaniards, doubtless, would have taken part with

their Christian friends and relations rather than with Pagans. The settlers, not

the natives, have the ear of the public at home; it is they whose

representations are likely to pass for truth, because they alone have both the

means and the motive to press them perseveringly upon the inattentive and

uninterested public mind. The distrustful criticism with which Englishmen,

more than any other people, are in the habit of scanning the conduct of their

country towards foreigners, they usually reserve for the proceedings of the

public authorities. In all questions between a government and an individualthe presumption in every Englishman's mind is that the government is in the

wrong. And when the resident English bring the batteries of English political

action to bear upon any of the bulwarks erected to protect the natives against

their encroachments, the executive, with their real but faint velleities of

something better, generally find it safer to their parliamentary interest, and at

any rate less troublesome, to give up the disputed position than to defend it.

              What makes matters worse is that when the public mind is invoked

(as, to its credit, the English mind is extremely open to be) in the name of

justice and philanthropy, in behalf of the subject community or race, there is

the same probability of its missing the mark. For in the subject community

also there are oppressors and oppressed; powerful individuals or classes, and

slaves prostrate before them; and it is the former, not the latter, who have the

means of access to the English public. A tyrant or sensualist who has been

deprived of the power he had abused, and, instead of punishment, is

supported in as great wealth and splendour as he ever enjoyed; a knot of

privileged landholders, who demand that the State should relinquish to them

its reserved right to a rent from their lands, or who resent as a wrong any

attempt to protect the masses from their extortion; these have no difficulty in

procuring interested or sentimental advocacy in the British Parliament and

press. The silent myriads obtain none.

              The preceding observations exemplify the operation of a principle —

which might be called an obvious one, were it not that scarcely anybody

seems to be aware of it — that, while responsibility to the governed is the

greatest of all securities for good government, responsibility to somebody

else not only has no such tendency, but is as likely to produce evil as good.

The responsibility of the British rulers of India to the British nation is chiefly

useful because, when any acts of the government are called in question, it

ensures publicity and discussion; the utility of which does not require that the

public at large should comprehend the point at issue, provided there are any

individuals among them who do; for, a merely moral responsibility not being

responsibility to the collective people, but to every separate person among

them who forms a judgment, opinions may be weighed as well as counted,

and the approbation or disapprobation of one person well versed in the

subject may outweigh that of thousands who know nothing about it at all. It is

doubtless a useful restraint upon the immediate rulers that they can be put

upon their defence, and that one or two of the jury will form an opinion worthhaving about their conduct, though that of the remainder will probably be

several degrees worse than none. Such as it is, this is the amount of benefit to

India, from the control exercised over the Indian government by the British

Parliament and people.

              It is not by attempting to rule directly a country like India, but by

giving it good rulers, that the English people can do their duty to that country;

and they can scarcely give it a worse one than an English Cabinet Minister,

who is thinking of English, not Indian politics; who seldom remains long

enough in office to acquire an intelligent interest in so complicated a subject;

upon whom the factitious public opinion got up in Parliament, consisting of

two or three fluent speakers, acts with as much force as if it were genuine;

while he is under none of the influences of training and position which would

lead or qualify him to form an honest opinion of his own. A free country

which attempts to govern a distant dependency, inhabited by a dissimilar

people, by means of a branch of its own executive, will almost inevitably fail.

The only mode which has any chance of tolerable success is to govern

through a delegated body of a comparatively permanent character; allowing

only a right of inspection, and a negative voice, to the changeable

Administration of the State. Such a body did exist in the case of India; and I

fear that both India and England will pay a severe penalty for the shortsighted

policy by which this intermediate instrument of government was done away

with.

              It is of no avail to say that such a delegated body cannot have all the

requisites of good government; above all, cannot have that complete and

ever-operative identity of interest with the governed which it is so difficult to

obtain even where the people to be ruled are in some degree qualified to look

after their own affairs. Real good government is not compatible with the

conditions of the case. There is but a choice of imperfections. The problem is,

so to construct the governing body that, under the difficulties of the position,

it shall have as much interest as possible in good government, and as little in

bad. Now these conditions are best found in an intermediate body. A

delegated administration has always this advantage over a direct one, that it

has, at all events, no duty to perform except to the governed. It has no

interests to consider except theirs. Its own power of deriving profit from

misgovernment may be reduced — in the latest constitution of the East India

Company it was reduced — to a singularly small amount: and it can be keptentirely clear of bias from the individual or class interests of any one else.

              When the home government and Parliament are swayed by those

partial influences in the exercise of the power reserved to them in the last

resort, the intermediate body is the certain advocate and champion of the

dependency before the imperial tribunal. The intermediate body, moreover,

is, in the natural course of things, chiefly composed of persons who have

acquired professional knowledge of this part of their country's concerns; who

have been trained to it in the place itself, and have made its administration the

main occupation of their lives. Furnished with these qualifications, and not

being liable to lose their office from the accidents of home politics, they

identify their character and consideration with their special trust, and have a

much more permanent interest in the success of their administration, and in

the prosperity of the country which they administer, than a member of a

Cabinet under a representative constitution can possibly have in the good

government of any country except the one which he serves. So far as the

choice of those who carry on the management on the spot devolves upon this

body, the appointments are kept out of the vortex of party and parliamentary

jobbing, and freed from the influence of those motives to the abuse of

patronage, for the reward of adherents, or to buy off those who would

otherwise be opponents, which are always stronger, with statesmen of

average honesty, than a conscientious sense of the duty of appointing the

fittest man. To put this one class of appointments as far as possible out of

harm's way is of more consequence than the worst which can happen to all

other offices in the state; for, in every other department, if the officer is

unqualified, the general opinion of the community directs him in a certain

degree what to do: but in the position of the administrators of a dependency

where the people are not fit to have the control in their own hands, the

character of the government entirely depends on the qualifications, moral and

intellectual, of the individual functionaries.

              It cannot be too often repeated, that in a country like India

everything depends on the personal qualities and capacities of the agents of

government. This truth is the cardinal principle of Indian administration. The

day when it comes to be thought that the appointment of persons to situations

of trust from motives of convenience, already so criminal in England, can be

practised with impunity in India, will be the beginning of the decline and fall

of our empire there. Even with a sincere intention of preferring the bestcandidate, it will not do to rely on chance for supplying fit persons. The

system must be calculated to form them. It has done this hitherto; and

because it has done so, our rule in India has lasted, and been one of constant,

if not very rapid, improvement in prosperity and good administration. As

much bitterness is now manifested against this system, and as much

eagerness displayed to overthrow it, as if educating and training the officers

of government for their work were a thing utterly unreasonable and

indefensible, an unjustifiable interference with the rights of ignorance and

inexperience. There is a tacit conspiracy between those who would like to job

in first-rate Indian offices for their connections here, and those who, being

already in India, claim to be promoted from the indigo factory or the

attorney's office, to administer justice or fix the payments due to government

from millions of people. The "monopoly" of the Civil Service, so much

inveighed against, is like the monopoly of judicial offices by the bar; and its

abolition would be like opening the bench in Westminster Hall to the first

comer whose friends certify that he has now and then looked into Blackstone.

Were the course ever adopted of sending men from this country, or

encouraging them in going out, to get themselves put into high appointments

without having learnt their business by passing through the lower ones, the

most important offices would be thrown to Scotch cousins and adventurers,

connected by no professional feeling with the country or the work, held to no

previous knowledge, and eager only to make money rapidly and return home.

              The safety of the country is, that those by whom it is administered be

sent out in youth, as candidates only, to begin at the bottom of the ladder, and

ascend higher or not, as, after a proper interval, they are proved qualified.

The defect of the East India Company's system was, that though the best men

were carefully sought out for the most important posts, yet if an officer

remained in the service, promotion, though it might be delayed, came at last

in some shape or other, to the least as well as to the most competent. Even the

inferior in qualifications, among such a corps of functionaries, consisted, it

must be remembered, of men who had been brought up to their duties, and

had fulfilled them for many years, at lowest without disgrace, under the eye

and authority of a superior. But though this diminished the evil, it was

nevertheless considerable. A man who never becomes fit for more than an

assistant's duty should remain an assistant all his life, and his juniors should

be promoted over him. With this exception, I am not aware of any real defect

in the old system of Indian appointments. It had already received the greatestother improvement it was susceptible of, the choice of the original candidates

by competitive examination: which, besides the advantage of recruiting from

a higher grade of industry and capacity, has the recommendation, that under

it, unless by accident, there are no personal ties between the candidates for

offices and those who have a voice in conferring them.

              It is in no way unjust that public officers thus selected and trained

should be exclusively eligible to offices which require specially Indian

knowledge and experience. If any door to the higher appointments, without

passing through the lower, be opened even for occasional use, there will be

such incessant knocking at it by persons of influence that it will be

impossible ever to keep it closed. The only excepted appointment should be

the highest one of all. The Viceroy of British India should be a person

selected from all Englishmen for his great general capacity for government. If

he have this, he will be able to distinguish in others, and turn to his own use,

that special knowledge and judgment in local affairs which he has not himself

had the opportunity of acquiring. There are good reasons why (saving

exceptional cases) the Viceroy should not be a member of the regular service.

All services have, more or less, their class prejudices, from which the

supreme ruler ought to be exempt. Neither are men, however able and

experienced, who have passed their lives in Asia, so likely to possess the

most advanced European ideas in general statesmanship; which the chief

ruler should carry out with him, and blend with the results of Indian

experience. Again, being of a different class, and especially if chosen by a

different authority, he will seldom have any personal partialities to warp his

appointments to office. This great security for honest bestowal of patronage

existed in rare perfection under the mixed government of the Crown and the

East India Company. The supreme dispensers of office, the Governor-

General and Governors, were appointed, in fact though not formally, by the

Crown, that is, by the general Government, not by the intermediate body; and

a great officer of the Crown probably had not a single personal or political

connection in the local service: while the delegated body, most of whom had

themselves served in the country, had and were likely to have such

connections.

              This guarantee for impartiality would be much impaired if the civil

servants of Government, even though sent out in boyhood as mere candidates

for employment, should come to be furnished, in any considerableproportion, by the class of society which supplies Viceroys and Governors.

Even the initiatory competitive examination would then be an insufficient

security. It would exclude mere ignorance and incapacity; it would compel

youths of family to start in the race with the same amount of instruction and

ability as other people; the stupidest son could not be put into the Indian

service as he can be into the church; but there would be nothing to prevent

undue preference afterwards. No longer all equally unknown and unheard of

by the arbiter of their lot, a portion of the service would be personally, and a

still greater number politically, in close relation with him. Members of certain

families, and of the higher classes and influential connections generally,

would rise more rapidly than their competitors, and be often kept in situations

for which they were unfit, or placed in those for which others were fitter. The

same influences would be brought into play which affect promotions in the

army: and those alone, if such miracles of simplicity there be, who believe

that these are impartial, would expect impartiality in those of India. This evil

is, I fear, irremediable by any general measures which can be taken under the

present system. No such will afford a degree of security comparable to that

which once flowed spontaneously from the so-called double government.

              What is accounted so great an advantage in the case of the English

system of government at home has been its misfortune in India — that it

grew up of itself, not from preconceived design, but by successive

expedients, and by the adaptation of machinery originally created for a

different purpose. As the country on which its maintenance depended was not

the one out of whose necessities it grew, its practical benefits did not come

home to the mind of that country, and it would have required theoretic

recommendations to render it acceptable. Unfortunately, these were exactly

what it seemed to be destitute of: and undoubtedly the common theories of

government did not furnish it with such, framed as those theories have been

for states of circumstances differing in all the most important features from

the case concerned. But in government, as in other departments of human

agency, almost all principles which have been durable were first suggested by

observation of some particular case in which the general laws of nature acted

in some new or previously unnoticed combination of circumstances. The

institutions of Great Britain, and those of the United States, have the

distinction of suggesting most of the theories of government which, through

good and evil fortune, are now, in the course of generations, reawakening

political life in the nations of Europe. It has been the destiny of thegovernment of the East India Company to suggest the true theory of the

government of a semibarbarous dependency by a civilised country, and after

having done this, to perish. It would be a singular fortune if, at the end of two

or three more generations, this speculative result should be the only

remaining fruit of our ascendancy in India; if posterity should say of us, that

having stumbled accidentally upon better arrangements than our wisdom

would ever have devised, the first use we made of our awakened reason was

to destroy them, and allow the good which had been in course of being

realised to fall through and be lost, from ignorance of the principles on which

it depended. Di meliora: but if a fate so disgraceful to England and to

civilisation can be averted, it must be through far wider political conceptions

than merely English or European practice can supply, and through a much

more profound study of Indian experience, and of the conditions of Indian

government, than either English politicians, or those who supply the English

public with opinions, have hitherto shown any willingness to undertake.

 

 

 

 

                                   Utilitarianism

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

CHAPTER 1
GENERAL REMARKS.
CHAPTER 2
WHAT UTILITARIANISM IS.
CHAPTER 3
OF THE ULTIMATE SANCTION OF THE PRINCIPLE OF UTILITY.
CHAPTER 4
OF WHAT SORT OF PROOF THE PRINCIPLE OF UTILITY IS SUSCEPTIBLE.
CHAPTER 5
ON THE CONNECTION BETWEEN JUSTICE AND UTILITY.                                      Chapter 1

 

 

                                  General Remarks.

 

 

              THERE ARE few circumstances among those which make up the

present condition of human knowledge, more unlike what might have been

expected, or more significant of the backward state in which speculation on

the most important subjects still lingers, than the little progress which has

been made in the decision of the controversy respecting the criterion of right

and wrong. From the dawn of philosophy, the question concerning the

summum bonum, or, what is the same thing, concerning the foundation of

morality, has been accounted the main problem in speculative thought, has

occupied the most gifted intellects, and divided them into sects and schools,

carrying on a vigorous warfare against one another. And after more than two

thousand years the same discussions continue, philosophers are still ranged

under the same contending banners, and neither thinkers nor mankind at large

seem nearer to being unanimous on the subject, than when the youth Socrates

listened to the old Protagoras, and asserted (if Plato's dialogue be grounded

on a real conversation) the theory of utilitarianism against the popular

morality of the so-called sophist.

              It is true that similar confusion and uncertainty, and in some cases

similar discordance, exist respecting the first principles of all the sciences,

not excepting that which is deemed the most certain of them, mathematics;

without much impairing, generally indeed without impairing at all, the

trustworthiness of the conclusions of those sciences. An apparent anomaly,

the explanation of which is, that the detailed doctrines of a science are not

usually deduced from, nor depend for their evidence upon, what are called its

first principles. Were it not so, there would be no science more precarious, or

whose conclusions were more insufficiently made out, than algebra; which

derives none of its certainty from what are commonly taught to learners as its

elements, since these, as laid down by some of its most eminent teachers, are

as full of fictions as English law, and of mysteries as theology. The truths

which are ultimately accepted as the first principles of a science, are reallythe last results of metaphysical analysis, practised on the elementary notions

with which the science is conversant; and their relation to the science is not

that of foundations to an edifice, but of roots to a tree, which may perform

their office equally well though they be never dug down to and exposed to

light. But though in science the particular truths precede the general theory,

the contrary might be expected to be the case with a practical art, such as

morals or legislation. All action is for the sake of some end, and rules of

action, it seems natural to suppose, must take their whole character and

colour from the end to which they are subservient. When we engage in a

pursuit, a clear and precise conception of what we are pursuing would seem

to be the first thing we need, instead of the last we are to look forward to. A

test of right and wrong must be the means, one would think, of ascertaining

what is right or wrong, and not a consequence of having already ascertained

it.

              The difficulty is not avoided by having recourse to the popular

theory of a natural faculty, a sense or instinct, informing us of right and

wrong. For- besides that the existence of such- a moral instinct is itself one of

the matters in dispute- those believers in it who have any pretensions to

philosophy, have been obliged to abandon the idea that it discerns what is

right or wrong in the particular case in hand, as our other senses discern the

sight or sound actually present. Our moral faculty, according to all those of

its interpreters who are entitled to the name of thinkers, supplies us only with

the general principles of moral judgments; it is a branch of our reason, not of

our sensitive faculty; and must be looked to for the abstract doctrines of

morality, not for perception of it in the concrete. The intuitive, no less than

what may be termed the inductive, school of ethics, insists on the necessity of

general laws. They both agree that the morality of an individual action is not

a question of direct perception, but of the application of a law to an individual

case. They recognise also, to a great extent, the same moral laws; but differ as

to their evidence, and the source from which they derive their authority.

According to the one opinion, the principles of morals are evident a priori,

requiring nothing to command assent, except that the meaning of the terms be

understood. According to the other doctrine, right and wrong, as well as truth

and falsehood, are questions of observation and experience. But both hold

equally that morality must be deduced from principles; and the intuitive

school affirm as strongly as the inductive, that there is a science of morals.

Yet they seldom attempt to make out a list of the a priori principles which areto serve as the premises of the science; still more rarely do they make any

effort to reduce those various principles to one first principle, or common

ground of obligation. They either assume the ordinary precepts of morals as

of a priori authority, or they lay down as the common groundwork of those

maxims, some generality much less obviously authoritative than the maxims

themselves, and which has never succeeded in gaining popular acceptance.

Yet to support their pretensions there ought either to be some one

fundamental principle or law, at the root of all morality, or if there be several,

there should be a determinate order of precedence among them; and the one

principle, or the rule for deciding between the various principles when they

conflict, ought to be self-evident.

              To inquire how far the bad effects of this deficiency have been

mitigated in practice, or to what extent the moral beliefs of mankind have

been vitiated or made uncertain by the absence of any distinct recognition of

an ultimate standard, would imply a complete survey and criticism, of past

and present ethical doctrine. It would, however, be easy to show that

whatever steadiness or consistency these moral beliefs have, attained, has

been mainly due to the tacit influence of a standard not recognised. Although

the non-existence of an acknowledged first principle has made ethics not so

much a guide as a consecration of men's actual sentiments, still, as men's

sentiments, both of favour and of aversion, are greatly influenced by what

they suppose to be the effects of things upon their happiness, the principle of

utility, or as Bentham latterly called it, the greatest happiness principle, has

had a large share in forming the moral doctrines even of those who most

scornfully reject its authority. Nor is there any school of thought which

refuses to admit that the influence of actions on happiness is a most material

and even predominant consideration in many of the details of morals,

however unwilling to acknowledge it as the fundamental principle of

morality, and the source of moral obligation. I might go much further, and

say that to all those a priori moralists who deem it necessary to argue at all,

utilitarian arguments are indispensable. It is not my present purpose to

criticise these thinkers; but I cannot help referring, for illustration, to a

systematic treatise by one of the most illustrious of them, the Metaphysics of

Ethics, by Kant. This remarkable man, whose system of thought will long

remain one of the landmarks in the history of philosophical speculation, does,

in the treatise in question, lay down a universal first principle as the origin

and ground of moral obligation; it is this: "So act, that the rule on which thouactest would admit of being adopted as a law by all rational beings." But

when he begins to deduce from this precept any of the actual duties of

morality, he fails, almost grotesquely, to show that there would be any

contradiction, any logical (not to say physical) impossibility, in the adoption

by all rational beings of the most outrageously immoral rules of conduct. All

he shows is that the consequences of their universal adoption would be such

as no one would choose to incur.

              On the present occasion, I shall, without further discussion of the

other theories, attempt to contribute something towards the understanding

and appreciation of the Utilitarian or Happiness theory, and towards such

proof as it is susceptible of. It is evident that this cannot be proof in the

ordinary and popular meaning of the term. Questions of ultimate ends are not

amenable to direct proof. Whatever can be proved to be good, must be so by

being shown to be a means to something admitted to be good without proof.

The medical art is proved to be good by its conducing to health; but how is it

possible to prove that health is good? The art of music is good, for the reason,

among others, that it produces pleasure; but what proof is it possible to give

that pleasure is good? If, then, it is asserted that there is a comprehensive

formula, including all things which are in themselves good, and that whatever

else is good, is not so as an end, but as a mean, the formula may be accepted

or rejected, but is not a subject of what is commonly understood by proof.

We are not, however, to infer that its acceptance or rejection must depend on

blind impulse, or arbitrary choice. There is a larger meaning of the word

proof, in which this question is as amenable to it as any other of the disputed

questions of philosophy. The subject is within the cognisance of the rational

faculty; and neither does that faculty deal with it solely in the way of

intuition. Considerations may be presented capable of determining the

intellect either to give or withhold its assent to the doctrine; and this is

equivalent to proof.

              We shall examine presently of what nature are these considerations;

in what manner they apply to the case, and what rational grounds, therefore,

can be given for accepting or rejecting the utilitarian formula. But it is a

preliminary condition of rational acceptance or rejection, that the formula

should be correctly understood. I believe that the very imperfect notion

ordinarily formed of its meaning, is the chief obstacle which impedes its

reception; and that could it be cleared, even from only the grossermisconceptions, the question would be greatly simplified, and a large

proportion of its difficulties removed. Before, therefore, I attempt to enter

into the philosophical grounds which can be given for assenting to the

utilitarian standard, I shall offer some illustrations of the doctrine itself; with

the view of showing more clearly what it is, distinguishing it from what it is

not, and disposing of such of the practical objections to it as either originate

in, or are closely connected with, mistaken interpretations of its meaning.

Having thus prepared the ground, I shall afterwards endeavour to throw such

light as I can upon the question, considered as one of philosophical theory.

 

 

                                       Chapter 2

 

 

                              What Utilitarianism Is.

 

 

              A PASSING remark is all that needs be given to the ignorant

blunder of supposing that those who stand up for utility as the test of right

and wrong, use the term in that restricted and merely colloquial sense in

which utility is opposed to pleasure. An apology is due to the philosophical

opponents of utilitarianism, for even the momentary appearance of

confounding them with any one capable of so absurd a misconception; which

is the more extraordinary, inasmuch as the contrary accusation, of referring

everything to pleasure, and that too in its grossest form, is another of the

common charges against utilitarianism: and, as has been pointedly remarked

by an able writer, the same sort of persons, and often the very same persons,

denounce the theory "as impracticably dry when the word utility precedes the

word pleasure, and as too practicably voluptuous when the word pleasure

precedes the word utility." Those who know anything about the matter are

aware that every writer, from Epicurus to Bentham, who maintained the

theory of utility, meant by it, not something to be contradistinguished from

pleasure, but pleasure itself, together with exemption from pain; and instead

of opposing the useful to the agreeable or the ornamental, have always

declared that the useful means these, among other things. Yet the common

herd, including the herd of writers, not only in newspapers and periodicals,

but in books of weight and pretension, are perpetually falling into this

shallow mistake. Having caught up the word utilitarian, while knowing

nothing whatever about it but its sound, they habitually express by it the

rejection, or the neglect, of pleasure in some of its forms; of beauty, of

ornament, or of amusement. Nor is the term thus ignorantly misapplied solely

in disparagement, but occasionally in compliment; as though it implied

superiority to frivolity and the mere pleasures of the moment. And this

perverted use is the only one in which the word is popularly known, and the

one from which the new generation are acquiring their sole notion of itsmeaning. Those who introduced the word, but who had for many years

discontinued it as a distinctive appellation, may well feel themselves called

upon to resume it, if by doing so they can hope to contribute anything
                                                      *
towards rescuing it from this utter degradation.

        *
               The author of this essay has reason for believing himself to be the

first person who brought the word utilitarian into use. He did not invent it,

but adopted it from a passing expression in Mr. Galt's Annals of the Parish.

After using it as a designation for several years, he and others abandoned it

from a growing dislike to anything resembling a badge or watchword of

sectarian distinction. But as a name for one single opinion, not a set of

opinions- to denote the recognition of utility as a standard, not any particular

way of applying it- the term supplies a want in the language, and offers, in

many cases, a convenient mode of avoiding tiresome circumlocution.

              The creed which accepts as the foundation of morals, Utility, or the

Greatest Happiness Principle, holds that actions are right in proportion as

they tend to promote happiness, wrong as they tend to produce the reverse of

happiness. By happiness is intended pleasure, and the absence of pain; by

unhappiness, pain, and the privation of pleasure. To give a clear view of the

moral standard set up by the theory, much more requires to be said; in

particular, what things it includes in the ideas of pain and pleasure; and to

what extent this is left an open question. But these supplementary

explanations do not affect the theory of life on which this theory of morality

is grounded- namely, that pleasure, and freedom from pain, are the only

things desirable as ends; and that all desirable things (which are as numerous

in the utilitarian as in any other scheme) are desirable either for the pleasure

inherent in themselves, or as means to the promotion of pleasure and the

prevention of pain.

              Now, such a theory of life excites in many minds, and among them

in some of the most estimable in feeling and purpose, inveterate dislike. To

suppose that life has (as they express it) no higher end than pleasure- no

better and nobler object of desire and pursuitthey designate as utterly mean

and grovelling; as a doctrine worthy only of swine, to whom the followers of

Epicurus were, at a very early period, contemptuously likened; and modern

holders of the doctrine are occasionally made the subject of equally polite

comparisons by its German, French, and English assailants.              When thus attacked, the Epicureans have always answered, that it is

not they, but their accusers, who represent human nature in a degrading light;

since the accusation supposes human beings to be capable of no pleasures

except those of which swine are capable. If this supposition were true, the

charge could not be gainsaid, but would then be no longer an imputation; for

if the sources of pleasure were precisely the same to human beings and to

swine, the rule of life which is good enough for the one would be good

enough for the other. The comparison of the Epicurean life to that of beasts is

felt as degrading, precisely because a beast's pleasures do not satisfy a human

being's conceptions of happiness. Human beings have faculties more elevated

than the animal appetites, and when once made conscious of them, do not

regard anything as happiness which does not include their gratification. I do

not, indeed, consider the Epicureans to have been by any means faultless in

drawing out their scheme of consequences from the utilitarian principle. To

do this in any sufficient manner, many Stoic, as well as Christian elements

require to be included. But there is no known Epicurean theory of life which

does not assign to the pleasures of the intellect, of the feelings and

imagination, and of the moral sentiments, a much higher value as pleasures

than to those of mere sensation. It must be admitted, however, that utilitarian

writers in general have placed the superiority of mental over bodily pleasures

chiefly in the greater permanency, safety, uncostliness, etc., of the former-

that is, in their circumstantial advantages rather than in their intrinsic nature.

And on all these points utilitarians have fully proved their case; but they

might have taken the other, and, as it may be called, higher ground, with

entire consistency. It is quite compatible with the principle of utility to

recognise the fact, that some kinds of pleasure are more desirable and more

valuable than others. It would be absurd that while, in estimating all other

things, quality is considered as well as quantity, the estimation of pleasures

should be supposed to depend on quantity alone.

              If I am asked, what I mean by difference of quality in pleasures, or

what makes one pleasure more valuable than another, merely as a pleasure,

except its being greater in amount, there is but one possible answer. Of two

pleasures, if there be one to which all or almost all who have experience of

both give a decided preference, irrespective of any feeling of moral obligation

to prefer it, that is the more desirable pleasure. If one of the two is, by those

who are competently acquainted with both, placed so far above the other that

they prefer it, even though knowing it to be attended with a greater amount ofdiscontent, and would not resign it for any quantity of the other pleasure

which their nature is capable of, we are justified in ascribing to the preferred

enjoyment a superiority in quality, so far outweighing quantity as to render it,

in comparison, of small account.

              Now it is an unquestionable fact that those who are equally

acquainted with, and equally capable of appreciating and enjoying, both, do

give a most marked preference to the manner of existence which employs

their higher faculties. Few human creatures would consent to be changed into

any of the lower animals, for a promise of the fullest allowance of a beast's

pleasures; no intelligent human being would consent to be a fool, no

instructed person would be an ignoramus, no person of feeling and

conscience would be selfish and base, even though they should be persuaded

that the fool, the dunce, or the rascal is better satisfied with his lot than they

are with theirs. They would not resign what they possess more than he for the

most complete satisfaction of all the desires which they have in common with

him. If they ever fancy they would, it is only in cases of unhappiness so

extreme, that to escape from it they would exchange their lot for almost any

other, however undesirable in their own eyes. A being of higher faculties

requires more to make him happy, is capable probably of more acute

suffering, and certainly accessible to it at more points, than one of an inferior

type; but in spite of these liabilities, he can never really wish to sink into

what he feels to be a lower grade of existence. We may give what explanation

we please of this unwillingness; we may attribute it to pride, a name which is

given indiscriminately to some of the most and to some of the least estimable

feelings of which mankind are capable: we may refer it to the love of liberty

and personal independence, an appeal to which was with the Stoics one of the

most effective means for the inculcation of it; to the love of power, or to the

love of excitement, both of which do really enter into and contribute to it: but

its most appropriate appellation is a sense of dignity, which all human beings

possess in one form or other, and in some, though by no means in exact,

proportion to their higher faculties, and which is so essential a part of the

happiness of those in whom it is strong, that nothing which conflicts with it

could be, otherwise than momentarily, an object of desire to them.

              Whoever supposes that this preference takes place at a sacrifice of

happiness- that the superior being, in anything like equal circumstances, is

not happier than the inferior- confounds the two very different ideas, ofhappiness, and content. It is indisputable that the being whose capacities of

enjoyment are low, has the greatest chance of having them fully satisfied; and

a highly endowed being will always feel that any happiness which he can

look for, as the world is constituted, is imperfect. But he can learn to bear its

imperfections, if they are at all bearable; and they will not make him envy the

being who is indeed unconscious of the imperfections, but only because he

feels not at all the good which those imperfections qualify. It is better to be a

human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied

than a fool satisfied. And if the fool, or the pig, are a different opinion, it is

because they only know their own side of the question. The other party to the

comparison knows both sides.

              It may be objected, that many who are capable of the higher

pleasures, occasionally, under the influence of temptation, postpone them to

the lower. But this is quite compatible with a full appreciation of the intrinsic

superiority of the higher. Men often, from infirmity of character, make their

election for the nearer good, though they know it to be the less valuable; and

this no less when the choice is between two bodily pleasures, than when it is

between bodily and mental. They pursue sensual indulgences to the injury of

health, though perfectly aware that health is the greater good.

              It may be further objected, that many who begin with youthful

enthusiasm for everything noble, as they advance in years sink into indolence

and selfishness. But I do not believe that those who undergo this very

common change, voluntarily choose the lower description of pleasures in

preference to the higher. I believe that before they devote themselves

exclusively to the one, they have already become incapable of the other.

Capacity for the nobler feelings is in most natures a very tender plant, easily

killed, not only by hostile influences, but by mere want of sustenance; and in

the majority of young persons it speedily dies away if the occupations to

which their position in life has devoted them, and the society into which it

has thrown them, are not favourable to keeping that higher capacity in

exercise. Men lose their high aspirations as they lose their intellectual tastes,

because they have not time or opportunity for indulging them; and they

addict themselves to inferior pleasures, not because they deliberately prefer

them, but because they are either the only ones to which they have access, or

the only ones which they are any longer capable of enjoying. It may be

questioned whether any one who has remained equally susceptible to bothclasses of pleasures, ever knowingly and calmly preferred the lower; though

many, in all ages, have broken down in an ineffectual attempt to combine

both.

              From this verdict of the only competent judges, I apprehend there

can be no appeal. On a question which is the best worth having of two

pleasures, or which of two modes of existence is the most grateful to the

feelings, apart from its moral attributes and from its consequences, the

judgment of those who are qualified by knowledge of both, or, if they differ,

that of the majority among them, must be admitted as final. And there needs

be the less hesitation to accept this judgment respecting the quality of

pleasures, since there is no other tribunal to be referred to even on the

question of quantity. What means are there of determining which is the

acutest of two pains, or the intensest of two pleasurable sensations, except the

general suffrage of those who are familiar with both? Neither pains nor

pleasures are homogeneous, and pain is always heterogeneous with pleasure.

What is there to decide whether a particular pleasure is worth purchasing at

the cost of a particular pain, except the feelings and judgment of the

experienced? When, therefore, those feelings and judgment declare the

pleasures derived from the higher faculties to be preferable in kind, apart

from the question of intensity, to those of which the animal nature, disjoined

from the higher faculties, is suspectible, they are entitled on this subject to the

same regard.

              I have dwelt on this point, as being a necessary part of a perfectly

just conception of Utility or Happiness, considered as the directive rule of

human conduct. But it is by no means an indispensable condition to the

acceptance of the utilitarian standard; for that standard is not the agent's own

greatest happiness, but the greatest amount of happiness altogether; and if it

may possibly be doubted whether a noble character is always the happier for

its nobleness, there can be no doubt that it makes other people happier, and

that the world in general is immensely a gainer by it. Utilitarianism,

therefore, could only attain its end by the general cultivation of nobleness of

character, even if each individual were only benefited by the nobleness of

others, and his own, so far as happiness is concerned, were a sheer deduction

from the benefit. But the bare enunciation of such an absurdity as this last,

renders refutation superfluous.

              According to the Greatest Happiness Principle, as above explained,the ultimate end, with reference to and for the sake of which all other things

are desirable (whether we are considering our own good or that of other

people), is an existence exempt as far as possible from pain, and as rich as

possible in enjoyments, both in point of quantity and quality; the test of

quality, and the rule for measuring it against quantity, being the preference

felt by those who in their opportunities of experience, to which must be

added their habits of self-consciousness and self-observation, are best

furnished with the means of comparison. This, being, according to the

utilitarian opinion, the end of human action, is necessarily also the standard

of morality; which may accordingly be defined, the rules and precepts for

human conduct, by the observance of which an existence such as has been

described might be, to the greatest extent possible, secured to all mankind;

and not to them only, but, so far as the nature of things admits, to the whole

sentient creation.

              Against this doctrine, however, arises another class of objectors,

who say that happiness, in any form, cannot be the rational purpose of human

life and action; because, in the first place, it is unattainable: and they

contemptuously ask, what right hast thou to be happy? a question which Mr.

Carlyle clenches by the addition, What right, a short time ago, hadst thou

even to be? Next, they say, that men can do without happiness; that all noble

human beings have felt this, and could not have become noble but by

learning the lesson of Entsagen, or renunciation; which lesson, thoroughly

learnt and submitted to, they affirm to be the beginning and necessary

condition of all virtue.

              The first of these objections would go to the root of the matter were

it well founded; for if no happiness is to be had at all by human beings, the

attainment of it cannot be the end of morality, or of any rational conduct.

Though, even in that case, something might still be said for the utilitarian

theory; since utility includes not solely the pursuit of happiness, but the

prevention or mitigation of unhappiness; and if the former aim be chimerical,

there will be all the greater scope and more imperative need for the latter, so

long at least as mankind think fit to live, and do not take refuge in the

simultaneous act of suicide recommended under certain conditions by

Novalis. When, however, it is thus positively asserted to be impossible that

human life should be happy, the assertion, if not something like a verbal

quibble, is at least an exaggeration. If by happiness be meant a continuity ofhighly pleasurable excitement, it is evident enough that this is impossible. A

state of exalted pleasure lasts only moments, or in some cases, and with some

intermissions, hours or days, and is the occasional brilliant flash of

enjoyment, not its permanent and steady flame. Of this the philosophers who

have taught that happiness is the end of life were as fully aware as those who

taunt them. The happiness which they meant was not a life of rapture; but

moments of such, in an existence made up of few and transitory pains, many

and various pleasures, with a decided predominance of the active over the

passive, and having as the foundation of the whole, not to expect more from

life than it is capable of bestowing. A life thus composed, to those who have

been fortunate enough to obtain it, has always appeared worthy of the name

of happiness. And such an existence is even now the lot of many, during

some considerable portion of their lives. The present wretched education, and

wretched social arrangements, are the only real hindrance to its being

attainable by almost all.

              The objectors perhaps may doubt whether human beings, if taught to

consider happiness as the end of life, would be satisfied with such a moderate

share of it. But great numbers of mankind have been satisfied with much less.

The main constituents of a satisfied life appear to be two, either of which by

itself is often found sufficient for the purpose: tranquillity, and excitement.

With much tranquillity, many find that they can be content with very little

pleasure: with much excitement, many can reconcile themselves to a

considerable quantity of pain. There is assuredly no inherent impossibility in

enabling even the mass of mankind to unite both; since the two are so far

from being incompatible that they are in natural alliance, the prolongation of

either being a preparation for, and exciting a wish for, the other. It is only

those in whom indolence amounts to a vice, that do not desire excitement

after an interval of repose: it is only those in whom the need of excitement is

a disease, that feel the tranquillity which follows excitement dull and insipid,

instead of pleasurable in direct proportion to the excitement which preceded

it. When people who are tolerably fortunate in their outward lot do not find in

life sufficient enjoyment to make it valuable to them, the cause generally is,

caring for nobody but themselves. To those who have neither public nor

private affections, the excitements of life are much curtailed, and in any case

dwindle in value as the time approaches when all selfish interests must be

terminated by death: while those who leave after them objects of personal

affection, and especially those who have also cultivated a fellow-feeling withthe collective interests of mankind, retain as lively an interest in life on the

eve of death as in the vigour of youth and health. Next to selfishness, the

principal cause which makes life unsatisfactory is want of mental cultivation.

A cultivated mind- I do not mean that of a philosopher, but any mind to

which the fountains of knowledge have been opened, and which has been

taught, in any tolerable degree, to exercise its faculties- finds sources of

inexhaustible interest in all that surrounds it; in the objects of nature, the

achievements of art, the imaginations of poetry, the incidents of history, the

ways of mankind, past and present, and their prospects in the future. It is

possible, indeed, to become indifferent to all this, and that too without having

exhausted a thousandth part of it; but only when one has had from the

beginning no moral or human interest in these things, and has sought in them

only the gratification of curiosity.

              Now there is absolutely no reason in the nature of things why an

amount of mental culture sufficient to give an intelligent interest in these

objects of contemplation, should not be the inheritance of every one born in a

civilised country. As little is there an inherent necessity that any human being

should be a selfish egotist, devoid of every feeling or care but those which

centre in his own miserable individuality. Something far superior to this is

sufficiently common even now, to give ample earnest of what the human

species may be made. Genuine private affections and a sincere interest in the

public good, are possible, though in unequal degrees, to every rightly brought

up human being. In a world in which there is so much to interest, so much to

enjoy, and so much also to correct and improve, every one who has this

moderate amount of moral and intellectual requisites is capable of an

existence which may be called enviable; and unless such a person, through

bad laws, or subjection to the will of others, is denied the liberty to use the

sources of happiness within his reach, he will not fail to find this enviable

existence, if he escape the positive evils of life, the great sources of physical

and mental suffering- such as indigence, disease, and the unkindness,

worthlessness, or premature loss of objects of affection. The main stress of

the problem lies, therefore, in the contest with these calamities, from which it

is a rare good fortune entirely to escape; which, as things now are, cannot be

obviated, and often cannot be in any material degree mitigated. Yet no one

whose opinion deserves a moment's consideration can doubt that most of the

great positive evils of the world are in themselves removable, and will, if

human affairs continue to improve, be in the end reduced within narrowlimits. Poverty, in any sense implying suffering, may be completely

extinguished by the wisdom of society, combined with the good sense and

providence of individuals. Even that most intractable of enemies, disease,

may be indefinitely reduced in dimensions by good physical and moral

education, and proper control of noxious influences; while the progress of

science holds out a promise for the future of still more direct conquests over

this detestable foe. And every advance in that direction relieves us from

some, not only of the chances which cut short our own lives, but, what

concerns us still more, which deprive us of those in whom our happiness is

wrapt up. As for vicissitudes of fortune, and other disappointments connected

with worldly circumstances, these are principally the effect either of gross

imprudence, of ill-regulated desires, or of bad or imperfect social institutions.

              All the grand sources, in short, of human suffering are in a great

degree, many of them almost entirely, conquerable by human care and effort;

and though their removal is grievously slow- though a long succession of

generations will perish in the breach before the conquest is completed, and

this world becomes all that, if will and knowledge were not wanting, it might

easily be made- yet every mind sufficiently intelligent and generous to bear a

part, however small and unconspicuous, in the endeavour, will draw a noble

enjoyment from the contest itself, which he would not for any bribe in the

form of selfish indulgence consent to be without.

              And this leads to the true estimation of what is said by the objectors

concerning the possibility, and the obligation, of learning to do without

happiness. Unquestionably it is possible to do without happiness; it is done

involuntarily by nineteen-twentieths of mankind, even in those parts of our

present world which are least deep in barbarism; and it often has to be done

voluntarily by the hero or the martyr, for the sake of something which he

prizes more than his individual happiness. But this something, what is it,

unless the happiness of others or some of the requisites of happiness? It is

noble to be capable of resigning entirely one's own portion of happiness, or

chances of it: but, after all, this self-sacrifice must be for some end; it is not

its own end; and if we are told that its end is not happiness, but virtue, which

is better than happiness, I ask, would the sacrifice be made if the hero or

martyr did not believe that it would earn for others immunity from similar

sacrifices? Would it be made if he thought that his renunciation of happiness

for himself would produce no fruit for any of his fellow creatures, but tomake their lot like his, and place them also in the condition of persons who

have renounced happiness? All honour to those who can abnegate for

themselves the personal enjoyment of life, when by such renunciation they

contribute worthily to increase the amount of happiness in the world; but he

who does it, or professes to do it, for any other purpose, is no more deserving

of admiration than the ascetic mounted on his pillar. He may be an inspiriting

proof of what men can do, but assuredly not an example of what they should.

              Though it is only in a very imperfect state of the world's

arrangements that any one can best serve the happiness of others by the

absolute sacrifice of his own, yet so long as the world is in that imperfect

state, I fully acknowledge that the readiness to make such a sacrifice is the

highest virtue which can be found in man. I will add, that in this condition the

world, paradoxical as the assertion may be, the conscious ability to do

without happiness gives the best prospect of realising, such happiness as is

attainable. For nothing except that consciousness can raise a person above the

chances of life, by making him feel that, let fate and fortune do their worst,

they have not power to subdue him: which, once felt, frees him from excess

of anxiety concerning the evils of life, and enables him, like many a Stoic in

the worst times of the Roman Empire, to cultivate in tranquillity the sources

of satisfaction accessible to him, without concerning himself about the

uncertainty of their duration, any more than about their inevitable end.

              Meanwhile, let utilitarians never cease to claim the morality of self

devotion as a possession which belongs by as good a right to them, as either

to the Stoic or to the Transcendentalist. The utilitarian morality does

recognise in human beings the power of sacrificing their own greatest good

for the good of others. It only refuses to admit that the sacrifice is itself a

good. A sacrifice which does not increase, or tend to increase, the sum total

of happiness, it considers as wasted. The only self-renunciation which it

applauds, is devotion to the happiness, or to some of the means of happiness,

of others; either of mankind collectively, or of individuals within the limits

imposed by the collective interests of mankind.

              I must again repeat, what the assailants of utilitarianism seldom have

the justice to acknowledge, that the happiness which forms the utilitarian

standard of what is right in conduct, is not the agent's own happiness, but that

of all concerned. As between his own happiness and that of others,

utilitarianism requires him to be as strictly impartial as a disinterested andbenevolent spectator. In the golden rule of Jesus of Nazareth, we read the

complete spirit of the ethics of utility. To do as you would be done by, and to

love your neighbour as yourself, constitute the ideal perfection of utilitarian

morality. As the means of making the nearest approach to this ideal, utility

would enjoin, first, that laws and social arrangements should place the

happiness, or (as speaking practically it may be called) the interest, of every

individual, as nearly as possible in harmony with the interest of the whole;

and secondly, that education and opinion, which have so vast a power over

human character, should so use that power as to establish in the mind of

every individual an indissoluble association between his own happiness and

the good of the whole; especially between his own happiness and the practice

of such modes of conduct, negative and positive, as regard for the universal

happiness prescribes; so that not only he may be unable to conceive the

possibility of happiness to himself, consistently with conduct opposed to the

general good, but also that a direct impulse to promote the general good may

be in every individual one of the habitual motives of action, and the

sentiments connected therewith may fill a large and prominent place in every

human being's sentient existence. If the, impugners of the utilitarian morality

represented it to their own minds in this its, true character, I know not what

recommendation possessed by any other morality they could possibly affirm

to be wanting to it; what more beautiful or more exalted developments of

human nature any other ethical system can be supposed to foster, or what

springs of action, not accessible to the utilitarian, such systems rely on for

giving effect to their mandates.

              The objectors to utilitarianism cannot always be charged with

representing it in a discreditable light. On the contrary, those among them

who entertain anything like a just idea of its disinterested character,

sometimes find fault with its standard as being too high for humanity. They

say it is exacting too much to require that people shall always act from the

inducement of promoting the general interests of society. But this is to

mistake the very meaning of a standard of morals, and confound the rule of

action with the motive of it. It is the business of ethics to tell us what are our

duties, or by what test we may know them; but no system of ethics requires

that the sole motive of all we do shall be a feeling of duty; on the contrary,

ninety-nine hundredths of all our actions are done from other motives, and

rightly so done, if the rule of duty does not condemn them. It is the more

unjust to utilitarianism that this particular misapprehension should be made aground of objection to it, inasmuch as utilitarian moralists have gone beyond

almost all others in affirming that the motive has nothing to do with the

morality of the action, though much with the worth of the agent. He who

saves a fellow creature from drowning does what is morally right, whether

his motive be duty, or the hope of being paid for his trouble; he who betrays

the friend that trusts him, is guilty of a crime, even if his object be to serve

another friend to whom he is under greater obligations.

              But to speak only of actions done from the motive of duty, and in

direct obedience to principle: it is a misapprehension of the utilitarian mode

of thought, to conceive it as implying that people should fix their minds upon

so wide a generality as the world, or society at large. The great majority of

good actions are intended not for the benefit of the world, but for that of

individuals, of which the good of the world is made up; and the thoughts of

the most virtuous man need not on these occasions travel beyond the

particular persons concerned, except so far as is necessary to assure himself

that in benefiting them he is not violating the rights, that is, the legitimate and

authorised expectations, of any one else. The multiplication of happiness is,

according to the utilitarian ethics, the object of virtue: the occasions on which

any person (except one in a thousand) has it in his power to do this on an

extended scale, in other words to be a public benefactor, are but exceptional;

and on these occasions alone is he called on to consider public utility; in

every other case, private utility, the interest or happiness of some few

persons, is all he has to attend to. Those alone the influence of whose actions

extends to society in general, need concern themselves habitually about large

an object. In the case of abstinences indeed- of things which people forbear to

do from moral considerations, though the consequences in the particular case

might be beneficial- it would be unworthy of an intelligent agent not to be

consciously aware that the action is of a class which, if practised generally,

would be generally injurious, and that this is the ground of the obligation to

abstain from it. The amount of regard for the public interest implied in this

recognition, is no greater than is demanded by every system of morals, for

they all enjoin to abstain from whatever is manifestly pernicious to society.

              The same considerations dispose of another reproach against the

doctrine of utility, founded on a still grosser misconception of the purpose of

a standard of morality, and of the very meaning of the words right and wrong.

It is often affirmed that utilitarianism renders men cold and unsympathising;that it chills their moral feelings towards individuals; that it makes them

regard only the dry and hard consideration of the consequences of actions,

not taking into their moral estimate the qualities from which those actions

emanate. If the assertion means that they do not allow their judgment

respecting the rightness or wrongness of an action to be influenced by their

opinion of the qualities of the person who does it, this is a complaint not

against utilitarianism, but against having any standard of morality at all; for

certainly no known ethical standard decides an action to be good or bad

because it is done by a good or a bad man, still less because done by an

amiable, a brave, or a benevolent man, or the contrary. These considerations

are relevant, not to the estimation of actions, but of persons; and there is

nothing in the utilitarian theory inconsistent with the fact that there are other

things which interest us in persons besides the rightness and wrongness of

their actions. The Stoics, indeed, with the paradoxical misuse of language

which was part of their system, and by which they strove to raise themselves

above all concern about anything but virtue, were fond of saying that he who

has that has everything; that he, and only he, is rich, is beautiful, is a king.

But no claim of this description is made for the virtuous man by the

utilitarian doctrine. Utilitarians are quite aware that there are other desirable

possessions and qualities besides virtue, and are perfectly willing to allow to

all of them their full worth. They are also aware that a right action does not

necessarily indicate a virtuous character, and that actions which are blamable,

often proceed from qualities entitled to praise. When this is apparent in any

particular case, it modifies their estimation, not certainly of the act, but of the

agent. I grant that they are, notwithstanding, of opinion, that in the long run

the best proof of a good character is good actions; and resolutely refuse to

consider any mental disposition as good, of which the predominant tendency

is to produce bad conduct. This makes them unpopular with many people; but

it is an unpopularity which they must share with every one who regards the

distinction between right and wrong in a serious light; and the reproach is not

one which a conscientious utilitarian need be anxious to repel.

              If no more be meant by the objection than that many utilitarians look

on the morality of actions, as measured by the utilitarian standard, with too

exclusive a regard, and do not lay sufficient stress upon the other beauties of

character which go towards making a human being lovable or admirable, this

may be admitted. Utilitarians who have cultivated their moral feelings, but

not their sympathies nor their artistic perceptions, do fall into this mistake;and so do all other moralists under the same conditions. What can be said in

excuse for other moralists is equally available for them, namely, that, if there

is to be any error, it is better that it should be on that side. As a matter of fact,

we may affirm that among utilitarians as among adherents of other systems,

there is every imaginable degree of rigidity and of laxity in the application of

their standard: some are even puritanically rigorous, while others are as

indulgent as can possibly be desired by sinner or by sentimentalist. But on the

whole, a doctrine which brings prominently forward the interest that mankind

have in the repression and prevention of conduct which violates the moral

law, is likely to be inferior to no other in turning the sanctions of opinion

again such violations. It is true, the question, What does violate the moral

law? is one on which those who recognise different standards of morality are

likely now and then to differ. But difference of opinion on moral questions

was not first introduced into the world by utilitarianism, while that doctrine

does supply, if not always an easy, at all events a tangible and intelligible

mode of deciding such differences.

              It may not be superfluous to notice a few more of the common

misapprehensions of utilitarian ethics, even those which are so obvious and

gross that it might appear impossible for any person of candour and

intelligence to fall into them; since persons, even of considerable mental

endowments, often give themselves so little trouble to understand the

bearings of any opinion against which they entertain a prejudice, and men are

in general so little conscious of this voluntary ignorance as a defect, that the

vulgarest misunderstandings of ethical doctrines are continually met with in

the deliberate writings of persons of the greatest pretensions both to high

principle and to philosophy. We not uncommonly hear the doctrine of utility

inveighed against as a godless doctrine. If it be necessary to say anything at

all against so mere an assumption, we may say that the question depends

upon what idea we have formed of the moral character of the Deity. If it be a

true belief that God desires, above all things, the happiness of his creatures,

and that this was his purpose in their creation, utility is not only not a godless

doctrine, but more profoundly religious than any other. If it be meant that

utilitarianism does not recognise the revealed will of God as the supreme law

of morals, I answer, that a utilitarian who believes in the perfect goodness

and wisdom of God, necessarily believes that whatever God has thought fit to

reveal on the subject of morals, must fulfil the requirements of utility in a

supreme degree. But others besides utilitarians have been of opinion that theChristian revelation was intended, and is fitted, to inform the hearts and

minds of mankind with a spirit which should enable them to find for

themselves what is right, and incline them to do it when found, rather than to

tell them, except in a very general way, what it is; and that we need a doctrine

of ethics, carefully followed out, to interpret to us the will God. Whether this

opinion is correct or not, it is superfluous here to discuss; since whatever aid

religion, either natural or revealed, can afford to ethical investigation, is as

open to the utilitarian moralist as to any other. He can use it as the testimony

of God to the usefulness or hurtfulness of any given course of action, by as

good a right as others can use it for the indication of a transcendental law,

having no connection with usefulness or with happiness.

              Again, Utility is often summarily stigmatised as an immoral doctrine

by giving it the name of Expediency, and taking advantage of the popular use

of that term to contrast it with Principle. But the Expedient, in the sense in

which it is opposed to the Right, generally means that which is expedient for

the particular interest of the agent himself; as when a minister sacrifices the

interests of his country to keep himself in place. When it means anything

better than this, it means that which is expedient for some immediate object,

some temporary purpose, but which violates a rule whose observance is

expedient in a much higher degree. The Expedient, in this sense, instead of

being the same thing with the useful, is a branch of the hurtful. Thus, it would

often be expedient, for the purpose of getting over some momentary

embarrassment, or attaining some object immediately useful to ourselves or

others, to tell a lie. But inasmuch as the cultivation in ourselves of a sensitive

feeling on the subject of veracity, is one of the most useful, and the

enfeeblement of that feeling one of the most hurtful, things to which our

conduct can be instrumental; and inasmuch as any, even unintentional,

deviation from truth, does that much towards weakening the trustworthiness

of human assertion, which is not only the principal support of all present

social well-being, but the insufficiency of which does more than any one

thing that can be named to keep back civilisation, virtue, everything on which

human happiness on the largest scale depends; we feel that the violation, for a

present advantage, of a rule of such transcendant expediency, is not

expedient, and that he who, for the sake of a convenience to himself or to

some other individual, does what depends on him to deprive mankind of the

good, and inflict upon them the evil, involved in the greater or less reliance

which they can place in each other's word, acts the part of one of their worstenemies. Yet that even this rule, sacred as it is, admits of possible exceptions,

is acknowledged by all moralists; the chief of which is when the withholding

of some fact (as of information from a malefactor, or of bad news from a

person dangerously ill) would save an individual (especially an individual

other than oneself) from great and unmerited evil, and when the withholding

can only be effected by denial. But in order that the exception may not extend

itself beyond the need, and may have the least possible effect in weakening

reliance on veracity, it ought to be recognised, and, if possible, its limits

defined; and if the principle of utility is good for anything, it must be good

for weighing these conflicting utilities against one another, and marking out

the region within which one or the other preponderates.

              Again, defenders of utility often find themselves called upon to reply

to such objections as this- that there is not time, previous to action, for

calculating and weighing the effects of any line of conduct on the general

happiness. This is exactly as if any one were to say that it is impossible to

guide our conduct by Christianity, because there is not time, on every

occasion on which anything has to be done, to read through the Old and New

Testaments. The answer to the objection is, that there has been ample time,

namely, the whole past duration of the human species. During all that time,

mankind have been learning by experience the tendencies of actions; on

which experience all the prudence, as well as all the morality of life, are

dependent. People talk as if the commencement of this course of experience

had hitherto been put off, and as if, at the moment when some man feels

tempted to meddle with the property or life of another, he had to begin

considering for the first time whether murder and theft are injurious to human

happiness. Even then I do not think that he would find the question very

puzzling; but, at all events, the matter is now done to his hand.

              It is truly a whimsical supposition that, if mankind were agreed in

considering utility to be the test of morality, they would remain without any

agreement as to what is useful, and would take no measures for having their

notions on the subject taught to the young, and enforced by law and opinion.

There is no difficulty in proving any ethical standard whatever to work ill, if

we suppose universal idiocy to be conjoined with it; but on any hypothesis

short of that, mankind must by this time have acquired positive beliefs as to

the effects of some actions on their happiness; and the beliefs which have

thus come down are the rules of morality for the multitude, and for thephilosopher until he has succeeded in finding better. That philosophers might

easily do this, even now, on many subjects; that the received code of ethics is

by no means of divine right; and that mankind have still much to learn as to

the effects of actions on the general happiness, I admit, or rather, earnestly

maintain. The corollaries from the principle of utility, like the precepts of

every practical art, admit of indefinite improvement, and, in a progressive

state of the human mind, their improvement is perpetually going on.

              But to consider the rules of morality as improvable, is one thing; to

pass over the intermediate generalisations entirely, and endeavour to test each

individual action directly by the first principle, is another. It is a strange

notion that the acknowledgment of a first principle is inconsistent with the

admission of secondary ones. To inform a traveller respecting the place of

his. ultimate destination, is not to forbid the use of landmarks and direction-

posts on the way. The proposition that happiness is the end and aim of

morality, does not mean that no road ought to be laid down to that goal, or

that persons going thither should not be advised to take one direction rather

than another. Men really ought to leave off talking a kind of nonsense on this

subject, which they would neither talk nor listen to on other matters of

practical concernment. Nobody argues that the art of navigation is not

founded on astronomy, because sailors cannot wait to calculate the Nautical

Almanack. Being rational creatures, they go to sea with it ready calculated;

and all rational creatures go out upon the sea of life with their minds made up

on the common questions of right and wrong, as well as on many of the far

more difficult questions of wise and foolish. And this, as long as foresight is

a human quality, it is to be presumed they will continue to do. Whatever we

adopt as the fundamental principle of morality, we require subordinate

principles to apply it by; the impossibility of doing without them, being

common to all systems, can afford no argument against any one in particular;

but gravely to argue as if no such secondary principles could be had, and as if

mankind had remained till now, and always must remain, without drawing

any general conclusions from the experience of human life, is as high a pitch,

I think, as absurdity has ever reached in philosophical controversy.

              The remainder of the stock arguments against utilitarianism mostly

consist in laying to its charge the common infirmities of human nature, and

the general difficulties which embarrass conscientious persons in shaping

their course through life. We are told that a utilitarian will be apt to make hisown particular case an exception to moral rules, and, when under temptation,

will see a utility in the breach of a rule, greater than he will see in its

observance. But is utility the only creed which is able to furnish us with

excuses for evil doing, and means of cheating our own conscience? They are

afforded in abundance by all doctrines which recognise as a fact in morals the

existence of conflicting considerations; which all doctrines do, that have been

believed by sane persons. It is not the fault of any creed, but of the

complicated nature of human affairs, that rules of conduct cannot be so

framed as to require no exceptions, and that hardly any kind of action can

safely be laid down as either always obligatory or always condemnable.

There is no ethical creed which does not temper the rigidity of its laws, by

giving a certain latitude, under the moral responsibility of the agent, for

accommodation to peculiarities of circumstances; and under every creed, at

the opening thus made, self-deception and dishonest casuistry get in. There

exists no moral system under which there do not arise unequivocal cases of

conflicting obligation. These are the real difficulties, the knotty points both in

the theory of ethics, and in the conscientious guidance of personal conduct.

They are overcome practically, with greater or with less success, according to

the intellect and virtue of the individual; but it can hardly be pretended that

any one will be the less qualified for dealing with them, from possessing an

ultimate standard to which conflicting rights and duties can be referred. If

utility is the ultimate source of moral obligations, utility may be invoked to

decide between them when their demands are incompatible. Though the

application of the standard may be difficult, it is better than none at all: while

in other systems, the moral laws all claiming independent authority, there is

no common umpire entitled to interfere between them; their claims to

precedence one over another rest on little better than sophistry, and unless

determined, as they generally are, by the unacknowledged influence of

considerations of utility, afford a free scope for the action of personal desires

and partialities. We must remember that only in these cases of conflict

between secondary principles is it requisite that first principles should be

appealed to. There is no case of moral obligation in which some secondary

principle is not involved; and if only one, there can seldom be any real doubt

which one it is, in the mind of any person by whom the principle itself is

recognised.

  

                                       Chapter 3

 

 

            Of the Ultimate Sanction of the Principle of Utility.

 

 

              THE QUESTION is often asked, and properly so, in regard to any

supposed moral standard- What is its sanction? what are the motives to obey

it? or more specifically, what is the source of its obligation? whence does it

derive its binding force? It is a necessary part of moral philosophy to provide

the answer to this question; which, though frequently assuming the shape of

an objection to the utilitarian morality, as if it had some special applicability

to that above others, really arises in regard to all standards. It arises, in fact,

whenever a person is called on to adopt a standard, or refer morality to any

basis on which he has not been accustomed to rest it. For the customary

morality, that which education and opinion have consecrated, is the only one

which presents itself to the mind with the feeling of being in itself obligatory;

and when a person is asked to believe that this morality derives its obligation

from some general principle round which custom has not thrown the same

halo, the assertion is to him a paradox; the supposed corollaries seem to have

a more binding force than the original theorem; the superstructure seems to

stand better without, than with, what is represented as its foundation. He says

to himself, I feel that I am bound not to rob or murder, betray or deceive; but

why am I bound to promote the general happiness? If my own happiness lies

in something else, why may I not give that the preference?

              If the view adopted by the utilitarian philosophy of the nature of the

moral sense be correct, this difficulty will always present itself, until the

influences which form moral character have taken the same hold of the

principle which they have taken of some of the consequences- until, by the

improvement of education, the feeling of unity with our fellow-creatures shall

be (what it cannot be denied that Christ intended it to be) as deeply rooted in

our character, and to our own consciousness as completely a part of our

nature, as the horror of crime is in an ordinarily well brought up young

person. In the meantime, however, the difficulty has no peculiar applicationto the doctrine of utility, but is inherent in every attempt to analyse morality

and reduce it to principles; which, unless the principle is already in men's

minds invested with as much sacredness as any of its applications, always

seems to divest them of a part of their sanctity.

              The principle of utility either has, or there is no reason why it might

not have, all the sanctions which belong to any other system of morals. Those

sanctions are either external or internal. Of the external sanctions it is not

necessary to speak at any length. They are, the hope of favour and the fear of

displeasure, from our fellow creatures or from the Ruler of the Universe,

along with whatever we may have of sympathy or affection for them, or of

love and awe of Him, inclining us to do his will independently of selfish

consequences. There is evidently no reason why all these motives for

observance should not attach themselves to the utilitarian morality, as

completely and as powerfully as to any other. Indeed, those of them which

refer to our fellow creatures are sure to do so, in proportion to the amount of

general intelligence; for whether there be any other ground of moral

obligation than the general happiness or not, men do desire happiness; and

however imperfect may be their own practice, they desire and commend all

conduct in others towards themselves, by which they think their happiness is

promoted. With regard to the religious motive, if men believe, as most

profess to do, in the goodness of God, those who think that conduciveness to

the general happiness is the essence, or even only the criterion of good, must

necessarily believe that it is also that which God approves. The whole force

therefore of external reward and punishment, whether physical or moral, and

whether proceeding from God or from our fellow men, together with all that

the capacities of human nature admit of disinterested devotion to either,

become available to enforce the utilitarian morality, in proportion as that

morality is recognised; and the more powerfully, the more the appliances of

education and general cultivation are bent to the purpose.

              So far as to external sanctions. The internal sanction of duty,

whatever our standard of duty may be, is one and the same- a feeling in our

own mind; a pain, more or less intense, attendant on violation of duty, which

in properly cultivated moral natures rises, in the more serious cases, into

shrinking from it as an impossibility. This feeling, when disinterested, and

connecting itself with the pure idea of duty, and not with some particular

form of it, or with any of the merely accessory circumstances, is the essenceof Conscience; though in that complex phenomenon as it actually exists, the

simple fact is in general all encrusted over with collateral associations,

derived from sympathy, from love, and still more from fear; from all the

forms of religious feeling; from the recollections of childhood and of all our

past life; from self-esteem, desire of the esteem of others, and occasionally

even self-abasement. This extreme complication is, I apprehend, the origin of

the sort of mystical character which, by a tendency of the human mind of

which there are many other examples, is apt to be attributed to the idea of

moral obligation, and which leads people to believe that the idea cannot

possibly attach itself to any other objects than those which, by a supposed

mysterious law, are found in our present experience to excite it. Its binding

force, however, consists in the existence of a mass of feeling which must be

broken through in order to do what violates our standard of right, and which,

if we do nevertheless violate that standard, will probably have to be

encountered afterwards in the form of remorse. Whatever theory we have of

the nature or origin of conscience, this is what essentially constitutes it.

              The ultimate sanction, therefore, of all morality (external motives

apart) being a subjective feeling in our own minds, I see nothing

embarrassing to those whose standard is utility, in the question, what is the

sanction of that particular standard? We may answer, the same as of all other

moral standards- the conscientious feelings of mankind. Undoubtedly this

sanction has no binding efficacy on those who do not possess the feelings it

appeals to; but neither will these persons be more obedient to any other moral

principle than to the utilitarian one. On them morality of any kind has no hold

but through the external sanctions. Meanwhile the feelings exist, a fact in

human nature, the reality of which, and the great power with which they are

capable of acting on those in whom they have been duly cultivated, are

proved by experience. No reason has ever been shown why they may not be

cultivated to as great intensity in connection with the utilitarian, as with any

other rule of morals.

              There is, I am aware, a disposition to believe that a person who sees

in moral obligation a transcendental fact, an objective reality belonging to the

province of "Things in themselves," is likely to be more obedient to it than

one who believes it to be entirely subjective, having its seat in human

consciousness only. But whatever a person's opinion may be on this point of

Ontology, the force he is really urged by is his own subjective feeling, and isexactly measured by its strength. No one's belief that duty is an objective

reality is stronger than the belief that God is so; yet the belief in God, apart

from the expectation of actual reward and punishment, only operates on

conduct through, and in proportion to, the subjective religious feeling. The

sanction, so far as it is disinterested, is always in the mind itself; and the

notion therefore of the transcendental moralists must be, that this sanction

will not exist in the mind unless it is believed to have its root out of the mind;

and that if a person is able to say to himself, This which is restraining me,

and which is called my conscience, is only a feeling in my own mind, he may

possibly draw the conclusion that when the feeling ceases the obligation

ceases, and that if he find the feeling inconvenient, he may disregard it, and

endeavour to get rid of it. But is this danger confined to the utilitarian

morality? Does the belief that moral obligation has its seat outside the mind

make the feeling of it too strong to be got rid of? The fact is so far otherwise,

that all moralists admit and lament the ease with which, in the generality of

minds, conscience can be silenced or stifled. The question, Need I obey my

conscience? is quite as often put to themselves by persons who never heard of

the principle of utility, as by its adherents. Those whose conscientious

feelings are so weak as to allow of their asking this question, if they answer it

affirmatively, will not do so because they believe in the transcendental

theory, but because of the external sanctions.

              It is not necessary, for the present purpose, to decide whether the

feeling of duty is innate or implanted. Assuming it to be innate, it is an open

question to what objects it naturally attaches itself; for the philosophic

supporters of that theory are now agreed that the intuitive perception is of

principles of morality and not of the details. If there be anything innate in the

matter, I see no reason why the feeling which is innate should not be that of

regard to the pleasures and pains of others. If there is any principle of morals

which is intuitively obligatory, I should say it must be that. If so, the intuitive

ethics would coincide with the utilitarian, and there would be no further

quarrel between them. Even as it is, the intuitive moralists, though they

believe that there are other intuitive moral obligations, do already believe this

to one; for they unanimously hold that a large portion of morality turns upon

the consideration due to the interests of our fellow-creatures. Therefore, if the

belief in the transcendental origin of moral obligation gives any additional

efficacy to the internal sanction, it appears to me that the utilitarian principle

has already the benefit of it.              On the other hand, if, as is my own belief, the moral feelings are not

innate, but acquired, they are not for that reason the less natural. It is natural

to man to speak, to reason, to build cities, to cultivate the ground, though

these are acquired faculties. The moral feelings are not indeed a part of our

nature, in the sense of being in any perceptible degree present in all of us; but

this, unhappily, is a fact admitted by those who believe the most strenuously

in their transcendental origin. Like the other acquired capacities above

referred to, the moral faculty, if not a part of our nature, is a natural

outgrowth from it; capable, like them, in a certain small degree, of springing

up spontaneously; and susceptible of being brought by cultivation to a high

degree of development. Unhappily it is also susceptible, by a sufficient use of

the external sanctions and of the force of early impressions, of being

cultivated in almost any direction: so that there is hardly anything so absurd

or so mischievous that it may not, by means of these influences, be made to

act on the human mind with all the authority of conscience. To doubt that the

same potency might be given by the same means to the principle of utility,

even if it had no foundation in human nature, would be flying in the face of

all experience.

              But moral associations which are wholly of artificial creation, when

intellectual culture goes on, yield by degrees to the dissolving force of

analysis: and if the feeling of duty, when associated with utility, would

appear equally arbitrary; if there were no leading department of our nature,

no powerful class of sentiments, with which that association would

harmonise, which would make us feel it congenial, and incline us not only to

foster it in others (for which we have abundant interested motives), but also

to cherish it in ourselves; if there were not, in short, a natural basis of

sentiment for utilitarian morality, it might well happen that this association

also, even after it had been implanted by education, might be analysed away.

              But there is this basis of powerful natural sentiment; and this it is

which, when once the general happiness is recognised as the ethical standard,

will constitute the strength of the utilitarian morality. This firm foundation is

that of the social feelings of mankind; the desire to be in unity with our

fellow creatures, which is already a powerful principle in human nature, and

happily one of those which tend to become stronger, even without express

inculcation, from the influences of advancing civilisation. The social state is

at once so natural, so necessary, and so habitual to man, that, except in someunusual circumstances or by an effort of voluntary abstraction, he never

conceives himself otherwise than as a member of a body; and this association

is riveted more and more, as mankind are further removed from the state of

savage independence. Any condition, therefore, which is essential to a state

of society, becomes more and more an inseparable part of every person's

conception of the state of things which he is born into, and which is the

destiny of a human being.

              Now, society between human beings, except in the relation of master

and slave, is manifestly impossible on any other footing than that the interests

of all are to be consulted. Society between equals can only exist on the

understanding that the interests of all are to be regarded equally. And since in

all states of civilisation, every person, except an absolute monarch, has

equals, every one is obliged to live on these terms with somebody; and in

every age some advance is made towards a state in which it will be

impossible to live permanently on other terms with anybody. In this way

people grow up unable to conceive as possible to them a state of total

disregard of other people's interests. They are under a necessity of conceiving

themselves as at least abstaining from all the grosser injuries, and (if only for

their own protection) living in a state of constant protest against them. They

are also familiar with the fact of co-operating with others and proposing to

themselves a collective, not an individual interest as the aim (at least for the

time being) of their actions. So long as they are co-operating, their ends are

identified with those of others; there is at least a temporary feeling that the

interests of others are their own interests. Not only does all strengthening of

social ties, and all healthy growth of society, give to each individual a

stronger personal interest in practically consulting the welfare of others; it

also leads him to identify his feelings more and more with their good, or at

least with an even greater degree of practical consideration for it. He comes,

as though instinctively, to be conscious of himself as a being who of course

pays regard to others. The good of others becomes to him a thing naturally

and necessarily to be attended to, like any of the physical conditions of our

existence. Now, whatever amount of this feeling a person has, he is urged by

the strongest motives both of interest and of sympathy to demonstrate it, and

to the utmost of his power encourage it in others; and even if he has none of it

himself, he is as greatly interested as any one else that others should have it.

Consequently the smallest germs of the feeling are laid hold of and nourished

by the contagion of sympathy and the influences of education; and acomplete web of corroborative association is woven round it, by the powerful

agency of the external sanctions.

              This mode of conceiving ourselves and human life, as civilisation

goes on, is felt to be more and more natural. Every step in political

improvement renders it more so, by removing the sources of opposition of

interest, and levelling those inequalities of legal privilege between individuals

or classes, owing to which there are large portions of mankind whose

happiness it is still practicable to disregard. In an improving state of the

human mind, the influences are constantly on the increase, which tend to

generate in each individual a feeling of unity with all the rest; which, if

perfect, would make him never think of, or desire, any beneficial condition

for himself, in the benefits of which they are not included. If we now suppose

this feeling of unity to be taught as a religion, and the whole force of

education, of institutions, and of opinion, directed, as it once was in the case

of religion, to make every person grow up from infancy surrounded on all

sides both by the profession and the practice of it, I think that no one, who

can realise this conception, will feel any misgiving about the sufficiency of

the ultimate sanction for the Happiness morality. To any ethical student who

finds the realisation difficult, I recommend, as a means of facilitating it, the

second of M. Comte's two principle works, the Traite de Politique Positive. I

entertain the strongest objections to the system of politics and morals set

forth in that treatise; but I think it has superabundantly shown the possibility

of giving to the service of humanity, even without the aid of belief in a

Providence, both the psychological power and the social efficacy of a

religion; making it take hold of human life, and colour all thought, feeling,

and action, in a manner of which the greatest ascendancy ever exercised by

any religion may be but a type and foretaste; and of which the danger is, not

that it should be insufficient but that it should be so excessive as to interfere

unduly with human freedom and individuality.

              Neither is it necessary to the feeling which constitutes the binding

force of the utilitarian morality on those who recognise it, to wait for those

social influences which would make its obligation felt by mankind at large. In

the comparatively early state of human advancement in which we now live, a

person cannot indeed feel that entireness of sympathy with all others, which

would make any real discordance in the general direction of their conduct in

life impossible; but already a person in whom the social feeling is at alldeveloped, cannot bring himself to think of the rest of his fellow creatures as

struggling rivals with him for the means of happiness, whom he must desire

to see defeated in their object in order that he may succeed in his. The deeply

rooted conception which every individual even now has of himself as a social

being, tends to make him feel it one of his natural wants that there should be

harmony between his feelings and aims and those of his fellow creatures. If

differences of opinion and of mental culture make it impossible for him to

share many of their actual feelings- perhaps make him denounce and defy

those feelings- he still needs to be conscious that his real aim and theirs do

not conflict; that he is not opposing himself to what they really wish for,

namely their own good, but is, on the contrary, promoting it. This feeling in

most individuals is much inferior in strength to their selfish feelings, and is

often wanting altogether. But to those who have it, it possesses all the

characters of a natural feeling. It does not present itself to their minds as a

superstition of education, or a law despotically imposed by the power of

society, but as an attribute which it would not be well for them to be without.

This conviction is the ultimate sanction of the greatest happiness morality.

This it is which makes any mind, of well-developed feelings, work with, and

not against, the outward motives to care for others, afforded by what I have

called the external sanctions; and when those sanctions are wanting, or act in

an opposite direction, constitutes in itself a powerful internal binding force, in

proportion to the sensitiveness and thoughtfulness of the character; since few

but those whose mind is a moral blank, could bear to lay out their course of

life on the plan of paying no regard to others except so far as their own

private interest compels.

 

 

                                       Chapter 4

 

 

      Of what sort of Proof the Principle of Utility is Susceptible.

 

 

              IT HAS already been remarked, that questions of ultimate ends do

not admit of proof, in the ordinary acceptation of the term. To be incapable of

proof by reasoning is common to all first principles; to the first premises of

our knowledge, as well as to those of our conduct. But the former, being

matters of fact, may be the subject of a direct appeal to the faculties which

judge of fact- namely, our senses, and our internal consciousness. Can an

appeal be made to the same faculties on questions of practical ends? Or by

what other faculty is cognisance taken of them?

              Questions about ends are, in other words, questions what things are

desirable. The utilitarian doctrine is, that happiness is desirable, and the only

thing desirable, as an end; all other things being only desirable as means to

that end. What ought to be required of this doctrine- what conditions is it

requisite that the doctrine should fulfil- to make good its claim to be

believed?

              The only proof capable of being given that an object is visible, is

that people actually see it. The only proof that a sound is audible, is that

people hear it: and so of the other sources of our experience. In like manner, I

apprehend, the sole evidence it is possible to produce that anything is

desirable, is that people do actually desire it. If the end which the utilitarian

doctrine proposes to itself were not, in theory and in practice, acknowledged

to be an end, nothing could ever convince any person that it was so. No

reason can be given why the general happiness is desirable, except that each

person, so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness.

This, however, being a fact, we have not only all the proof which the case

admits of, but all which it is possible to require, that happiness is a good: that

each person's happiness is a good to that person, and the general happiness,

therefore, a good to the aggregate of all persons. Happiness has made out itstitle as one of the ends of conduct, and consequently one of the criteria of

morality.

              But it has not, by this alone, proved itself to be the sole criterion. To

do that, it would seem, by the same rule, necessary to show, not only that

people desire happiness, but that they never desire anything else. Now it is

palpable that they do desire things which, in common language, are decidedly

distinguished from happiness. They desire, for example, virtue, and the

absence of vice, no less really than pleasure and the absence of pain. The

desire of virtue is not as universal, but it is as authentic a fact, as the desire of

happiness. And hence the opponents of the utilitarian standard deem that they

have a right to infer that there are other ends of human action besides

happiness, and that happiness is not the standard of approbation and

disapprobation.

              But does the utilitarian doctrine deny that people desire virtue, or

maintain that virtue is not a thing to be desired? The very reverse. It

maintains not only that virtue is to be desired, but that it is to be desired

disinterestedly, for itself. Whatever may be the opinion of utilitarian moralists

as to the original conditions by which virtue is made virtue; however they

may believe (as they do) that actions and dispositions are only virtuous

because they promote another end than virtue; yet this being granted, and it

having been decided, from considerations of this description, what is

virtuous, they not only place virtue at the very head of the things which are

good as means to the ultimate end, but they also recognise as a psychological

fact the possibility of its being, to the individual, a good in itself, without

looking to any end beyond it; and hold, that the mind is not in a right state,

not in a state conformable to Utility, not in the state most conducive to the

general happiness, unless it does love virtue in this manner- as a thing

desirable in itself, even although, in the individual instance, it should not

produce those other desirable consequences which it tends to produce, and on

account of which it is held to be virtue. This opinion is not, in the smallest

degree, a departure from the Happiness principle. The ingredients of

happiness are very various, and each of them is desirable in itself, and not

merely when considered as swelling an aggregate. The principle of utility

does not mean that any given pleasure, as music, for instance, or any given

exemption from pain, as for example health, is to be looked upon as means to

a collective something termed happiness, and to be desired on that account.They are desired and desirable in and for themselves; besides being means,

they are a part of the end. Virtue, according to the utilitarian doctrine, is not

naturally and originally part of the end, but it is capable of becoming so; and

in those who love it disinterestedly it has become so, and is desired and

cherished, not as a means to happiness, but as a part of their happiness.

              To illustrate this farther, we may remember that virtue is not the only

thing, originally a means, and which if it were not a means to anything else,

would be and remain indifferent, but which by association with what it is a

means to, comes to be desired for itself, and that too with the utmost

intensity. What, for example, shall we say of the love of money? There is

nothing originally more desirable about money than about any heap of

glittering pebbles. Its worth is solely that of the things which it will buy; the

desires for other things than itself, which it is a means of gratifying. Yet the

love of money is not only one of the strongest moving forces of human life,

but money is, in many cases, desired in and for itself; the desire to possess it

is often stronger than the desire to use it, and goes on increasing when all the

desires which point to ends beyond it, to be compassed by it, are falling off. It

may, then, be said truly, that money is desired not for the sake of an end, but

as part of the end. From being a means to happiness, it has come to be itself a

principal ingredient of the individual's conception of happiness. The same

may be said of the majority of the great objects of human life- power, for

example, or fame; except that to each of these there is a certain amount of

immediate pleasure annexed, which has at least the semblance of being

naturally inherent in them; a thing which cannot be said of money. Still,

however, the strongest natural attraction, both of power and of fame, is the

immense aid they give to the attainment of our other wishes; and it is the

strong association thus generated between them and all our objects of desire,

which gives to the direct desire of them the intensity it often assumes, so as in

some characters to surpass in strength all other desires. In these cases the

means have become a part of the end, and a more important part of it than

any of the things which they are means to. What was once desired as an

instrument for the attainment of happiness, has come to be desired for its own

sake. In being desired for its own sake it is, however, desired as part of

happiness. The person is made, or thinks he would be made, happy by its

mere possession; and is made unhappy by failure to obtain it. The desire of it

is not a different thing from the desire of happiness, any more than the love

of music, or the desire of health. They are included in happiness. They aresome of the elements of which the desire of happiness is made up. Happiness

is not an abstract idea, but a concrete whole; and these are some of its parts.

And the utilitarian standard sanctions and approves their being so. Life would

be a poor thing, very ill provided with sources of happiness, if there were not

this provision of nature, by which things originally indifferent, but conducive

to, or otherwise associated with, the satisfaction of our primitive desires,

become in themselves sources of pleasure more valuable than the primitive

pleasures, both in permanency, in the space of human existence that they are

capable of covering, and even in intensity.

              Virtue, according to the utilitarian conception, is a good of this

description. There was no original desire of it, or motive to it, save its

conduciveness to pleasure, and especially to protection from pain. But

through the association thus formed, it may be felt a good in itself, and

desired as such with as great intensity as any other good; and with this

difference between it and the love of money, of power, or of fame, that all of

these may, and often do, render the individual noxious to the other members

of the society to which he belongs, whereas there is nothing which makes

him so much a blessing to them as the cultivation of the disinterested love of

virtue. And consequently, the utilitarian standard, while it tolerates and

approves those other acquired desires, up to the point beyond which they

would be more injurious to the general happiness than promotive of it,

enjoins and requires the cultivation of the love of virtue up to the greatest

strength possible, as being above all things important to the general

happiness.

              It results from the preceding considerations, that there is in reality

nothing desired except happiness. Whatever is desired otherwise than as a

means to some end beyond itself, and ultimately to happiness, is desired as

itself a part of happiness, and is not desired for itself until it has become so.

Those who desire virtue for its own sake, desire it either because the

consciousness of it is a pleasure, or because the consciousness of being

without it is a pain, or for both reasons united; as in truth the pleasure and

pain seldom exist separately, but almost always together, the same person

feeling pleasure in the degree of virtue attained, and pain in not having

attained more. If one of these gave him no pleasure, and the other no pain, he

would not love or desire virtue, or would desire it only for the other benefits

which it might produce to himself or to persons whom he cared for.              We have now, then, an answer to the question, of what sort of proof

the principle of utility is susceptible. If the opinion which I have now stated is

psychologically true- if human nature is so constituted as to desire nothing

which is not either a part of happiness or a means of happiness, we can have

no other proof, and we require no other, that these are the only things

desirable. If so, happiness is the sole end of human action, and the promotion

of it the test by which to judge of all human conduct; from whence it

necessarily follows that it must be the criterion of morality, since a part is

included in the whole.

              And now to decide whether this is really so; whether mankind do

desire nothing for itself but that which is a pleasure to them, or of which the

absence is a pain; we have evidently arrived at a question of fact and

experience, dependent, like all similar questions, upon evidence. It can only

be determined by practised self-consciousness and self-observation, assisted

by observation of others. I believe that these sources of evidence, impartially

consulted, will declare that desiring a thing and finding it pleasant, aversion

to it and thinking of it as painful, are phenomena entirely inseparable, or

rather two parts of the same phenomenon; in strictness of language, two

different modes of naming the same psychological fact: that to think of an

object as desirable (unless for the sake of its consequences), and to think of it

as pleasant, are one and the same thing; and that to desire anything, except in

proportion as the idea of it is pleasant, is a physical and metaphysical

impossibility.

              So obvious does this appear to me, that I expect it will hardly be

disputed: and the objection made will be, not that desire can possibly be

directed to anything ultimately except pleasure and exemption from pain, but

that the will is a different thing from desire; that a person of confirmed virtue,

or any other person whose purposes are fixed, carries out his purposes

without any thought of the pleasure he has in contemplating them, or expects

to derive from their fulfilment; and persists in acting on them, even though

these pleasures are much diminished, by changes in his character or decay of

his passive sensibilities, or are outweighed by the pains which the pursuit of

the purposes may bring upon him. All this I fully admit, and have stated it

elsewhere, as positively and emphatically as any one. Will, the active

phenomenon, is a different thing from desire, the state of passive sensibility,

and though originally an offshoot from it, may in time take root and detachitself from the parent stock; so much so, that in the case of an habitual

purpose, instead of willing the thing because we desire it, we often desire it

only because we will it. This, however, is but an instance of that familiar fact,

the power of habit, and is nowise confined to the case of virtuous actions.

Many indifferent things, which men originally did from a motive of some

sort, they continue to do from habit. Sometimes this is done unconsciously,

the consciousness coming only after the action: at other times with conscious

volition, but volition which has become habitual, and is put in operation by

the force of habit, in opposition perhaps to the deliberate preference, as often

happens with those who have contracted habits of vicious or hurtful

indulgence.

              Third and last comes the case in which the habitual act of will in the

individual instance is not in contradiction to the general intention prevailing

at other times, but in fulfilment of it; as in the case of the person of confirmed

virtue, and of all who pursue deliberately and consistently any determinate

end. The distinction between will and desire thus understood is an authentic

and highly important psychological fact; but the fact consists solely in this-

that will, like all other parts of our constitution, is amenable to habit, and that

we may will from habit what we no longer desire for itself or desire only

because we will it. It is not the less true that will, in the beginning, is entirely

produced by desire; including in that term the repelling influence of pain as

well as the attractive one of pleasure. Let us take into consideration, no

longer the person who has a confirmed will to do right, but him in whom that

virtuous will is still feeble, conquerable by temptation, and not to be fully

relied on; by what means can it be strengthened? How can the will to be

virtuous, where it does not exist in sufficient force, be implanted or

awakened? Only by making the person desire virtue- by making him think of

it in a pleasurable light, or of its absence in a painful one. It is by associating

the doing right with pleasure, or the doing wrong with pain, or by eliciting

and impressing and bringing home to the person's experience the pleasure

naturally involved in the one or the pain in the other, that it is possible to call

forth that will to be virtuous, which, when confirmed, acts without any

thought of either pleasure or pain. Will is the child of desire, and passes out

of the dominion of its parent only to come under that of habit. That which is

the result of habit affords no presumption of being intrinsically good; and

there would be no reason for wishing that the purpose of virtue should

become independent of pleasure and pain, were it not that the influence of thepleasurable and painful associations which prompt to virtue is not sufficiently

to be depended on for unerring constancy of action until it has acquired the

support of habit. Both in feeling and in conduct, habit is the only thing which

imparts certainty; and it is because of the importance to others of being able

to rely absolutely on one's feelings and conduct, and to oneself of being able

to rely on one's own, that the will to do right ought to be cultivated into this

habitual independence. In other words, this state of the will is a means to

good, not intrinsically a good; and does not contradict the doctrine that

nothing is a good to human beings but in so far as it is either itself

pleasurable, or a means of attaining pleasure or averting pain.

              But if this doctrine be true, the principle of utility is proved. Whether

it is so or not, must now be left to the consideration of the thoughtful reader.

 

 

                                       Chapter 5

 

 

              On the Connection between Justice and Utility.

 

 

              IN ALL ages of speculation, one of the strongest obstacles to the

reception of the doctrine that Utility or Happiness is the criterion of right and

wrong, has been drawn from the idea of justice. The powerful sentiment, and

apparently clear perception, which that word recalls with a rapidity and

certainty resembling an instinct, have seemed to the majority of thinkers to

point to an inherent quality in things; to show that the just must have an

existence in Nature as something absolute, generically distinct from every

variety of the Expedient, and, in idea, opposed to it, though (as is commonly

acknowledged) never, in the long run, disjoined from it in fact.

              In the case of this, as of our other moral sentiments, there is no

necessary connection between the question of its origin, and that of its

binding force. That a feeling is bestowed on us by Nature, does not

necessarily legitimate all its promptings. The feeling of justice might be a

peculiar instinct, and might yet require, like our other instincts, to be

controlled and enlightened by a higher reason. If we have intellectual

instincts, leading us to judge in a particular way, as well as animal instincts

that prompt us to act in a particular way, there is no necessity that the former

should be more infallible in their sphere than the latter in theirs: it may as

well happen that wrong judgments are occasionally suggested by those, as

wrong actions by these. But though it is one thing to believe that we have

natural feelings of justice, and another to acknowledge them as an ultimate

criterion of conduct, these two opinions are very closely connected in point of

fact. Mankind are always predisposed to believe that any subjective feeling,

not otherwise accounted for, is a revelation of some objective reality. Our

present object is to determine whether the reality, to which the feeling of

justice corresponds, is one which needs any such special revelation; whether

the justice or injustice of an action is a thing intrinsically peculiar, and

distinct from all its other qualities, or only a combination of certain of thosequalities, presented under a peculiar aspect. For the purpose of this inquiry it

is practically important to consider whether the feeling itself, of justice and

injustice, is sui generis like our sensations of colour and taste, or a derivative

feeling, formed by a combination of others. And this it is the more essential

to examine, as people are in general willing enough to allow, that objectively

the dictates of justice coincide with a part of the field of General Expediency;

but inasmuch as the subjective mental feeling of justice is different from that

which commonly attaches to simple expediency, and, except in the extreme

cases of the latter, is far more imperative in its demands, people find it

difficult to see, in justice, only a particular kind or branch of general utility,

and think that its superior binding force requires a totally different origin.

              To throw light upon this question, it is necessary to attempt to

ascertain what is the distinguishing character of justice, or of injustice: what

is the quality, or whether there is any quality, attributed in common to all

modes of conduct designated as unjust (for justice, like many other moral

attributes, is best defined by its opposite), and distinguishing them from such

modes of conduct as are disapproved, but without having that particular

epithet of disapprobation applied to them. If in everything which men are

accustomed to characterise as just or unjust, some one common attribute or

collection of attributes is always present, we may judge whether this

particular attribute or combination of attributes would be capable of gathering

round it a sentiment of that peculiar character and intensity by virtue of the

general laws of our emotional constitution, or whether the sentiment is

inexplicable, and requires to be regarded as a special provision of Nature. If

we find the former to be the case, we shall, in resolving this question, have

resolved also the main problem: if the latter, we shall have to seek for some

other mode of investigating it.

              To find the common attributes of a variety of objects, it is necessary

to begin by surveying the objects themselves in the concrete. Let us therefore

advert successively to the various modes of action, and arrangements of

human affairs, which are classed, by universal or widely spread opinion, as

Just or as Unjust. The things well known to excite the sentiments associated

with those names are of a very multifarious character. I shall pass them

rapidly in review, without studying any particular arrangement.

              In the first place, it is mostly considered unjust to deprive any one of

his personal liberty, his property, or any other thing which belongs to him bylaw. Here, therefore, is one instance of the application of the terms just and

unjust in a perfectly definite sense, namely, that it is just to respect, unjust to

violate, the legal rights of any one. But this judgment admits of several

exceptions, arising from the other forms in which the notions of justice and

injustice present themselves. For example, the person who suffers the

deprivation may (as the phrase is) have forfeited the rights which he is so

deprived of: a case to which we shall return presently. But also,

              Secondly; the legal rights of which he is deprived, may be rights

which ought not to have belonged to him; in other words, the law which

confers on him these rights, may be a bad law. When it is so, or when (which

is the same thing for our purpose) it is supposed to be so, opinions will differ

as to the justice or injustice of infringing it. Some maintain that no law,

however bad, ought to be disobeyed by an individual citizen; that his

opposition to it, if shown at all, should only be shown in endeavouring to get

it altered by competent authority. This opinion (which condemns many of the

most illustrious benefactors of mankind, and would often protect pernicious

institutions against the only weapons which, in the state of things existing at

the time, have any chance of succeeding against them) is defended, by those

who hold it, on grounds of expediency; principally on that of the importance,

to the common interest of mankind, of maintaining inviolate the sentiment of

submission to law. Other persons, again, hold the directly contrary opinion,

that any law, judged to be bad, may blamelessly be disobeyed, even though it

be not judged to be unjust, but only inexpedient; while others would confine

the licence of disobedience to the case of unjust laws: but again, some say,

that all laws which are inexpedient are unjust; since every law imposes some

restriction on the natural liberty of mankind, which restriction is an injustice,

unless legitimated by tending to their good. Among these diversities of

opinion, it seems to be universally admitted that there may be unjust laws,

and that law, consequently, is not the ultimate criterion of justice, but may

give to one person a benefit, or impose on another an evil, which justice

condemns. When, however, a law is thought to be unjust, it seems always to

be regarded as being so in the same way in which a breach of law is unjust,

namely, by infringing somebody's right; which, as it cannot in this case be a

legal right, receives a different appellation, and is called a moral right. We

may say, therefore, that a second case of injustice consists in taking or

withholding from any person that to which he has a moral right.              Thirdly, it is universally considered just that each person should

obtain that (whether good or evil) which he deserves; and unjust that he

should obtain a good, or be made to undergo an evil, which he does not

deserve. This is, perhaps, the clearest and most emphatic form in which the

idea of justice is conceived by the general mind. As it involves the notion of

desert, the question arises, what constitutes desert? Speaking in a general

way, a person is understood to deserve good if he does right, evil if he does

wrong; and in a more particular sense, to deserve good from those to whom

he does or has done good, and evil from those to whom he does or has done

evil. The precept of returning good for evil has never been regarded as a case

of the fulfilment of justice, but as one in which the claims of justice are

waived, in obedience to other considerations.

              Fourthly, it is confessedly unjust to break faith with any one: to

violate an engagement, either express or implied, or disappoint expectations

raised by our conduct, at least if we have raised those expectations knowingly

and voluntarily. Like the other obligations of justice already spoken of, this

one is not regarded as absolute, but as capable of being overruled by a

stronger obligation of justice on the other side; or by such conduct on the part

of the person concerned as is deemed to absolve us from our obligation to

him, and to constitute a forfeiture of the benefit which he has been led to

expect.

              Fifthly, it is, by universal admission, inconsistent with justice to be

partial; to show favour or preference to one person over another, in matters to

which favour and preference do not properly apply. Impartiality, however,

does not seem to be regarded as a duty in itself, but rather as instrumental to

some other duty; for it is admitted that favour and preference are not always

censurable, and indeed the cases in which they are condemned are rather the

exception than the rule. A person would be more likely to be blamed than

applauded for giving his family or friends no superiority in good offices over

strangers, when he could do so without violating any other duty; and no one

thinks it unjust to seek one person in preference to another as a friend,

connection, or companion. Impartiality where rights are concerned is of

course obligatory, but this is involved in the more general obligation of

giving to every one his right. A tribunal, for example, must be impartial,

because it is bound to award, without regard to any other consideration, a

disputed object to the one of two parties who has the right to it. There areother cases in which impartiality means, being solely influenced by desert; as

with those who, in the capacity of judges, preceptors, or parents, administer

reward and punishment as such. There are cases, again, in which it means,

being solely influenced by consideration for the public interest; as in making

a selection among candidates for a government employment. Impartiality, in

short, as an obligation of justice, may be said to mean, being exclusively

influenced by the considerations which it is supposed ought to influence the

particular case in hand; and resisting the solicitation of any motives which

prompt to conduct different from what those considerations would dictate.

              Nearly allied to the idea of impartiality is that of equality; which

often enters as a component part both into the conception of justice and into

the practice of it, and, in the eyes of many persons, constitutes its essence.

But in this, still more than in any other case, the notion of justice varies in

different persons, and always conforms in its variations to their notion of

utility. Each person maintains that equality is the dictate of justice, except

where he thinks that expediency requires inequality. The justice of giving

equal protection to the rights of all, is maintained by those who support the

most outrageous inequality in the rights themselves. Even in slave countries it

is theoretically admitted that the rights of the slave, such as they are, ought to

be as sacred as those of the master; and that a tribunal which fails to enforce

them with equal strictness is wanting in justice; while, at the same time,

institutions which leave to the slave scarcely any rights to enforce, are not

deemed unjust, because they are not deemed inexpedient. Those who think

that utility requires distinctions of rank, do not consider it unjust that riches

and social privileges should be unequally dispensed; but those who think this

inequality inexpedient, think it unjust also. Whoever thinks that government

is necessary, sees no injustice in as much inequality as is constituted by

giving to the magistrate powers not granted to other people. Even among

those who hold levelling doctrines, there are as many questions of justice as

there are differences of opinion about expediency. Some Communists

consider it unjust that the produce of the labour of the community should be

shared on any other principle than that of exact equality; others think it just

that those should receive most whose wants are greatest; while others hold

that those who work harder, or who produce more, or whose services are

more valuable to the community, may justly claim a larger quota in the

division of the produce. And the sense of natural justice may be plausibly

appealed to in behalf of every one of these opinions.              Among so many diverse applications of the term justice, which yet is

not regarded as ambiguous, it is a matter of some difficulty to seize the

mental link which holds them together, and on which the moral sentiment

adhering to the term essentially depends. Perhaps, in this embarrassment,

some help may be derived from the history of the word, as indicated by its

etymology.

              In most, if not in all, languages, the etymology of the word which

corresponds to Just, points distinctly to an origin connected with the

ordinances of law. Justum is a form of jussum, that which has been ordered.

Dikaion comes directly from dike, a suit at law. Recht, from which came

right and righteous, is synonymous with law. The courts of justice, the

administration of justice, are the courts and the administration of law. La

justice, in French, is the established term for judicature. I am not committing

the fallacy imputed with some show of truth to Horne Tooke, of assuming

that a word must still continue to mean what it originally meant. Etymology

is slight evidence of what the idea now signified is, but the very best evidence

of how it sprang up. There can, I think, be no doubt that the idee mere, the

primitive element, in the formation of the notion of justice, was conformity to

law. It constituted the entire idea among the Hebrews, up to the birth of

Christianity; as might be expected in the case of a people whose laws

attempted to embrace all subjects on which precepts were required, and who

believed those laws to be a direct emanation from the Supreme Being. But

other nations, and in particular the Greeks and Romans, who knew that their

laws had been made originally, and still continued to be made, by men, were

not afraid to admit that those men might make bad laws; might do, by law,

the same things, and from the same motives, which if done by individuals

without the sanction of law, would be called unjust. And hence the sentiment

of injustice came to be attached, not to all violations of law, but only to

violations of such laws as ought to exist, including such as ought to exist, but

do not; and to laws themselves, if supposed to be contrary to what ought to be

law. In this manner the idea of law and of its injunctions was still

predominant in the notion of justice, even when the laws actually in force

ceased to be accepted as the standard of it.

              It is true that mankind consider the idea of justice and its obligations

as applicable to many things which neither are, nor is it desired that they

should be, regulated by law. Nobody desires that laws should interfere withthe whole detail of private life; yet every one allows that in all daily conduct

a person may and does show himself to be either just or unjust. But even

here, the idea of the breach of what ought to be law, still lingers in a modified

shape. It would always give us pleasure, and chime in with our feelings of

fitness, that acts which we deem unjust should be punished, though we do not

always think it expedient that this should be done by the tribunals. We forego

that gratification on account of incidental inconveniences. We should be glad

to see just conduct enforced and injustice repressed, even in the minutest

details, if we were not, with reason, afraid of trusting the magistrate with so

unlimited an amount of power over individuals. When we think that a person

is bound in justice to do a thing, it is an ordinary form of language to say, that

he ought to be compelled to do it. We should be gratified to see the obligation

enforced by anybody who had the power. If we see that its enforcement by

law would be inexpedient, we lament the impossibility, we consider the

impunity given to injustice as an evil, and strive to make amends for it by

bringing a strong expression of our own and the public disapprobation to bear

upon the offender. Thus the idea of legal constraint is still the generating idea

of the notion of justice, though undergoing several transformations before

that notion, as it exists in an advanced state of society, becomes complete.

              The above is, I think, a true account, as far as it goes, of the origin

and progressive growth of the idea of justice. But we must observe, that it

contains, as yet, nothing to distinguish that obligation from moral obligation

in general. For the truth is, that the idea of penal sanction, which is the

essence of law, enters not only into the conception of injustice, but into that

of any kind of wrong. We do not call anything wrong, unless we mean to

imply that a person ought to be punished in some way or other for doing it; if

not by law, by the opinion of his fellow-creatures; if not by opinion, by the

reproaches of his own conscience. This seems the real turning point of the

distinction between morality and simple expediency. It is a part of the notion

of Duty in every one of its forms, that a person may rightfully be compelled

to fulfil it. Duty is a thing which may be exacted from a person, as one exacts

a debt. Unless we think that it may be exacted from him, we do not call it his

duty. Reasons of prudence, or the interest of other people, may militate

against actually exacting it; but the person himself, it is clearly understood,

would not be entitled to complain. There are other things, on the contrary,

which we wish that people should do, which we like or admire them for

doing, perhaps dislike or despise them for not doing, but yet admit that theyare not bound to do; it is not a case of moral obligation; we do not blame

them, that is, we do not think that they are proper objects of punishment.

How we come by these ideas of deserving and not deserving punishment, will

appear, perhaps, in the sequel; but I think there is no doubt that this

distinction lies at the bottom of the notions of right and wrong; that we call

any conduct wrong, or employ, instead, some other term of dislike or

disparagement, according as we think that the person ought, or ought not, to

be punished for it; and we say, it would be right, to do so and so, or merely

that it would be desirable or laudable, according as we would wish to see the

person whom it concerns, compelled, or only persuaded and exhorted, to act
                *
in that manner.

        *
               See this point enforced and illustrated by Professor Bain, in an

admirable chapter (entitled "The Ethical Emotions, or the Moral Sense"), of

the second of the two treatises composing his elaborate and profound work

on the Mind.

              This, therefore, being the characteristic difference which marks off,

not justice, but morality in general, from the remaining provinces of

Expediency and Worthiness; the character is still to be sought which

distinguishes justice from other branches of morality. Now it is known that

ethical writers divide moral duties into two classes, denoted by the ill-chosen

expressions, duties of perfect and of imperfect obligation; the latter being

those in which, though the act is obligatory, the particular occasions of

performing it are left to our choice, as in the case of charity or beneficence,

which we are indeed bound to practise, but not towards any definite person,

nor at any prescribed time. In the more precise language of philosophic

jurists, duties of perfect obligation are those duties in virtue of which a

correlative right resides in some person or persons; duties of imperfect

obligation are those moral obligations which do not give birth to any right. I

think it will be found that this distinction exactly coincides with that which

exists between justice and the other obligations of morality. In our survey of

the various popular acceptations of justice, the term appeared generally to

involve the idea of a personal right- a claim on the part of one or more

individuals, like that which the law gives when it confers a proprietary or

other legal right. Whether the injustice consists in depriving a person of a

possession, or in breaking faith with him, or in treating him worse than he

deserves, or worse than other people who have no greater claims, in each casethe supposition implies two things- a wrong done, and some assignable

person who is wronged. Injustice may also be done by treating a person better

than others; but the wrong in this case is to his competitors, who are also

assignable persons.

              It seems to me that this feature in the case- a right in some person,

correlative to the moral obligation- constitutes the specific difference

between justice, and generosity or beneficence. Justice implies something

which it is not only right to do, and wrong not to do, but which some

individual person can claim from us as his moral right. No one has a moral

right to our generosity or beneficence, because we are not morally bound to

practise those virtues towards any given individual. And it will be found with

respect to this, as to every correct definition, that the instances which seem to

conflict with it are those which most confirm it. For if a moralist attempts, as

some have done, to make out that mankind generally, though not any given

individual, have a right to all the good we can do them, he at once, by that

thesis, includes generosity and beneficence within the category of justice. He

is obliged to say, that our utmost exertions are due to our fellow creatures,

thus assimilating them to a debt; or that nothing less can be a sufficient return

for what society does for us, thus classing the case as one of gratitute; both of

which are acknowledged cases of justice. Wherever there is right, the case is

one of justice, and not of the virtue of beneficence: and whoever does not

place the distinction between justice and morality in general, where we have

now placed it, will be found to make no distinction between them at all, but

to merge all morality in justice.

              Having thus endeavoured to determine the distinctive elements

which enter into the composition of the idea of justice, we are ready to enter

on the inquiry, whether the feeling, which accompanies the idea, is attached

to it by a special dispensation of nature, or whether it could have grown up,

by any known laws, out of the idea itself; and in particular, whether it can

have originated in considerations of general expediency.

              I conceive that the sentiment itself does not arise from anything

which would commonly, or correctly, be termed an idea of expediency; but

that though the sentiment does not, whatever is moral in it does.

              We have seen that the two essential ingredients in the sentiment of

justice are, the desire to punish a person who has done harm, and theknowledge or belief that there is some definite individual or individuals to

whom harm has been done.

              Now it appears to me, that the desire to punish a person who has

done harm to some individual is a spontaneous outgrowth from two

sentiments, both in the highest degree natural, and which either are or

resemble instincts; the impulse of self-defence, and the feeling of sympathy.

              It is natural to resent, and to repel or retaliate, any harm done or

attempted against ourselves, or against those with whom we sympathise. The

origin of this sentiment it is not necessary here to discuss. Whether it be an

instinct or a result of intelligence, it is, we know, common to all animal

nature; for every animal tries to hurt those who have hurt, or who it thinks are

about to hurt, itself or its young. Human beings, on this point, only differ

from other animals in two particulars. First, in being capable of sympathising,

not solely with their offspring, or, like some of the more noble animals, with

some superior animal who is kind to them, but with all human, and even with

all sentient, beings. Secondly, in having a more developed intelligence, which

gives a wider range to the whole of their sentiments, whether self-regarding

or sympathetic. By virtue of his superior intelligence, even apart from his

superior range of sympathy, a human being is capable of apprehending a

community of interest between himself and the human society of which he

forms a part, such that any conduct which threatens the security of the society

generally, is threatening to his own, and calls forth his instinct (if instinct it

be) of self-defence. The same superiority of intelligence joined to the power

of sympathising with human beings generally, enables him to attach himself

to the collective idea of his tribe, his country, or mankind, in such a manner

that any act hurtful to them, raises his instinct of sympathy, and urges him to

resistance.

              The sentiment of justice, in that one of its elements which consists of

the desire to punish, is thus, I conceive, the natural feeling of retaliation or

vengeance, rendered by intellect and sympathy applicable to those injuries,

that is, to those hurts, which wound us through, or in common with, society at

large. This sentiment, in itself, has nothing moral in it; what is moral is, the

exclusive subordination of it to the social sympathies, so as to wait on and

obey their call. For the natural feeling would make us resent indiscriminately

whatever any one does that is disagreeable to us; but when moralised by the

social feeling, it only acts in the directions conformable to the general good:just persons resenting a hurt to society, though not otherwise a hurt to

themselves, and not resenting a hurt to themselves, however painful, unless it

be of the kind which society has a common interest with them in the

repression of.

              It is no objection against this doctrine to say, that when we feel our

sentiment of justice outraged, we are not thinking of society at large, or of

any collective interest, but only of the individual case. It is common enough

certainly, though the reverse of commendable, to feel resentment merely

because we have suffered pain; but a person whose resentment is really a

moral feeling, that is, who considers whether an act is blamable before he

allows himself to resent it- such a person, though he may not say expressly to

himself that he is standing up for the interest of society, certainly does feel

that he is asserting a rule which is for the benefit of others as well as for his

own. If he is not feeling this- if he is regarding the act solely as it affects him

individually- he is not consciously just; he is not concerning himself about

the justice of his actions. This is admitted even by anti-utilitarian moralists.

When Kant (as before remarked) propounds as the fundamental principle of

morals, "So act, that thy rule of conduct might be adopted as a law by all

rational beings," he virtually acknowledges that the interest of mankind

collectively, or at least of mankind indiscriminately, must be in the mind of

the agent when conscientiously deciding on the morality of the act. Otherwise

he uses words without a meaning: for, that a rule even of utter selfishness

could not possibly be adopted by all rational beings- that there is any

insuperable obstacle in the nature of things to its adoption- cannot be even

plausibly maintained. To give any meaning to Kant's principle, the sense put

upon it must be, that we ought to shape our conduct by a rule which all

rational beings might adopt with benefit to their collective interest.

              To recapitulate: the idea of justice supposes two things; a rule of

conduct, and a sentiment which sanctions the rule. The first must be supposed

common to all mankind, and intended for their good. The other (the

sentiment) is a desire that punishment may be suffered by those who infringe

the rule. There is involved, in addition, the conception of some definite

person who suffers by the infringement; whose rights (to use the expression

appropriated to the case) are violated by it. And the sentiment of justice

appears to me to be, the animal desire to repel or retaliate a hurt or damage to

oneself, or to those with whom one sympathises, widened so as to include allpersons, by the human capacity of enlarged sympathy, and the human

conception of intelligent self-interest. From the latter elements, the feeling

derives its morality; from the former, its peculiar impressiveness, and energy

of self-assertion.

              I have, throughout, treated the idea of a right residing in the injured

person, and violated by the injury, not as a separate element in the

composition of the idea and sentiment, but as one of the forms in which the

other two elements clothe themselves. These elements are, a hurt to some

assignable person or persons on the one hand, and a demand for punishment

on the other. An examination of our own minds, I think, will show, that these

two things include all that we mean when we speak of violation of a right.

When we call anything a person's right, we mean that he has a valid claim on

society to protect him in the possession of it, either by the force of law, or by

that of education and opinion. If he has what we consider a sufficient claim,

on whatever account, to have something guaranteed to him by society, we say

that he has a right to it. If we desire to prove that anything does not belong to

him by right, we think this done as soon as it is admitted that society ought

not to take measures for securing it to him, but should leave him to chance, or

to his own exertions. Thus, a person is said to have a right to what he can

earn in fair professional competition; because society ought not to allow any

other person to hinder him from endeavouring to earn in that manner as much

as he can. But he has not a right to three hundred a-year, though he may

happen to be earning it; because society is not called on to provide that he

shall earn that sum. On the contrary, if he owns ten thousand pounds three

per cent stock, he has a right to three hundred a-year; because society has

come under an obligation to provide him with an income of that amount.

              To have a right, then, is, I conceive, to have something which

society ought to defend me in the possession of. If the objector goes on to

ask, why it ought? I can give him no other reason than general utility. If that

expression does not seem to convey a sufficient feeling of the strength of the

obligation, nor to account for the peculiar energy of the feeling, it is because

there goes to the composition of the sentiment, not a rational only, but also an

animal element, the thirst for retaliation; and this thirst derives its intensity, as

well as its moral justification, from the extraordinarily important and

impressive kind of utility which is concerned. The interest involved is that of

security, to every one's feelings the most vital of all interests. All otherearthly benefits are needed by one person, not needed by another; and many

of them can, if necessary, be cheerfully foregone, or replaced by something

else; but security no human being can possibly do without on it we depend

for all our immunity from evil, and for the whole value of all and every good,

beyond the passing moment; since nothing but the gratification of the instant

could be of any worth to us, if we could be deprived of anything the next

instant by whoever was momentarily stronger than ourselves. Now this most

indispensable of all necessaries, after physical nutriment, cannot be had,

unless the machinery for providing it is kept unintermittedly in active play.

Our notion, therefore, of the claim we have on our fellow-creatures to join in

making safe for us the very groundwork of our existence, gathers feelings

around it so much more intense than those concerned in any of the more

common cases of utility, that the difference in degree (as is often the case in

psychology) becomes a real difference in kind. The claim assumes that

character of absoluteness, that apparent infinity, and incommensurability with

all other considerations, which constitute the distinction between the feeling

of right and wrong and that of ordinary expediency and inexpediency. The

feelings concerned are so powerful, and we count so positively on finding a

responsive feeling in others (all being alike interested), that ought and should

grow into must, and recognised indispensability becomes a moral necessity,

analogous to physical, and often not inferior to it in binding force exhorted,

              If the preceding analysis, or something resembling it, be not the

correct account of the notion of justice; if justice be totally independent of

utility, and be a standard per se, which the mind can recognise by simple

introspection of itself; it is hard to understand why that internal oracle is so

ambiguous, and why so many things appear either just or unjust, according to

the light in which they are regarded.

              We are continually informed that Utility is an uncertain standard,

which every different person interprets differently, and that there is no safety

but in the immutable, ineffaceable, and unmistakable dictates of justice,

which carry their evidence in themselves, and are independent of the

fluctuations of opinion. One would suppose from this that on questions of

justice there could be no controversy; that if we take that for our rule, its

application to any given case could leave us in as little doubt as a

mathematical demonstration. So far is this from being the fact, that there is as

much difference of opinion, and as much discussion, about what is just, asabout what is useful to society. Not only have different nations and

individuals different notions of justice, but in the mind of one and the same

individual, justice is not some one rule, principle, or maxim, but many, which

do not always coincide in their dictates, and in choosing between which, he is

guided either by some extraneous standard, or by his own personal

predilections.

              For instance, there are some who say, that it is unjust to punish any

one for the sake of example to others; that punishment is just, only when

intended for the good of the sufferer himself. Others maintain the extreme

reverse, contending that to punish persons who have attained years of

discretion, for their own benefit, is despotism and injustice, since if the matter

at issue is solely their own good, no one has a right to control their own

judgment of it; but that they may justly be punished to prevent evil to others,

this being the exercise of the legitimate right of self-defence. Mr. Owen,

again, affirms that it is unjust to punish at all; for the criminal did not make

his own character; his education, and the circumstances which surrounded

him, have made him a criminal, and for these he is not responsible. All these

opinions are extremely plausible; and so long as the question is argued as one

of justice simply, without going down to the principles which lie under

justice and are the source of its authority, I am unable to see how any of these

reasoners can be refuted. For in truth every one of the three builds upon rules

of justice confessedly true. The first appeals to the acknowledged injustice of

singling out an individual, and making a sacrifice, without his consent, for

other people's benefit. The second relies on the acknowledged justice of self-

defence, and the admitted injustice of forcing one person to conform to

another's notions of what constitutes his good. The Owenite invokes the

admitted principle, that it is unjust to punish any one for what he cannot help.

Each is triumphant so long as he is not compelled to take into consideration

any other maxims of justice than the one he has selected; but as soon as their

several maxims are brought face to face, each disputant seems to have exactly

as much to say for himself as the others. No one of them can carry out his

own notion of justice without trampling upon another equally binding.

              These are difficulties; they have always been felt to be such; and

many devices have been invented to turn rather than to overcome them. As a

refuge from the last of the three, men imagined what they called the freedom

of the will; fancying that they could not justify punishing a man whose will isin a thoroughly hateful state, unless it be supposed to have come into that

state through no influence of anterior circumstances. To escape from the

other difficulties, a favourite contrivance has been the fiction of a contract,

whereby at some unknown period all the members of society engaged to obey

the laws, and consented to be punished for any disobedience to them, thereby

giving to their legislators the right, which it is assumed they would not

otherwise have had, of punishing them, either for their own good or for that

of society. This happy thought was considered to get rid of the whole

difficulty, and to legitimate the infliction of punishment, in virtue of another

received maxim of justice, Volenti non fit injuria; that is not unjust which is

done with the consent of the person who is supposed to be hurt by it. I need

hardly remark, that even if the consent were not a mere fiction, this maxim is

not superior in authority to the others which it is brought in to supersede. It is,

on the contrary, an instructive specimen of the loose and irregular manner in

which supposed principles of justice grow up. This particular one evidently

came into use as a help to the coarse exigencies of courts of law, which are

sometimes obliged to be content with very uncertain presumptions, on

account of the greater evils which would often arise from any attempt on their

part to cut finer. But even courts of law are not able to adhere consistently to

the maxim, for they allow voluntary engagements to be set aside on the

ground of fraud, and sometimes on that of mere mistake or misinformation.

              Again, when the legitimacy of inflicting punishment is admitted,

how many conflicting conceptions of justice come to light in discussing the

proper apportionment of punishments to offences. No rule on the subject

recommends itself so strongly to the primitive and spontaneous sentiment of

justice, as the bex talionis, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. Though

this principle of the Jewish and of the Mahometan law has been generally

abandoned in Europe as a practical maxim, there is, I suspect, in most minds,

a secret hankering after it; and when retribution accidentally falls on an

offender in that precise shape, the general feeling of satisfaction evinced

bears witness how natural is the sentiment to which this repayment in kind is

acceptable. With many, the test of justice in penal infliction is that the

punishment should be proportioned to the offence; meaning that it should be

exactly measured by the moral guilt of the culprit (whatever be their standard

for measuring moral guilt): the consideration, what amount of punishment is

necessary to deter from the offence, having nothing to do with the question of

justice, in their estimation: while there are others to whom that considerationis all in all; who maintain that it is not just, at least for man, to inflict on a

fellow creature, whatever may be his offences, any amount of suffering

beyond the least that will suffice to prevent him from repeating, and others

from imitating, his misconduct.

              To take another example from a subject already once referred to. In a

co-operative industrial association, is it just or not that talent or skill should

give a title to superior remuneration? On the negative side of the question it is

argued, that whoever does the best he can, deserves equally well, and ought

not in justice to be put in a position of inferiority for no fault of his own; that

superior abilities have already advantages more than enough, in the

admiration they excite, the personal influence they command, and the internal

sources of satisfaction attending them, without adding to these a superior

share of the world's goods; and that society is bound in justice rather to make

compensation to the less favoured, for this unmerited inequality of

advantages, than to aggravate it. On the contrary side it is contended, that

society receives more from the more efficient labourer; that his services being

more useful, society owes him a larger return for them; that a greater share of

the joint result is actually his work, and not to allow his claim to it is a kind

of robbery; that if he is only to receive as much as others, he can only be

justly required to produce as much, and to give a smaller amount of time and

exertion, proportioned to his superior efficiency. Who shall decide between

these appeals to conflicting principles of justice? justice has in this case two

sides to it, which it is impossible to bring into harmony, and the two

disputants have chosen opposite sides; the one looks to what it is just that the

individual should receive, the other to what it is just that the community

should give. Each, from his own point of view, is unanswerable; and any

choice between them, on grounds of justice, must be perfectly arbitrary.

Social utility alone can decide the preference.

              How many, again, and how irreconcilable, are the standards of

justice to which reference is made in discussing the repartition of taxation.

One opinion is, that payment to the State should be in numerical proportion

to pecuniary means. Others think that justice dictates what they term

graduated taxation; taking a higher percentage from those who have more to

spare. In point of natural justice a strong case might be made for disregarding

means altogether, and taking the same absolute sum (whenever it could be

got) from every one: as the subscribers to a mess, or to a club, all pay thesame sum for the same privileges, whether they can all equally afford it or

not. Since the protection (it might be said) of law and government is afforded

to, and is equally required by all, there is no injustice in making all buy it at

the same price. It is reckoned justice, not injustice, that a dealer should charge

to all customers the same price for the same article, not a price varying

according to their means of payment. This doctrine, as applied to taxation,

finds no advocates, because it conflicts so strongly with man's feelings of

humanity and of social expediency; but the principle of justice which it

invokes is as true and as binding as those which can be appealed to against it.

Accordingly it exerts a tacit influence on the line of defence employed for

other modes of assessing taxation. People feel obliged to argue that the State

does more for the rich than for the poor, as a justification for its taking more

from them: though this is in reality not true, for the rich would be far better

able to protect themselves, in the absence of law or government, than the

poor, and indeed would probably be successful in converting the poor into

their slaves. Others, again, so far defer to the same conception of justice, as to

maintain that all should pay an equal capitation tax for the protection of their

persons (these being of equal value to all), and an unequal tax for the

protection of their property, which is unequal. To this others reply, that the all

of one man is as valuable to him as the all of another. From these confusions

there is no other mode of extrication than the utilitarian.

              Is, then the difference between the just and the Expedient a merely

imaginary distinction? Have mankind been under a delusion in thinking that

justice is a more sacred thing than policy, and that the latter ought only to be

listened to after the former has been satisfied? By no means. The exposition

we have given of the nature and origin of the sentiment, recognises a real

distinction; and no one of those who profess the most sublime contempt for

the consequences of actions as an element in their morality, attaches more

importance to the distinction than I do. While I dispute the pretensions of any

theory which sets up an imaginary standard of justice not grounded on utility,

I account the justice which is grounded on utility to be the chief part, and

incomparably the most sacred and binding part, of all morality. justice is a

name for certain classes of moral rules, which concern the essentials of

human well-being more nearly, and are therefore of more absolute obligation,

than any other rules for the guidance of life; and the notion which we have

found to be of the essence of the idea of justice, that of a right residing in an

individual implies and testifies to this more binding obligation.              The moral rules which forbid mankind to hurt one another (in which

we must never forget to include wrongful interference with each other's

freedom) are more vital to human well-being than any maxims, however

important, which only point out the best mode of managing some department

of human affairs. They have also the peculiarity, that they are the main

element in determining the whole of the social feelings of mankind. It is their

observance which alone preserves peace among human beings: if obedience

to them were not the rule, and disobedience the exception, every one would

see in every one else an enemy, against whom he must be perpetually

guarding himself. What is hardly less important, these are the precepts which

mankind have the strongest and the most direct inducements for impressing

upon one another. By merely giving to each other prudential instruction or

exhortation, they may gain, or think they gain, nothing: in inculcating on each

other the duty of positive beneficence they have an unmistakable interest, but

far less in degree: a person may possibly not need the benefits of others; but

he always needs that they should not do him hurt. Thus the moralities which

protect every individual from being harmed by others, either directly or by

being hindered in his freedom of pursuing his own good, are at once those

which he himself has most at heart, and those which he has the strongest

interest in publishing and enforcing by word and deed. It is by a person's

observance of these that his fitness to exist as one of the fellowship of human

beings is tested and decided; for on that depends his being a nuisance or not

to those with whom he is in contact. Now it is these moralities primarily

which compose the obligations of justice. The most marked cases of injustice,

and those which give the tone to the feeling of repugnance which

characterises the sentiment, are acts of wrongful aggression, or wrongful

exercise of power over some one; the next are those which consist in

wrongfully withholding from him something which is his due; in both cases,

inflicting on him a positive hurt, either in the form of direct suffering, or of

the privation of some good which he had reasonable ground, either of a

physical or of a social kind, for counting upon.

              The same powerful motives which command the observance of these

primary moralities, enjoin the punishment of those who violate them; and as

the impulses of self-defence, of defence of others, and of vengeance, are all

called forth against such persons, retribution, or evil for evil, becomes closely

connected with the sentiment of justice, and is universally included in the

idea. Good for good is also one of the dictates of justice; and this, though itssocial utility is evident, and though it carries with it a natural human feeling,

has not at first sight that obvious connection with hurt or injury, which,

existing in the most elementary cases of just and unjust, is the source of the

characteristic intensity of the sentiment. But the connection, though less

obvious, is not less real. He who accepts benefits, and denies a return of them

when needed, inflicts a real hurt, by disappointing one of the most natural and

reasonable of expectations, and one which he must at least tacitly have

encouraged, otherwise the benefits would seldom have been conferred. The

important rank, among human evils and wrongs, of the disappointment of

expectation, is shown in the fact that it constitutes the principal criminality of

two such highly immoral acts as a breach of friendship and a breach of

promise. Few hurts which human beings can sustain are greater, and none

wound more, than when that on which they habitually and with full assurance

relied, fails them in the hour of need; and few wrongs are greater than this

mere withholding of good; none excite more resentment, either in the person

suffering, or in a sympathising spectator. The principle, therefore, of giving

to each what they deserve, that is, good for good as well as evil for evil, is not

only included within the idea of justice as we have defined it, but is a proper

object of that intensity of sentiment, which places the just, in human

estimation, above the simply Expedient.

              Most of the maxims of justice current in the world, and commonly

appealed to in its transactions, are simply instrumental to carrying into effect

the principles of justice which we have now spoken of. That a person is only

responsible for what he has done voluntarily, or could voluntarily have

avoided; that it is unjust to condemn any person unheard; that the punishment

ought to be proportioned to the offence, and the like, are maxims intended to

prevent the just principle of evil for evil from being perverted to the infliction

of evil without that justification. The greater part of these common maxims

have come into use from the practice of courts of justice, which have been

naturally led to a more complete recognition and elaboration than was likely

to suggest itself to others, of the rules necessary to enable them to fulfil their

double function, of inflicting punishment when due, and of awarding to each

person his right.

              That first of judicial virtues, impartiality, is an obligation of justice,

partly for the reason last mentioned; as being a necessary condition of the

fulfilment of the other obligations of justice. But this is not the only source ofthe exalted rank, among human obligations, of those maxims of equality and

impartiality, which, both in popular estimation and in that of the most

enlightened, are included among the precepts of justice. In one point of view,

they may be considered as corollaries from the principles already laid down.

If it is a duty to do to each according to his deserts, returning good for good

as well as repressing evil by evil, it necessarily follows that we should treat

all equally well (when no higher duty forbids) who have deserved equally

well of us, and that society should treat all equally well who have deserved

equally well of it, that is, who have deserved equally well absolutely. This is

the highest abstract standard of social and distributive justice; towards which

all institutions, and the efforts of all virtuous citizens, should be made in the

utmost possible degree to converge.

              But this great moral duty rests upon a still deeper foundation, being a

direct emanation from the first principle of morals, and not a mere logical

corollary from secondary or derivative doctrines. It is involved in the very

meaning of Utility, or the Greatest Happiness Principle. That principle is a

mere form of words without rational signification, unless one person's

happiness, supposed equal in degree (with the proper allowance made for

kind), is counted for exactly as much as another's. Those conditions being

supplied, Bentham's dictum, "everybody to count for one, nobody for more

than one," might be written under the principle of utility as an explanatory
              *
commentary. The equal claim of everybody to happiness in the estimation of

the moralist and the legislator, involves an equal claim to all the means of

happiness, except in so far as the inevitable conditions of human life, and the

general interest, in which that of every individual is included, set limits to the

maxim; and those limits ought to be strictly construed. As every other maxim

of justice, so this is by no means applied or held applicable universally; on

the contrary, as I have already remarked, it bends to every person's ideas of

social expediency. But in whatever case it is deemed applicable at all, it is

held to be the dictate of justice. All persons are deemed to have a right to

equality of treatment, except when some recognised social expediency

requires the reverse. And hence all social inequalities which have ceased to

be considered expedient, assume the character not of simple inexpediency,

but of injustice, and appear so tyrannical, that people are apt to wonder how

they ever could have. been tolerated; forgetful that they themselves perhaps

tolerate other inequalities under an equally mistaken notion of expediency,

the correction of which would make that which they approve seem quite asmonstrous as what they have at last learnt to condemn. The entire history of

social improvement has been a series of transitions, by which one custom or

institution after another, from being a supposed primary necessity of social

existence, has passed into the rank of a universally stigmatised injustice and

tyranny. So it has been with the distinctions of slaves and freemen, nobles

and serfs, patricians and plebeians; and so it will be, and in part already is,

with the aristocracies of colour, race, and sex.

        *
               This implication, in the first principle of the utilitarian scheme, of

perfect impartiality between persons, is regarded by Mr. Herbert Spencer (in

his Social Statics) as a disproof of the pretensions of utility to be a sufficient

guide to right; since (he says) the principle of utility presupposes the anterior

principle, that everybody has an equal right to happiness. It may be more

correctly described as supposing that equal amounts of happiness are equally

desirable, whether felt by the same or by different persons. This, however, is

not a pre-supposition; not a premise needful to support the principle of utility,

but the very principle itself; for what is the principle of utility, if it be not that

"happiness" and "desirable" are synonymous terms? If there is any anterior

principle implied, it can be no other than this, that the truths of arithmetic are

applicable to the valuation of happiness, as of all other measurable quantities.

              [Mr. Herbert Spencer, in a private communication on the subject of

the preceding Note, objects to being considered an opponent of utilitarianism,

and states that he regards happiness as the ultimate end of morality; but

deems that end only partially attainable by empirical generalisations from the

observed results of conduct, and completely attainable only by deducing,

from the laws of life and the conditions of existence, what kinds of action

necessarily tend to produce happiness, and what kinds to produce

unhappiness. What the exception of the word "necessarily," I have no dissent

to express from this doctrine; and (omitting that word) I am not aware that

any modern advocate of utilitarianism is of a different opinion. Bentham,

certainly, to whom in the Social Statics Mr. Spencer particularly referred, is,

least of all writers, chargeable with unwillingness to deduce the effect of

actions on happiness from the laws of human nature and the universal

conditions of human life. The common charge against him is of relying too

exclusively upon such deductions, and declining altogether to be bound by

the generalisations from specific experience which Mr. Spencer thinks that

utilitarians generally confine themselves to. My own opinion (and, as Icollect, Mr. Spencer's) is, that in ethics, as in all other branches of scientific

study, the consilience of the results of both these processes, each

corroborating and verifying the other, is requisite to give to any general

proposition the kind degree of evidence which constitutes scientific proof.]

              It appears from what has been said, that justice is a name for certain

moral requirements, which, regarded collectively, stand higher in the scale of

social utility, and are therefore of more paramount obligation, than any

others; though particular cases may occur in which some other social duty is

so important, as to overrule any one of the general maxims of justice. Thus,

to save a life, it may not only be allowable, but a duty, to steal, or take by

force, the necessary food or medicine, or to kidnap, and compel to officiate,

the only qualified medical practitioner. In such cases, as we do not call

anything justice which is not a virtue, we usually say, not that justice must

give way to some other moral principle, but that what is just in ordinary cases

is, by reason of that other principle, not just in the particular case. By this

useful accommodation of language, the character of indefeasibility attributed

to justice is kept up, and we are saved from the necessity of maintaining that

there can be laudable injustice.

              The considerations which have now been adduced resolve, I

conceive, the only real difficulty in the utilitarian theory of morals. It has

always been evident that all cases of justice are also cases of expediency: the

difference is in the peculiar sentiment which attaches to the former, as

contradistinguished from the latter. If this characteristic sentiment has been

sufficiently accounted for; if there is no necessity to assume for it any

peculiarity of origin; if it is simply the natural feeling of resentment,

moralised by being made coextensive with the demands of social good; and if

this feeling not only does but ought to exist in all the classes of cases to

which the idea of justice corresponds; that idea no longer presents itself as a

stumbling-block to the utilitarian ethics.

              Justice remains the appropriate name for certain social utilities

which are vastly more important, and therefore more absolute and imperative,

than any others are as a class (though not more so than others may be in

particular cases); and which, therefore, ought to be, as well as naturally are,

guarded by a sentiment not only different in degree, but also in kind;

distinguished from the milder feeling which attaches to the mere idea of

promoting human pleasure or convenience, at once by the more definitenature of its commands, and by the sterner character of its sanctions.

 

 

 

 

                       The Subjection of Women

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4                                      Chapter 1

 

 

              The object of this Essay is to explain as clearly as I am able grounds

of an opinion which I have held from the very earliest period when I had

formed any opinions at all on social political matters, and which, instead of

being weakened or modified, has been constantly growing stronger by the

progress of reflection and the experience of life. That the principle which

regulates the existing social relations between the two sexes — the legal

subordination of one sex to the other — is wrong itself, and now one of the

chief hindrances to human improvement; and that it ought to be replaced by a

principle of perfect equality, admitting no power or privilege on the one side,

nor disability on the other.

              The very words necessary to express the task I have undertaken,

show how arduous it is. But it would be a mistake to suppose that the

difficulty of the case must lie in the insufficiency or obscurity of the grounds

of reason on which my conviction rests. The difficulty is that which exists in

all cases in which there is a mass of feeling to be contended against. So long

as opinion is strongly rooted in the feelings, it gains rather than loses

instability by having a preponderating weight of argument against it. For if it

were accepted as a result of argument, the refutation of the argument might

shake the solidity of the conviction; but when it rests solely on feeling, the

worse it fares in argumentative contest, the more persuaded adherents are that

their feeling must have some deeper ground, which the arguments do not

reach; and while the feeling remains, it is always throwing up fresh

intrenchments of argument to repair any breach made in the old. And there

are so many causes tending to make the feelings connected with this subject

the most intense and most deeply-rooted of those which gather round and

protect old institutions and custom, that we need not wonder to find them as

yet less undermined and loosened than any of the rest by the progress the

great modern spiritual and social transition; nor suppose that the barbarisms

to which men cling longest must be less barbarisms than those which they

earlier shake off.

              In every respect the burthen is hard on those who attack an almost

universal opinion. They must be very fortunate well as unusually capable ifthey obtain a hearing at all. They have more difficulty in obtaining a trial,

than any other litigants have in getting a verdict. If they do extort a hearing,

they are subjected to a set of logical requirements totally different from those

exacted from other people. In all other cases, burthen of proof is supposed to

lie with the affirmative. If a person is charged with a murder, it rests with

those who accuse him to give proof of his guilt, not with himself to prove his

innocence. If there is a difference of opinion about the reality of an alleged

historical event, in which the feelings of men general are not much interested,

as the Siege of Troy example, those who maintain that the event took place

expected to produce their proofs, before those who take the other side can be

required to say anything; and at no time these required to do more than show

that the evidence produced by the others is of no value. Again, in practical

matters, the burthen of proof is supposed to be with those who are against

liberty; who contend for any restriction or prohibition either any limitation of

the general freedom of human action or any disqualification or disparity of

privilege affecting one person or kind of persons, as compared with others.

The a priori presumption is in favour of freedom and impartiality. It is held

that there should be no restraint not required by I general good, and that the

law should be no respecter of persons but should treat all alike, save where

dissimilarity of treatment is required by positive reasons, either of justice or

of policy. But of none of these rules of evidence will the benefit be allowed

to those who maintain the opinion I profess. It is useless me to say that those

who maintain the doctrine that men ha a right to command and women are

under an obligation obey, or that men are fit for government and women

unfit, on the affirmative side of the question, and that they are bound to show

positive evidence for the assertions, or submit to their rejection. It is equally

unavailing for me to say that those who deny to women any freedom or

privilege rightly allow to men, having the double presumption against them

that they are opposing freedom and recommending partiality, must held to the

strictest proof of their case, and unless their success be such as to exclude all

doubt, the judgment ought to against them. These would be thought good

pleas in any common case; but they will not be thought so in this instance.

Before I could hope to make any impression, I should be expected not only to

answer all that has ever been said bye who take the other side of the question,

but to imagine that could be said by them — to find them in reasons, as I as

answer all I find: and besides refuting all arguments for the affirmative, I

shall be called upon for invincible positive arguments to prove a negative.And even if I could do all and leave the opposite party with a host of

unanswered arguments against them, and not a single unrefuted one on side, I

should be thought to have done little; for a cause supported on the one hand

by universal usage, and on the other by so great a preponderance of popular

sentiment, is supposed to have a presumption in its favour, superior to any

conviction which an appeal to reason has power to produce in intellects but

those of a high class.

              I do not mention these difficulties to complain of them; first, use it

would be useless; they are inseparable from having to contend through

people's understandings against the hostility their feelings and practical

tendencies: and truly the understandings of the majority of mankind would

need to be much better cultivated than has ever yet been the case, before they

be asked to place such reliance in their own power of estimating arguments,

as to give up practical principles in which have been born and bred and which

are the basis of much existing order of the world, at the first argumentative

attack which they are not capable of logically resisting. I do not therefore

quarrel with them for having too little faith in argument, but for having too

much faith in custom and the general feeling. It is one of the characteristic

prejudices of the ion of the nineteenth century against the eighteenth, to d to

the unreasoning elements in human nature the infallibility which the

eighteenth century is supposed to have ascribed to the reasoning elements.

For the apotheosis of Reason we have substituted that of Instinct; and we call

thing instinct which we find in ourselves and for which we cannot trace any

rational foundation. This idolatry, infinitely more degrading than the other,

and the most pernicious e false worships of the present day, of all of which it

is the main support, will probably hold its ground until it way before a sound

psychology laying bare the real root of much that is bowed down to as the

intention of Nature and ordinance of God. As regards the present question, I

am going to accept the unfavourable conditions which the prejudice assigns

to me. I consent that established custom, and the general feelings, should be

deemed conclusive against me, unless that custom and feeling from age to

age can be shown to have owed their existence to other causes than their

soundness, and to have derived their power from the worse rather than the

better parts of human nature. I am willing that judgment should go against

me, unless I can show that my judge has been tampered with. The concession

is not so great as it might appear; for to prove this, is by far the easiest

portion of my task.              The generality of a practice is in some cases a strong presumption

that it is, or at all events once was, conducive to laudable ends. This is the

case, when the practice was first adopted, or afterwards kept up, as a means

to such ends, and was grounded on experience of the mode in which they

could be most effectually attained. If the authority of men over women, when

first established, had been the result of a conscientious comparison between

different modes of constituting the government of society; if, after trying

various other modes of social organisation — the government of women over

men, equality between the two, and such mixed and divided modes of

government as might be invented — it had been decided, on the testimony of

experience, that the mode in which women are wholly under the rule of men,

having no share at all in public concerns, and each in private being under the

legal obligation of obedience to the man with whom she has associated her

destiny, was the arrangement most conducive to the happiness and well-being

of both; its general adoption might then be fairly thought to be some evidence

that, at the time when it was adopted, it was the best: though even then the

considerations which recommended it may, like so many other primeval

social facts of the greatest importance, have subsequently, in the course of

ages, ceased to exist. But the state of the case is in every respect the reverse

of this. In the first place, the opinion in favour of the present system, which

entirely subordinates the weaker sex to the stronger, rests upon theory only;

for there never has been trial made of any other: so that experience, in the

sense in which it is vulgarly opposed to theory, cannot be pretended to have

pronounced any verdict. And in the second place, the adoption of this system

of inequality never was the result of deliberation, or forethought, or any

social ideas, or any notion whatever of what conduced to the benefit of

humanity or the good order of society. It arose simply from the fact that from

the very earliest twilight of human society, every woman owing to the value

attached to her by men, combined with her inferiority in muscular strength)

was found in a state of bondage to some man. Laws and systems of polity

always begin by recognising the relations they find already existing between

individuals. They convert what was a mere physical fact into a legal right,

give it the sanction of society, and principally aim at the substitution of

public and organised means of asserting and protecting these rights, instead

of the irregular and lawless conflict of physical strength. Those who had

already been compelled to obedience became in this manner legally bound to

it. Slavery, from be inn a mere affair of force between the master and theslave, became regularised and a matter of compact among the masters, who,

binding themselves to one another for common protection, guaranteed by

their collective strength the private possessions of each, including his slaves.

In early times, the great majority of the male sex were slaves, as well as the

whole of the female. And many ages elapsed, some of them ages of high

cultivation, before any thinker was bold enough to question the rightfulness,

and the absolute social necessity, either of the one slavery or of the other. By

degrees such thinkers did arise; and (the general progress of society assisting)

the slavery of the male sex has, in all the countries of Christian Europe at

least (though, in one of them, only within the last few years) been at length

abolished, and that of the female sex has been gradually changed into a

milder form of dependence. But this dependence, as it exists at present, is not

an original institution, taking a fresh start from considerations of justice and

social expediency — it is the primitive state of slavery lasting on, through

successive mitigations and modifications occasioned by the same causes

which have softened the general manners, and brought all human relations

more under the control of justice and the influence of humanity. It has not

lost the taint of its brutal origin. No presumption in its favour, therefore, can

be drawn from the fact of its existence. The only such presumption which it

could be supposed to have, must be grounded on its having lasted till now,

when so many other things which came down from the same odious source

have been done away with. And this, indeed, is what makes it strange to

ordinary ears, to hear it asserted that the inequality of rights between men and

women has no other source than the law of the strongest.

              That this statement should have the effect of a paradox, is in some

respects creditable to the progress of civilisation, and the improvement of the

moral sentiments of mankind. We now live — that is to say, one or two of the

most advanced nations of the world now live — in a state in which the law of

the strongest seems to be entirely abandoned as the regulating principle of the

world's affairs: nobody professes it, and, as regards most of the relations

between human beings, nobody is permitted to practise it. When anyone

succeeds in doing so, it is under cover of some pretext which gives him the

semblance of having some general social interest on his side. This being the

ostensible state of things, people flatter themselves that the rule of mere force

is ended; that the law of the strongest cannot be the reason of existence of

anything which has remained in full operation down to the present time.

However any of our present institutions may have begun, it can only, theythink, have been preserved to this period of advanced civilisation by a well-

grounded feeling of its adaptation to human nature, and conduciveness to the

general good. They do not understand the great vitality and durability of

institutions which place right on the side of might; how intensely they are

clung to; how the good as well as the bad propensities and sentiments of

those who have power in their hands, become identified with retaining it;

how slowly these bad institutions give way, one at a time, the weakest first.

beginning with those which are least interwoven with the daily habits of life;

and how very rarely those who have obtained legal power because they first

had physical, have ever lost their hold of it until the physical power had

passed over to the other side. Such shifting of the physical force not having

taken place in the case of women; this fact, combined with all the peculiar

and characteristic features of the particular case, made it certain from the first

that this branch of the system of right founded on might, though softened in

its most atrocious features at an earlier period than several of the others,

would be the very last to disappear. It was inevitable that this one case of a

social relation grounded on force, would survive through generations of

institutions grounded on equal justice, an almost solitary exception to the

general character of their laws and customs; but which, so long as it does not

proclaim its own origin, and as discussion has not brought out its true

character, is not felt to jar with modern civilisation, any more than domestic

slavery among the Greeks jarred with their notion of themselves as a free

people.

              The truth is, that people of the present and the last two or three

generations have lost all practical sense of the primitive condition of

humanity; and only the few who have studied history accurately, or have

much frequented the parts of the world occupied by the living representatives

of ages long past, are able to form any mental picture of what society then

was. People are not aware how entirely, informer ages, the law of superior

strength was the rule of life; how publicly and openly it was avowed, I do not

say cynically or shamelessly — for these words imply a feeling that there was

something in it to be ashamed of, and no such notion could find a place in the

faculties of any person in those ages, except a philosopher or a saint. History

gives a cruel experience of human nature, in showing how exactly the regard

due to the life, possessions, and entire earthly happiness of any class of

persons, was measured by what they had the power of enforcing; how all who

made any resistance to authorities that had arms in their hands, howeverdreadful might be the provocation, had not only the law of force but all other

laws, and all the notions of social obligation against them; and in the eyes of

those whom they resisted, were not only guilty of crime, but of the worst of

all crimes, deserving the most cruel chastisement which human beings could

inflict. The first small vestige of a feeling of obligation in a superior to

acknowledge any right in inferiors, began when he had been induced, for

convenience, to make some promise to them. Though these promises, even

when sanctioned by the most solemn oaths, were for many ages revoked or

violated on the most trifling provocation or temptation, it is probably that

this, except by persons of still worse than the average morality, was seldom

done without some twinges of conscience. The ancient republics, being

mostly grounded from the first upon some kind of mutual compact, or at any

rate formed by an union of persons not very unequal in strength, afforded, in

consequence, the first instance of a portion of human relations fenced round,

and placed under the dominion of another law than that of force. And though

the original law of force remained in full operation between them and their

slaves, and also (except so far as limited by express compact) between a

commonwealth and its subjects, or other independent commonwealths; the

banishment of that primitive law even from so narrow a field, commenced the

regeneration of human nature, by giving birth to sentiments of which

experience soon demonstrated the immense value even for material interests,

and which thence forward only required to be enlarged, not created. Though

slaves were no part of the commonwealth, it was in the free states that slaves

were first felt to have rights as human beings. The Stoics were, I believe, the

first (except so far as the Jewish law constitutes an exception) who taught as

a part of morality that men were bound by moral obligations to their slaves.

No one, after Christianity became ascendant, could ever again have been a

stranger to this belief, in theory; nor, after the rise of the Catholic Church,

was it ever without persons to stand up for it. Yet to enforce it was the most

arduous task which Christianity ever had to perform. For more than a

thousand years the Church kept up the contest, with hardly any perceptible

success. It was not for want of power over men's minds. Its power was

prodigious. It could make kings and nobles resign their most valued

possessions to enrich the Church. It could make thousands in the prime of life

and the height of worldly advantages, shut themselves up in convents to work

out their salvation by poverty, fasting, and prayer. It could send hundreds of

thousands across land and sea, Europe and Asia, to give their lives for thedeliverance of the Holy Sepulchre. It could make kings relinquish wives who

were the object of their passionate attachment, because the Church declared

that they were within the seventh (by our calculation the fourteenth) degree of

relationship. All this it did; but it could not make men fight less with one

another, nor tyrannise less cruelly over the serfs, and when they were able,

over burgesses. It could not make them renounce either of the applications of

force; force militant, or force triumphant. This they could never be induced to

do until they were themselves in their turn compelled by superior force. Only

by the growing power of kings was an end put to fighting except between

kings, or competitors for kingship; only by the growth of a wealthy and

warlike bourgeoisie in the fortified towns, and of a plebeian infantry which

proved more powerful in the field than the undisciplined chivalry, was the

insolent tyranny of the nobles over the bourgeoisie and peasantry brought

within some bounds. It was persisted in not only until, but long after, the

oppressed had obtained a power enabling them often to take conspicuous

vengeance; and on the Continent much of it continued to the time of the

French Revolution, though in England the earlier and better organisation of

the democratic classes put an end to it sooner, by establishing equal laws and

free national institutions.

              If people are mostly so little aware how completely, during the

greater part of the duration of our species, the law of force was the avowed

rule of general conduct, any other being only a special and exceptional

consequence of peculiar ties — and from how very recent a date it is that the

affairs of society in general have been even pretended to be regulated

according to any moral law; as little do people remember or consider, how

institutions and customs which never had any ground but the law of force,

last on into ages and states of general opinion which never would have

permitted their first establishment. Less than forty years ago, Englishmen

might still by law hold human beings in bondage as saleable property: within

the present century they might kidnap them and carry them off, and work

them literally to death. This absolutely extreme case of the law of force,

condemned by those who can tolerate almost every other form of arbitrary

power, and which, of all others presents features the most revolting to the

feelings of all who look at it from an impartial position, was the law of

civilised and Christian England within the memory of persons now living:

and in one half of Anglo-Saxon America three or four years ago, not only did

slavery exist, but the slave-trade, and the breeding of slaves expressly for it,was a general practice between slave states. Yet not only was there a greater

strength of sentiment against it, but, in England at least, a less amount either

of feeling or of interest in favour of it, than of any other of the customary

abuses of force: for its motive was the love of gain, unmixed and

undisguised; and those who profited by it were a very small numerical

fraction of the country, while the natural feeling of all who were not

personally interested in it, was unmitigated abhorrence. So extreme an

instance makes it almost superfluous to refer to any other: but consider the

long duration of absolute monarchy. In England at present it is the almost

universal conviction that military despotism is a case of the law of force,

having no other origin or justification. Yet in all the great nations of Europe

except England it either still exists, or has only just ceased to exist, and has

even now a strong party favourable to it in all ranks of the people, especially

among persons of station and consequence. Such is the power of an

established system, even when far from universal; when not only in almost

every period of history there have been great and well-known examples of

the contrary system, but these have almost invariably been afforded by the

most illustrious and most prosperous communities. In this case, too, the

possessor of the undue power, the person directly interested in it, is only one

person, while those who are subject to it and suffer from it are literally all the

rest. The yoke is naturally and necessarily humiliating to all persons, except

the one who is on the throne, together with, at most, the one who expects to

succeed to it. How different are these cases from that of the power of men

over women! I am not now prejudging the question-of its justifiableness. I am

showing how vastly more permanent it could not but be, even if not

justifiable, than these other dominations which have nevertheless lasted down

to our own time. Whatever gratification of pride there is in the possession of

power, and whatever personal interest in its exercise, is in this case not

confined to a limited class, but common to the whole male sex. Instead of

being, to most of its supporters) a thing desirable chiefly in the abstract, or,

like the political ends usually contended for by factions, of little private

importance to any but the leaders; it comes home to the person and hearth of

every male head of a family, and of everyone who looks forward to being so.

The clodhopper exercises, oris to exercise, his share of the power equally

with the highest nobleman. And the case is that in which the desire of power

is the strongest: for everyone who desires power, desires it most over those

who are nearest to him, with whom his life is passed, with whom he has mostconcerns in common and in whom any independence of his authority is

oftenest likely to interfere with his individual preferences. If, in the other

cases specified, powers manifestly grounded only on force, and having so

much less to support them, are so slowly and with so much difficulty got rid

of, much more must it be so with this, even if it rests on no better foundation

than those. We must consider, too, that the possessors of the power have

facilities in this case, greater than in any other, to prevent any uprising

against it. Every one of the subjects lives under the very eye, and almost, it

may be said, in the hands, of one of the masters in closer intimacy with him

than with any of her fellow-subjects; with no means of combining against

him, no power of even locally over mastering him, and, on the other hand,

with the strongest motives for seeking his favour and avoiding to give him

offence. In struggles for political emancipation, everybody knows how often

its champions are bought off by bribes, or daunted by terrors. In the case of

women, each individual of the subject-class is in a chronic state of bribery

and intimidation combined. In setting up the standard of resistance, a large

number of the leaders, and still more of the followers, must make an almost

complete sacrifice of the pleasures or the alleviations of their own individual

lot. If ever any system of privilege and enforced subjection had its yoke

tightly riveted on the those who are kept down by it, this has. I have not yet

shown that it is a wrong system: but everyone who is capable of thinking on

the subject must see that even if it is, it was certain to outlast all other forms

of unjust authority. And when some of the grossest of the other forms still

exist in many civilised countries, and have only recently been got rid of in

others, it would be strange if that which is so much the deepest rooted had yet

been perceptibly shaken anywhere. There is more reason to wonder that the

protests and testimonies against it should have been so numerous and so

weighty as they are.

              Some will object, that a comparison cannot fairly be made between

the government of the male sex and the forms of unjust power which I have

adduced in illustration of it, since these are arbitrary, and the effect of mere

usurpation, while it on the contrary is natural. But was there ever any

domination which did not appear natural to those who possessed it? There

was a time when the division of mankind into two classes, a small one of

masters and a numerous one of slaves, appeared, even to the most cultivated

minds, to be natural, and the only natural, condition of the human race. No

less an intellect, and one which contributed no less to the progress of humanthought, than Aristotle, held this opinion without doubt or misgiving; and

rested it on the same premises on which the same assertion in regard to the

dominion of men over women is usually based, namely that there are

different natures among mankind, free natures, and slave natures; that the

Greeks were of a free nature, the barbarian races of Thracians and Asiatics of

a slave nature. But why need I go back to Aristotle? Did not the slave-owners

of the Southern United States maintain the same doctrine, with all the

fanaticism with which men ding to the theories that justify their passions and

legitimate their personal interests? Did they not call heaven and earth to

witness that the dominion of the white man over the black is natural, that the

black race is by nature incapable of freedom, and marked out for slavery?

some even going so far as to say that the freedom of manual labourers is an

unnatural order of things anywhere. Again, the theorists of absolute

monarchy have always affirmed it to be the only natural form of government;

issuing from the patriarchal, which was the primitive and spontaneous form

of society, framed on the model of the paternal, which is anterior to society

itself, and, as they contend, the most natural authority of all. Nay, for that

matter, the law of force itself, to those who could not plead any other has

always seemed the most natural of all grounds for the exercise of authority.

Conquering races hold it to be Nature's own dictate that the conquered should

obey the conquerors, or as they euphoniously paraphrase it, that the feebler

and more unwarlike races should submit to the braver and manlier. The

smallest acquaintance with human life in the middle ages, shows how

supremely natural the dominion of the feudal nobility overmen of low

condition appeared to the nobility themselves, and how unnatural the

conception seemed, of a person of the inferior class claiming equality with

them, or exercising authority over them. It hardly seemed less so to the class

held in subjection. The emancipated serfs and burgesses, even in their most

vigorous struggles, never made any pretension to a share of authority; they

only demanded more or less of limitation to the power of tyrannising over

them. So true is it that unnatural generally means only uncustomary, and that

everything which is usual appears natural. The subjection of women to men

being a universal custom, any departure from it quite naturally appears

unnatural. But how entirely, even in this case, the feeling is dependent on

custom, appears by ample experience. Nothing so much astonishes the people

of distant parts of the world, when they first learn anything about England, as

to be told that it is under a queen; the thing seems to them so unnatural as tobe almost incredible. To Englishmen this does not seem in the least degree

unnatural, because they are used to it; but they do feel it unnatural that

women should be soldiers or Members of Parliament. In the feudal ages, on

the contrary, war and politics were not thought unnatural to women, because

not unusual; it seemed natural that women of the privileged classes should be

of manly character, inferior in nothing but bodily strength to their husbands

and fathers. The independence of women seemed rather less unnatural to the

Greeks than to other ancients, on account of the fabulous Amazons (whom

they believed to be historical), and the partial example afforded by the

Spartan women; who, though no less subordinate by law than in other Greek

states, were more free in fact, and being trained to bodily exercises in the

same manner with men, gave ample proof that they were not naturally

disqualified for them. There can be little doubt that Spartan experience

suggested to Plato, among many other of his doctrines, that of the social and

political equality of the two sexes.

              But, it will be said, the rule of men over women differs from all

these others in not being a rule a rule of force: it is accepted voluntarily;

women make no complaint, and are consenting parties to it. In the first place,

a great number of women do not accept it. Ever since there have been women

able to make their sentiments known by their writings (the only mode of

publicity which society permits to them), an increasing number of them have

recorded protests against their present social condition: and recently many

thousands of them, headed by the most eminent women known to the public,

have petitioned Parliament for their admission to the Parliamentary Suffrage

The claim of women to be educated as solidly, and in the same branches of

knowledge, as men, is urged with growing intensity, and with a great

prospect of success; while the demand for their admission into professions

and occupations hitherto closed against them, becomes every year more

urgent. Though there are not in this country, as there are in the United States,

periodical conventions and an organised party to agitate for the Rights of

Women, there is a numerous and active society organised and managed by

women, for the more limited object of obtaining the political franchise. Nor is

it only in our own country and in America that women are beginning to

protest, more or less collectively, against the disabilities under which they

labour. France, and Italy, and Switzerland, and Russia now afford examples

of the same thing. How many more women there are who silently cherish

similar aspirations, no one can possibly know; but there are abundant tokenshow many would cherish them, were they not so strenuously taught to repress

them as contrary to the proprieties of their sex. It must be remembered, also,

that no enslaved class ever asked for complete liberty at once. When Simon

de Montfort called the deputies of the commons to sit for the first time in

Parliament, did any of them dream of demanding that an assembly, elected by

their constituents)should make and destroy ministries, and dictate to the king

in affairs of State? No such thought entered into the imagination of the most

ambitious of them. The nobility had already these pretensions; the commons

pretended to nothing but to be exempt from arbitrary taxation, and from the

gross individual oppression of the king's officers. It is a political law of

nature that those who are under any power of ancient origin, never begin by

complaining of the power itself, but only of its oppressive exercise. There is

never any want of women who complain of ill-usage by their husbands.

There would be infinitely more, if complaint were not the greatest of all

provocatives to a repetition and increase of the ill-usage. It is this which

frustrates all attempts to maintain the power but protect the woman against its

abuses. In no other case (except that of a child) is the person who has been

proved judicially to have suffered an injury, replaced under the physical

power of the culprit who inflicted it. Accordingly wives, even in the most

extreme and protracted cases of bodily ill-usage, hardly ever dare avail

themselves of the laws made for their protection: and if, in a moment of

irrepressible indignation, or by the interference of neighbours, they are

induced to do so, their whole effort afterwards is to disclose as little as they

can, and to beg off their tyrant from his merited chastisement.

              All causes, social and natural, combine to make it unlikely that

women should be collectively rebellious to the power of men. They are so far

in a position different from all other subject classes, that their masters require

something more from them than actual service. Men do not want solely the

obedience of women, they want their sentiments. All men, except the most

brutish, desire to have, in the woman most nearly connected with them, not a

forced slave but a willing one, not a slave merely, but a favourite. They have

therefore put everything in practice to enslave their minds. The masters of all

other slaves rely, for maintaining obedience, on fear; either fear of

themselves, or religious fears. The masters of women wanted more than

simple obedience, and they turned the whole force of education to effect their

purpose. All women are brought up from the very earliest years in the belief

that their ideal of character is the very opposite to that of men; not self will,and government by self-control, but submission, and yielding to the control

of other. All the moralities tell them that it is the duty of women, and all the

current sentimentalities that it is their nature, to live for others; to make

complete abnegation of themselves, and to have no life but in their affections.

And by their affections are meant the only ones they are allowed to have —

those to the men with whom they are connected, or to the children who

constitute an additional and indefeasible tie between them and a man. When

we put together three things — first, the natural attraction between opposite

sexes; secondly, the wife's entire dependence on the husband, every privilege

or pleasure she has being either his gift, or depending entirely on his will; and

lastly, that the principal object of human pursuit, consideration, and all

objects of social ambition, can in general be sought or obtained by her only

through him, it would be a miracle if the object of being attractive to men had

not become the polar star of feminine education and formation of character.

And, this great means of influence over the minds of women having been

acquired, an instinct of selfishness made men avail themselves of it to the

utmost as a means of holding women in subjection, by representing to them

meekness, submissiveness, and resignation of all individual will into the

hands of a man, as an essential part of sexual attractiveness. Can it be

doubted that any of the other yokes which mankind have succeeded in

breaking, would have subsisted till now if the same means had existed, and

had been so sedulously used, to bow down their minds to it? If it had been

made the object of the life of every young plebeian to find personal favour in

the eyes of some patrician, of every young serf with some seigneur; if

domestication with him, and a share of his personal affections, had been held

out as the prize which they all should look out for, the most gifted and

aspiring being able to reckon on the most desirable prizes; and if, when this

prize had been obtained, they had been shut out by a wall of brass from all

interests not centring in him, all feelings and desires but those which he

shared or inculcated; would not serfs and seigneurs, plebeians and patricians,

have been as broadly distinguished at this day as men and women are? and

would not all but a thinker here and there, have believed the distinction to be

a fundamental and unalterable fact in human nature?

              The preceding considerations are amply sufficient to show that

custom, however universal it may be, affords in this case no presumption, and

ought not to create any prejudice, in favour of the arrangements which place

women in social and political subjection to men. But I may go farther, andmaintain that the course of history, and the tendencies of progressive human

society, afford not only no presumption in favour of this system of inequality

of rights, but a strong one against it; and that, so far as the whole course of

human improvement up to the time, the whole stream of modern tendencies,

warrants any inference on the subject, it is, that this relic of the past is

discordant with the future, and must necessarily disappear.

              For, what is the peculiar character of the modern world — the

difference which chiefly distinguishes modern institutions, modern social

ideas, modern life itself, from those of times long past? It is, that human

beings are no longer born to their place in life, and chained down by an

inexorable bond to the place they are born to, but are free to employ their

faculties, and such favourable chances as offer, to achieve the lot which may

appear to them most desirable. Human society of old was constituted on a

very different principle. All were born to a fixed social position, and were

mostly kept in it by law, or interdicted from any means by which they could

emerge from it. As some men are born white and others black, so some were

born slaves and others freemen and citizens; some were born patricians,

others plebeians; some were born feudal nobles, others commoners and

roturiers. A slave or serf could never make himself free, nor, except by the

will of his master, become so. In most European countries it was not till

towards the close of the middle ages, and as a consequence of the growth of

regal power, that commoners could be ennobled. Even among nobles, the

eldest son was born the exclusive heir to the paternal possessions, and a long

time elapsed before it was fully established that the father could disinherit

him. Among the industrious classes, only those who were born members of a

guild, or were admitted into it by its members, could lawfully practise their

calling within its local limits; and nobody could practise any calling deemed

important, in any but the legal manner — by processes authoritatively

prescribed. Manufacturers have stood in the pillory for presuming to carry on

their business by new and improved methods. In modern Europe, and most in

those parts of it which have participated most largely in all other modern

improvements, diametrically opposite doctrines now prevail. Law and

government do not undertake to prescribe by whom any social or industrial

operation shall or shall not be conducted, or what modes of conducting them

shall be lawful. These things are left to the unfettered choice of individuals.

Even the laws which required that workmen should serve an apprenticeship,

have in this country been repealed: there being ample assurance that in allcases in which an apprenticeship is necessary, its necessity will suffice to

enforce it. The old theory was, that the least possible should be left to the

choice of the individual agent; that all he had to do should, as far as

practicable, be laid down for him by superior wisdom. Left to himself he was

sure to go wrong. The modern conviction, the fruit of a thousand years of

experience, is, that things in which the individual is the person directly

interested, never go right but as they are left to his own discretion; and that

any regulation of them by authority, except to protect the rights of others, is

sure to be mischievous. This conclusion slowly arrived at, and not adopted

until almost every possible application of the contrary theory had been made

with disastrous result, now (in the industrial department) prevails universally

in the most advanced countries, almost universally in all that have

pretensions to any sort of advancement. It is not that all processes are

supposed to be equally good, or all persons to be equally qualified for

everything; but that freedom of individual choice is now known to be the

only thing which procures the adoption of the best processes, and throws each

operation into the hands of those who are best qualified for it. Nobody thinks

it necessary to make a law that only a strong-armed man shall be a

blacksmith. Freedom and competition suffice to make blacksmiths strong-

armed men, because the weak armed can earn more by engaging in

occupations for which they are more fit. In consonance with this doctrine, it

is felt to be an overstepping of the proper bounds of authority to fix

beforehand, on some general presumption, that certain persons are not fit to

do certain things. It is now thoroughly known and admitted that if some such

presumptions exist, no such presumption is infallible. Even if it be well

grounded in a majority of cases, which it is very likely not to be, there will be

a minority of exceptional cases in which it does not hold: and in those it is

both an injustice to the individuals, and a detriment to society, to place

barriers in the way of their using their faculties for their own benefit and for

that of others. In the cases, on the other hand, in which the unfitness is real,

the ordinary motives of human conduct will on the whole suffice to prevent

the incompetent person from making, or from persisting in, the attempt.

              If this general principle of social and economical science is not true;

if individuals, with such help as they can derive from the opinion of those

who know them, are not better judges than the law and the government, of

their own capacities and vocation; the world cannot too soon abandon this

principle, and return to the old system of regulations and disabilities. But ifthe principle is true, we ought to act as if we believed it, and not to ordain

that to be born a girl instead of a boy, any more than to be born black instead

of white, or a commoner instead of a nobleman, shall decide the person's

position through all life — shall interdict people from all the more elevated

social positions, and from all, except a few, respectable occupations. Even

were we to admit the utmost that is ever pretended a to the superior fitness of

men for all the functions now reserve to them, the same argument applies

which forbids a legal qualification for Members of Parliament. If only once in

a dozen years the conditions of eligibility exclude a fit person, there is a real

loss, while the exclusion of thousands of unfit persons is no gain; for if the

constitution of the electoral body disposes them to choose unfit persons, there

are always plenty of such persons to choose from. In all things of any

difficulty and importance, those who can do them well are fewer than the

need, even with the most unrestricted latitude of choice: and any limitation of

the field of selection deprives society of some chances of being served by the

competent, without ever saving it from the incompetent.

              At present, in the more improved countries, the disabilities of

women are the only case, save one, in which laws and institutions take

persons at their birth, and ordain that they shall never in all their lives be

allowed to compete for certain things. The one exception is that of royalty.

Persons still are born to the throne; no one, not of the reigning family, can

ever occupy it, and no one even of that family can, by any means but the

course of hereditary succession, attain it. All other dignities and social

advantages are open to the whole male sex: many indeed are only attainable

by wealth, but wealth may be striven for by anyone, and is actually obtained

by many men of the very humblest origin. The difficulties, to the majority,

are indeed insuperable without the aid of fortunate accidents; but no male

human being is under any legal ban: neither law nor opinion superadd

artificial obstacles to the natural ones. Royalty, as I have said, is excepted:

but in this case everyone feels it to be an exception — an anomaly in the

modern world, in marked opposition to its customs and principles, and to be

justified only by extraordinary special expediences, which, though

individuals and nations differ in estimating their weight, unquestionably do in

fact exist. But in this exceptional case, in which a high social function is, for

important reasons, bestowed on birth instead of being put up to competition,

all free nations contrive to adhere in substance to the principle from which

they nominally derogate; for they circumscribe this high function byconditions avowedly intended to prevent the person to whom it ostensibly

belongs from really performing it; while the person by whom it is performed,

the responsible minister, does obtain the post by a competition from which no

full-grown citizen of the male sex is legally excluded. The disabilities,

therefore, to which women are subject from the mere fact of their birth, are

the solitary examples of the kind in modern legislation. In no instance except

this, which comprehends half the human race, are the higher social functions

closed against anyone by a fatality of birth which no exertions, and no change

of circumstances, can overcome; for even religious disabilities (besides that

in England and in Europe they have practically almost ceased to exist) do not

close any career to the disqualified person in case of conversion.

              The social subordination of women thus stands out an isolated fact in

modern social institutions; a solitary breach of what has become their

fundamental law; a single relic of an old world of thought and practice

exploded in everything else, but retained in the one thing of most universal

interest; as if a gigantic dolmen, or a vast temple of Jupiter Olympius,

occupied the site of St. Paul's and received daily worship, while the

surrounding Christian churches were only resorted to on fasts and festivals.

This entire discrepancy between one social fact and all those which

accompany it, and the radical opposition between its nature and the

progressive movement which is the boast of the modern world, and which has

successively swept away everything else of an analogous character, surely

affords, to a conscientious observer of human tendencies, serious matter for

reflection. It raises a prima facie presumption on the unfavourable side, far

outweighing any which custom and usage could in such circumstances create

on the favourable; and should at least suffice to make this, like the choice

between republicanism and royalty, a balanced question.

              The least that can be demanded is, that the question should not be

considered as prejudged by existing fact and existing opinion, but open to

discussion on its merits, as a question of justice and expediency: the decision

on this, as on any of the other social arrangements of mankind, depending on

what an enlightened estimate of tendencies and consequences may show to be

most advantageous to humanity in general, without distinction of sex. And

the discussion must be a real discussion, descending to foundations, and not

resting satisfied with vague and general assertions. It will not do, for instance

to assert in general terms, that the experience of mankind has pronounced infavour of the existing system. Experience cannot possibly have decided

between two courses, so long as there has only been experience of one. If it

be said that the doctrine of the equality of the sexes rests only on theory, it

must be remembered that the contrary doctrine also has only theory to rest

upon. All that is proved in its favour by direct experience, is that mankind

have been able to exist under it, and to attain the degree of improvement and

prosperity which we now see; but whether that prosperity has been attained

sooner, or is now greater, than it would have been under the other system,

experience does not say. on the other hand, experience does say, that every

step in improvement has been so invariably accompanied by a step made in

raising the social position of women, that historians and philosophers have

been led to adopt their elevation or debasement as on the whole the surest test

and most correct measure of the civilisation of a people or an age. Through

all the progressive period of human history, the condition of women has been

approaching nearer to equality with men. This does not of itself prove that the

assimilation must goon to complete equality; but it assuredly affords some

presumption that such is the case.

              Neither does it avail anything to say that the nature of the two sexes

adapts them to their present functions and position, and renders these

appropriate to them. Standing on the ground of common sense and the

constitution of the human mind, I deny that anyone knows, or can know, the

nature of the two sexes, as long as they have only been seen in their present

relation to one another. If men had ever been found in society without

women, or women without men, or if there had been a society of men and

women in which the women were not under the control of the men,

something might have been positively known about the mental and moral

differences which may be inherent in the nature of each. What is now called

the nature of women is an eminently artificial thing — the result of forced

repression in some directions, unnatural stimulation in others. It may be

asserted without scruple, that no other class of dependents have had their

character so entirely distorted from its natural proportions by their relation

with their masters; for, if conquered and slave races have been, in some

respects, more forcibly repressed, whatever in them has not been crushed

down by an iron heel has generally been let alone, and if left with any liberty

of development, it has developed itself according to its own laws; but in the

case of women, a hot-house and stove cultivation has always been carried on

of some of the capabilities of their nature, for the benefit and pleasure of theirmasters Then, because certain products of the general vital force sprout

luxuriantly and reach a great development in this heated atmosphere and

under this active nurture and watering, while other shoots from the same root,

which are left outside in the wintry air, with ice purposely heaped all round

them, have a stunted growth, and some are burnt off with fire and disappear;

men, with that inability to recognise their own work which distinguishes the

unanalytic mind, indolently believe that the tree grows of itself in the way

they have made it grow, and that it would die if one half of it were not kept in

a vapour bath and the other half in the snow.

              Of all difficulties which impede the progress of thought, and the

formation of well-grounded opinions on life and social arrangements, the

greatest is now the unspeakable ignorance and inattention of mankind in

respect to the influences which form human character. Whatever any portion

of the human species now are, or seem to be, such, it is supposed, they have a

natural tendency to be: even when the most elementary knowledge of the

circumstances in which they have been placed, clearly points out the causes

that made them what they are. Because a cottier deeply in arrears to his

landlord is not industrious, there are people who think that the Irish are

naturally idle. Because constitutions can be overthrown when the authorities

appointed to execute them turn their arms against them, there are people who

think the French incapable of free government. Because the Greeks cheated

the Turks, and the Turks only plundered the Greeks, there are persons who

think that the Turks are naturally more sincere: and because women, as is

often said, care nothing about politics except their personalities, it is

supposed that the general good is naturally less interesting to women than to

men. History, which is now so much better understood than formerly, teaches

another lesson: if only by showing the extraordinary susceptibility of human

nature to external influences, and the extreme variableness of those of its

manifestations which are supposed to be most universal and uniform. But in

history, as in travelling, men usually see only what they already had in their

own minds; and few learn much from history, who do not bring much with

them to its study.

              Hence, in regard to that most difficult question, what are the natural

differences between the two sexes — a subject on which it is impossible in

the present state of society to obtain complete and correct knowledge —

while almost everybody dogmatises upon it, almost all neglect and make lightof the only means by which any partial insight can be obtained into it. This is,

an analytic study of the most important department of psychology, the laws

of the influence of circumstances on character. For, however great and

apparently ineradicable the moral and intellectual differences between men

and women might be, the evidence of there being natural differences could

only be negative. Those only could be inferred to be natural which could not

possibly be artificial — the residuum, after deducting every characteristic of

either sex which can admit of being explained from education or external

circumstances. The profoundest knowledge of the laws of the formation of

character is indispensable to entitle anyone to affirm even that there is any

difference, much more what the difference is, between the two sexes

considered as moral and rational beings; and since no one, as yet, has that

knowledge (for there is hardly any subject which, in proportion to its

importance, has been so little studied), no one is thus far entitled to any

positive opinion on the subject. Conjectures are all that can at present be

made; conjectures more or less probable, according as more or less

authorised by such knowledge as we yet have of the laws of psychology, as

applied to the formation of character.

              Even the preliminary knowledge, what the differences between the

sexes now are, apart from all question as to how they are made what they are,

is still in the crudest and most' incomplete state. Medical practitioners and

physiologists have ascertained, to some extent, the differences in bodily

constitution; and this is an important element to the psychologist: but hardly

any medical practitioner is a psychologist. Respecting the mental

characteristics of women; their observations are of no more worth than those

of common men. It is a subject on which nothing final can be known, so long

as those who alone can really know it, women themselves, have given but

little testimony, and that little, mostly suborned. It is easy to know stupid

women. Stupidity is much the same all the world over. A stupid person's

notions and feelings may confidently be inferred from those which prevail in

the circle by which the person is surrounded. Not so with those whose

opinions and feelings are an emanation from their own nature and faculties. It

is only a man here and there who has any tolerable knowledge of the

character even of the women of his own family. I do not mean, of their

capabilities; these nobody knows, not even themselves, because most of them

have never been called out. I mean their actually existing thoughts and

feelings. Many a man think she perfectly understands women, because he hashad amatory relations with several, perhaps with many of them. If he is a

good observer, and his experience extends to quality as well as quantity, he

may have learnt something of one narrow department of their nature — an

important department, no doubt. But of all the rest of it, few persons are

generally more ignorant, because there are few from whom it is so carefully

hidden. The most favourable case which a man can generally have for

studying the character of a woman, is that of his own wife: for the

opportunities are greater, and the cases of complete sympathy not so

unspeakably rare. And in fact, this is the source from which any knowledge

worth having on the subject has, I believe, generally come. But most men

have not had the opportunity of studying in this way more than a single case:

accordingly one can, to an almost laughable degree, infer what a man's wife

is like, from his opinions about women in general. To make even this one

case yield any result, the woman must be worth knowing, and the man not

only a competent judge, but of a character so sympathetic in itself, and so

well adapted to hers, that he can either read her mind by sympathetic

intuition, or has nothing in himself which makes her shy of disclosing it,

Hardly anything, I believe, can be more rare than this conjunction. It often

happens that there is the most complete unity of feeling and community of

interests as to all external things, yet the one has as little admission into the

internal life of the other as if they were common acquaintance. Even with true

affection, authority on the one side and subordination on the other prevent

perfect confidence. Though nothing may be intentionally withheld, much is

not shown. In the analogous relation of parent and child, the corresponding

phenomenon must have been in the observation of everyone. As between

father and son, how many are the cases in which the father, in spite of real

affection on both sides, obviously to all the world does not know, nor

suspect, parts of the son's character familiar to his companions and equals.

The truth is, that the position of looking up to another is extremely

unpropitious to complete sincerity and openness with him. The fear of losing

ground in his opinion or in his feelings is so strong, that even in an upright

character, there is an unconscious tendency to show only the best side, or the

side which, though not the best, is that which he most likes to see: and it may

be confidently said that thorough knowledge of one another hardly ever

exists, but between persons who, besides being intimates, are equals. How

much more true, then, must all this be, when the one is not only under the

authority of the other, but has it inculcated on her as a duty to reckoneverything else subordinate to his comfort and pleasure, and to let him neither

see nor feel anything coming from her, except what is agreeable to him. All

these difficulties stand in the way of a man's obtaining any thorough

knowledge even of the one woman whom alone, in general, he has sufficient

opportunity of studying. When we further consider that to understand one

woman is not necessarily to understand any other woman; that even if he

could study many women of one rank, or of one country, he would not

thereby understand women of other ranks or countries; and even if he did,

they are still only the women of a single period of history; we may safely

assert that the knowledge which men can acquire of women, even as they

have been and are, without reference to what they might be, is wretchedly

imperfect and superficial, and always will be so, until women themselves

have told all that they have to tell.

              And this time has not come; nor will it come otherwise than

gradually. It is but of yesterday that women have either been qualified by

literary accomplishments or permitted by society, to tell anything to the

general public. As yet very few of them dare tell anything, which men, on

whom their literary success depends, are unwilling to hear. Let us remember

in what manner, up to a very recent time, the expression, even by a male

author, of uncustomary opinions, or what are deemed eccentric feelings,

usually was, and in some degree still is, received; and we may form some

faint conception under what impediments a woman, who is brought up to

think custom and opinion her sovereign rule, attempts to express in books

anything drawn from the depths of her own nature. The greatest woman who

has left writings behind her sufficient to give her an eminent rank in the

literature of her country, thought it necessary to prefix as a motto to her

boldest work, "Un homme peut braver l'opinion; une femme doit s'y
            *
soumettre."  The greater part of what women write about women is mere

sycophancy to men. In the case of unmarried women, much of it seems only

intended to increase their chance of a husband. Many, both married and

unmarried, overstep the mark, and inculcate a servility beyond what is

desired or relished by any man, except the very vulgarest. But this is not so

often the L case as, even at a quite late period, it still was. Literary women I

are becoming more free-spoken, and more willing to express their real

sentiments. Unfortunately, in this country especially, they are themselves

such artificial products, that their sentiments are compounded of a small

element of individual observation and consciousness, and a very large one ofacquired associations. This will be less and less the case, but it will remain

true to a great extent, as long as social institutions do not admit the same free

development of originality in women which is possible to men. When that

time comes, and not before, we shall see, and not merely hear, as much as it

is necessary to know of the nature of women, and the adaptation of other

things to it.

        *
               Title-page of Mme de Stael's Delphine.

              I have dwelt so much on the difficulties which at present obstruct

any real knowledge by men of the true nature of women, because in this as in

so many other things "opinio copiae inter maximas causas inopiae est"; and

there is little chance of reasonable thinking on the matter while people flatter

themselves that they perfectly understand a subject of which most men know

absolutely nothing, and of which it is at present impossible that any man, or

all men taken together, should have knowledge which can qualify them to lay

down the law to women as to what is, or is not, their vocation. Happily, no

such knowledge is necessary for any practical purpose connected with the

position of women is relation to society and life. For, according to all the

principles involved in modern society, the question rests with women

themselves — to be decided by their own experience, and by the use of their

own faculties. There are no means of finding what either one person or many

can do, but by trying — and no means by which anyone else can discover for

them what it is for their happiness to do or leave undone.

              One thing we may be certain of — that what is contrary to women's

nature to do, they never will be made to do by simply giving their nature free

play. The anxiety of mankind to interfere in behalf of nature, for fear lest

nature should not succeed m effecting its purpose, is an altogether

unnecessary solicitude. What women by nature cannot do, it is quite

superfluous to forbid them from doing. What they can do, but not so well as

the men who are their competitors, competition suffices to exclude them

from; since nobody asks for protective duties and bounties in favour of

women; it is only asked that the present bounties and protective duties in

favour of men should be recalled. If women have a greater natural inclination

for some things than for others, there is no need of laws or social inculcation

to make the majority of them do the former in preference to the latter.

Whatever women's services are most wanted for, the free play of competition

will hold out the strongest inducements to them to undertake. And, as thewords imply, they are most wanted for the things for which they are most fit;

by the apportionment of which to them, the collective faculties of the two

sexes can be applied on the whole with the greatest sum of valuable result.

              The general opinion of men is supposed to be, that the natural

vocation of a woman is that of a wife and mother. I say, is supposed to be,

because, judging from acts — from the whole of the present constitution of

society — one might infer that their opinion was the direct contrary. They

might be supposed to think that the alleged natural vocation of women was of

all things the most repugnant to their nature; insomuch that if they are free to

do anything else — if any other means of living or occupation of their time

and faculties, is open, which has any chance of appearing desirable to them

— there will not be enough of them who will be willing to accept the

condition said to be natural to them. If this is the real opinion of men in

general, it would be well that it should be spoken out. I should like to hear

somebody openly enunciating the doctrine (it is already implied in much that

is written on the subject) "It is necessary to society that women should marry

and produce children. They will not do so unless they are compelled.

Therefore it is necessary to compel them." The merits of the case would then

be clearly defined. It would be exactly that of the slave-holders of South

Carolina and Louisiana. "It is necessary that cotton and sugar should be

grown. White men cannot produce them. Negroes will not, for any wages

which we choose to give. Ergo they must be compelled." An illustration still

closer to the point is that of impressment. Sailors must absolutely be had to

defend the country. It often happens that they will not voluntarily enlist.

Therefore there must be the power of forcing them. How often has this logic

been used! and, but for one flaw in it, without doubt it would have been

successful up to this day. But it is open to the retort — First pay the sailors

the honest value of their labour. When you have made it as well worth their

while to serve you, as to work for other employers, you will have no more

difficulty than others have in obtaining their services. To this there is no

logical answer except "I will not": and as people are now not only ashamed,

but are not desirous, to rob the labourer of his hire, impressment is no longer

advocated. Those who attempt to force women into marriage by closing all

other doors against them, lay themselves open to a similar retort. If they mean

what they say, their opinion must evidently be, that men do not render the

married condition so desirable to women, as to induce them to accept it for its

own recommendations. It is not a sign of one's thinking the boon one offersvery attractive, when one allows only Hobson's choice, "that or none." And

here, I believe, is the clue to the feelings of those men, who have a real

antipathy to the equal freedom of women. I believe they are afraid, not lest

women should be unwilling to marry, for I do not think that anyone in reality

has that apprehension; but lest they should insist that marriage should be on

equal conditions; lest all women of spirit and capacity should prefer doing

almost anything else, not in their own eyes degrading, rather than marry,

when marrying is giving themselves a master, and a master too of all their

earthly possessions. And truly, if this consequence were necessarily incident

to marriage, I think that the apprehension would be very well founded. I

agree in thinking it probable that few women, capable of anything else,

would, unless under an irresistible entrainement, rendering them for the time

insensible to anything but itself, choose such a lot, when any other means

were open to them of filling a conventionally honourable place in life: and if

men are determined that the law of marriage shall be a law of despotism, they

are quite right, in point of mere policy, in leaving to women only Hobson's

choice. But, in that case, all that has been done in the modern world to relax

the chain on the minds of women, has been a mistake. They never should

have been allowed to receive a literary education. Women who read, much

more women who write, are, in the existing constitution of things, a

contradiction and a disturbing element: and it was wrong to bring women up

with any acquirements but those of an odalisque, or of a domestic servant.

 

 

                                       Chapter 2

 

 

              It will be well to commence the detailed discussion of the subject by

the particular branch of it to which the course of our observations has led us:

the conditions which the laws of this and all other countries annex to the

marriage contract. Marriage being the destination appointed by society for

women, the prospect they are brought up to, and the object which it is

intended should be sought by all of them, except those who are too little

attractive to be chosen by any man as his companion; one might have

supposed that everything would have been done to make this condition as

eligible to them as possible, that they might have no cause to regret being

denied the option of any other. Society, however, both in this, and, at first, in

all other cases, has preferred to attain its object by foul rather than fair means:

but this is the only case in which it has substantially persisted in them even to

the present day. Originally women were taken by force, or regularly sold by

their father to the husband. Until a late period in European history, the father

had the power to dispose of his daughter in marriage at his own will and

pleasure, without any regard to hers. The Church, indeed, was so far faithful

to a better morality as to require a formal "yes" from the woman at the

marriage ceremony; but there was nothing to show that the consent was other

than compulsory; and it was practically impossible for the girl to refuse

compliance if the father persevered, except perhaps when she might obtain

the protection of religion by a determined resolution to take monastic vows.

After marriage, the man had anciently (but this was anterior to Christianity)

the power of life and death over his wife. She could invoke no law against

him; he was her sole tribunal and law. For a long time he could repudiate her,

but she had no corresponding power in regard to him. By the old laws of

England, the husband was called the lord of the wife; he was literally

regarded as her sovereign, inasmuch that the murder of a man by his wife was

called treason (petty as distinguished from high treason), and was more

cruelly avenged than was usually the case with high treason, for the penalty

was burning to death. Because these various enormities have fallen into

disuse (for most of them were never formally abolished, or not until they had

long ceased to be practised) men suppose that all is now as it should be inregard to the marriage contract; and we are continually told that civilisation

and Christianity have restored to the woman her just rights. Meanwhile the

wife is the actual bond servant of her husband: no less so, as far as legal

obligation goes, than slaves commonly so called. She vows a livelong

obedience to him at the altar, and is held to it all through her life by law.

Casuists may say that the obligation of obedience stops short of participation

in crime, but it certainly extends to everything else. She can do no act

whatever but by his permission, at least tacit. She can acquire no property but

for him; the instant it becomes hers, even if by inheritance, it becomes ipso

facto his. In this respect the wife's position under the common law of England

is worse than that-of slaves in the laws of many countries: by the Roman law,

for example, a slave might have his peculium, which to a certain extent the

law guaranteed to him for his exclusive use. The higher classes in this

country have given an analogous advantage to their women, through special

contracts setting aside the law, by conditions of pin-money, etc.: since

parental feeling being stronger with fathers than the class feeling of their own

sex, a father generally prefers his own daughter to a son-in-law who is a

stranger to him. By means of settlements, the rich usually contrive to

withdraw the whole or part of the inherited property of the wife from the

absolute control of the husband: but they do not succeed in keeping it under

her own control; the utmost they can do only prevents the husband from

squandering it, at the same time debarring the rightful owner from its use.

The property itself is out of the reach of both; and as to the income derived

from it, the form of settlement most favourable to the wife (that called "to her

separate use") only precludes the husband from receiving it instead of her: it

must pass through her hands, but if he takes it from her by personal violence

as soon as she receives it, he can neither be punished, nor compelled to

restitution. This is the amount of the protection which, under the laws of this

country, the most powerful nobleman can give to his own daughter as

respects her husband. In the immense majority of cases there is no settlement:

and the absorption of all rights, all property, as well as all freedom of action,

is complete. The two are called "one person in law," for the purpose of

inferring that whatever is hers is his, but the parallel inference is never drawn

that whatever is his is hers; the maxim is not applied against the man, except

to make him responsible to third parties for her acts, as a master is for the acts

of his slaves or of his cattle. I am far from pretending that wives are in

general no better treated than slaves; but no slave is a slave to the samelengths, and in so full a sense of the word, as a wife is. Hardly any slave,

except one immediately attached to the master's person, is a slave at all hours

and all minutes; in general he has, like a soldier, his fixed task, and when it is

done, or when he is off duty, he disposes, within certain limits, of his own

time, and has a family life into which the master rarely intrudes. "Uncle

Tom" under his first master had his own life in his "cabin," almost as much as

any man whose work takes him away from home, is able to have in his own

family. But it cannot be so with the wife. Above all, a female slave has (in

Christian countries) an admitted right, and is considered under a moral

obligation, to refuse to her master the last familiarity. Not so the wife:

however brutal a tyrant she may unfortunately be chained to — though she

may know that he hates her, though it may be his daily pleasure to torture her,

and though she may feel it impossible not to loathe him — he can claim from

her and enforce the lowest degradation of a human being, that of being made

the instrument of an animal function contrary to her inclinations. While she is

held in this worst description of slavery as to her own person, what is her

position in regard to the children in whom she and her master have a joint

interest? They are by law his children. He alone has any legal rights over

them. Not one act can she do towards or in relation to them, except by

delegation from him. Even after he is dead she is not their legal guardian,

unless he by will has made her so. He could even send them away from her,

and deprive her of the means of seeing or corresponding with them, until this

power was in some degree restricted by Serjeant Talfourd's Act. This is her

legal state. And from this state she has no means of withdrawing herself. If

she leaves her husband, she can take nothing with her, neither her children

nor anything which is rightfully her own. If he chooses, he can compel her to

return, by law, or by physical force; or he may content himself with seizing

for his own use anything which she may earn, or which may be given to her

by her relations. It is only legal separation by a decree of a court of justice,

which entitles her to live apart, without being forced back into the custody of

an exasperated jailer — or which empowers her to apply any earnings to her

own use, without fear that a man whom perhaps she has not seen for twenty

years will pounce upon her some day and carry all off. This legal separation,

until lately, the courts of justice would only give at an expense which made it

inaccessible to anyone out of the higher ranks. Even now it is only given in

cases of desertion, or of the extreme of cruelty; and yet complaints are made

every day that it is granted too easily. Surely, if a woman is denied any lot inlife but that of being the personal body-servant of a despot, and is dependent

for everything upon the chance of finding one who may be disposed to make

a favourite of her instead of merely a drudge, it is a very cruel aggravation of

her fate that she should be allowed to try this chance only once. The natural

sequel and corollary from this state of things would be, that since her all in

life depends upon obtaining a good master, she should be allowed to change

again and again until she finds one. I am not saying that she ought to be

allowed this privilege. That is a totally different consideration. The question

of divorce, in the sense involving liberty of remarriage, is one into which it is

foreign to my purpose to enter. All I now say is, that to those to whom

nothing but servitude is allowed, the free choice of servitude is the only,

though a most insufficient, alleviation. Its refusal completes the assimilation

of the wife to the slave — and the slave under not the mildest form of

slavery: for in some slave codes the slave could, under certain circumstances

of ill usage, legally compel the master to sell him. But no amount of ill usage,

without adultery superadded, will in England free a wife from her tormentor.

              I have no desire to exaggerate, nor does the case stand in any need of

exaggeration. I have described the wife's legal position, not her actual

treatment. The laws of most countries are far worse than the people who

execute them, and many of them are only able to remain laws by being

seldom or never carried into effect. If married life were all that it might be

expected to be, looking to the laws alone, society would be a hell upon earth.

Happily there are both feelings and interests which in many men exclude, and

in most, greatly temper, the impulses and propensities which lead to tyranny:

and of those feelings, the tie which connects a man with his wife affords, in a

normal state of things, incomparably the strongest example. The only tie

which at all approaches to it. that between him and his children, tends, in all

save exceptional cases, to strengthen, instead of conflicting with, the first.

Because this is true; because men in general do not inflict, nor women suffer,

all the misery which could be inflicted and suffered if the full power of

tyranny with which the man is legally invested were acted on; the defenders

of the existing form of the institution think that all its iniquity is justified, and

that any complaint is merely quarrelling with the evil which is the price paid

for every great good. But the mitigations in practice, which are compatible

with maintaining in full legal force this or any other kind of tyranny, instead

of being any apology for despotism, only serve to prove what power human

nature possesses of reacting against the vilest institutions, and with whatvitality the seeds of good as well as those of evil in human character diffuse

and propagate themselves. Not a word can be said for despotism in the family

which cannot be said for political despotism. Every absolute king does not sit

at his window to enjoy the groans of his tortured subjects, nor strips them of

their last rag and turns them out to shiver in the road The despotism of Louis

XVI was not the despotism of Philippe le Bel, or of Nadir Shah, or of

Caligula; but it was bad enough to justify the French Revolution, and to

palliate even its horrors. If an appeal be made to the intense attachments

which exist between wives and their husbands, exactly as much may be said

of domestic slavery. It was quite an ordinary fact in Greece and Rome for

slaves to submit to death by torture rather than betray their masters. In the

proscriptions of the Roman civil wars it was remarked that wives and slaves

were heroically faithful, sons very commonly treacherous. Yet we know how

cruelly many Romans treated their slaves. But in truth these intense

individual feelings nowhere rise to such a luxuriant height as under the most

atrocious institutions. It IS part of the irony of life, that the strongest feelings

of devoted gratitude of which human nature seems to be susceptible, are

called forth in human beings towards those who, having the power entirely to

crush their earthly existence, voluntarily refrain from using that power. How

great a place in most men this sentiment fills, even in religious devotion, it

would be cruel to inquire. We daily see how much their gratitude to Heaven

appears to be stimulated by the contemplation of fellow-creatures to whom

God has not been so merciful as he has to themselves.

              Whether the institution to be defended is slavery, political

absolutism, or the absolutism of the head of a family, we are always expected

to judge of it from its best instances; and we are presented with pictures of

loving exercise of authority on one side, loving submission to it on the other

— superior wisdom ordering all things for the greatest good of the

dependents, and surrounded by their smiles and benedictions. All this would

be very much to the purpose if anyone pretended that there are no such things

as good men. Who doubts that there may be great goodness, and great

happiness, and great affection, under the absolute government of a good

man? Meanwhile, laws and institutions require to be adapted, not to good

men, but to bad. Marriage is not an institution designed for a select few. Men

are not required, as a preliminary to the marriage ceremony, to prove by

testimonials that they are fit to be trusted with the exercise of absolute power.

The tie of affection and obligation to a wife and children is very strong withthose whose general social feelings are strong, and with many who are little

sensible to any other social ties; but there are all degrees of sensibility and

insensibility to it, as there are all grades of goodness and wickedness in men,

down to those whom no ties will bind, and on whom society has no action but

through its ultima ratio, the penalties of the law. In every grade of this

descending scale are men to whom are committed all the legal powers of a

husband. The vilest malefactor has some wretched woman tied to him,

against whom he can commit any atrocity except killing her, and, if tolerably

cautious, can do that without much danger of the legal penalty. And how

many thousands are there among the lowest classes in every country, who,

without being in a legal sense malefactors in any other respect, because in

every other quarter their aggressions meet with resistance, indulge the utmost

habitual excesses of bodily violence towards the unhappy wife, who alone, at

least of grown persons, can neither repel nor escape from their brutality; and

towards whom the excess of dependence inspires their mean and savage

natures, not with a generous forbearance, and a point of honour to behave

well to one whose lot in life is trusted entirely to their kindness, but on the

contrary with a notion that the law has delivered her to them as their thing, to

be used at their pleasure, and that they are not expected to practise the

consideration towards her which is required from them towards everybody

else. The law, which till lately left even these atrocious extremes of domestic

oppression practically unpunished, has within these few years made some

feeble attempts to repress them. But its attempts have done little, and cannot

be expected to do much, because it is contrary to reason and experience to

suppose that there can be any real check to brutality, consistent with leaving

the victim still in the power of the executioner. Until a conviction for

personal violence, or at all events a repetition of it after a first conviction,

entitles the woman ipso facto to a divorce, or at least to a judicial separation,

the attempt to repress these "aggravated assaults" by legal penalties will

break down for want of a prosecutor, or for want of a witness.

              When we consider how vast is the number of men, in any great

country, who are little higher than brutes, and that this never prevents them

from being able, through the law of marriage, to obtain a victim, the breadth

and depth of human misery caused in this shape alone by the abuse of the

institution swells to something appalling. Yet these are only the extreme

cases. They are the lowest abysses, but there is a sad succession of depth after

depth before reaching them. In domestic as in political tyranny, the case ofabsolute monsters chiefly illustrates the institution by showing that there is

scarcely any horror which may not occur under it if the despot pleases, and

thus setting in a strong light what must be the terrible frequency of things

only a little less atrocious. Absolute fiends are as rare as angels, perhaps

rarer: ferocious savages, with occasional touches of humanity, are however

very frequent: and in the wide interval which separates these from any

worthy representatives of the human species, how many are the forms and

gradations of animalism and selfishness, often under an outward varnish of

civilisation and even cultivation, living at peace with the law, maintaining a

creditable appearance to all who are not under their power, yet sufficient

often to make the lives of all who are so, a torment and a burthen to them! It

would be tiresome to repeat the commonplaces about the unfitness of men in

general for power, which, after the political discussions of centuries,

everyone knows by heart, were it not that hardly anyone thinks of applying

these maxims to the case in which above all others they are applicable, that of

power, not placed in the hands of a man here and there, but offered to every

adult male, down to the basest and most ferocious. It is not because a man is

not known to have broken any of the Ten Commandments, or because he

maintains a respectable character in his dealings with those whom he cannot

compel to have intercourse with him, or because he does not fly out into

violent bursts of ill-temper against those who are not obliged to bear with

him, that it is possible to surmise of what sort his conduct will be in the

unrestraint of home. Even the commonest men reserve the violent, the sulky,

the undisguisedly selfish side of their character for those who have no power

to withstand it. The relation of superiors to dependents is the nursery of these

vices of character, which, wherever else they exist, are an overflowing from

that source. A man who is morose or violent to his equals, is sure to be one

who has lived among inferiors, whom he could frighten or worry into

submission. If the family in its best forms is, as it is often said to be, a school

of sympathy, tenderness, and loving forgetfulness of self, it is still oftener, as

respects its chief, a school of wilfulness, overbearingness, unbounded selfish

indulgence, and a double-dyed and idealised selfishness, of which sacrifice

itself is only a particular form: the care for the wife and children being only

care for them as parts of the man's own interests and belongings, and their

individual happiness being immolated in every shape to his smallest

preferences. What better is to be looked for under the existing form of the

institution? We know that the bad propensities of human nature are only keptwithin bounds when they are allowed no scope for their indulgence. We

know that from impulse and habit, when not from deliberate purpose, almost

everyone to whom others yield, goes on encroaching upon them, until a point

is reached at which they are compelled to resist. Such being the common

tendency of human nature; the almost unlimited power which present social

institutions give to the man over at least one human being — the one with

whom he resides, and whom he has always present — this power seeks out

and evokes the latent germs of selfishness in the remotest corners of his

nature — fans its faintest sparks and smouldering embers — offers to him a

licence for the indulgence of those points of his original character which in

all other relations he would have found it necessary to repress and conceal,

and the repression of which would in time have become a second nature. I

know that there is another side to the question. I grant that the wife, if she

cannot effectually resist, can at least retaliate; she, too, can make the man's

life extremely uncomfortable, and by that power is able to carry many points

which she ought, and many which she ought not, to prevail in. But this

instrument of self-protection — which may be called the power of the scold,

or the shrewish sanction — has the fatal defect, that it avails most against the

least tyrannical superiors, and in favour of the least deserving dependents. It

is the weapon of irritable and self-willed women; of those who would make

the worst use of power if they themselves had it, and who generally turn this

power to a bad use. The amiable cannot use such an instrument, the high

minded disdain it. And on the other hand, the husbands against whom it is

used most effectively are the gentler and more inoffensive; those who cannot

be induced, even by provocation, to resort to any very harsh exercise of

authority. The wife's power of being disagreeable generally only establishes a

counter-tyranny, and makes victims in their turn chiefly of those husbands

who are least inclined to be tyrants.

              What is it, then, which really tempers the corrupting effects of the

power, and makes it compatible with such amount of good as we actually

see? Mere feminine blandishments. though of great effect in individual

instances, have very little effect in modifying the general tendencies of the

situation; for their power only lasts while the woman is young and attractive,

often only while her charm is new, and not dimmed by familiarity; and on

many men they have not much influence at any time. The real mitigating

causes are, the personal affection which is the growth of time in so far as the

man's nature is susceptible of it and the woman's character sufficientlycongenial with his to excite it; their common interests as regards the children,

and their general community of interest as concerns third persons(to which

however there are very great limitations); the real importance of the wife to

his daily comforts and enjoyments, and the value he consequently attaches to

her on his personal account, which, in a man capable of feeling for others,

lays the foundation of caring for her on her own; and lastly, the influence

naturally acquired over almost all human beings by those near to their

persons (if not actually disagreeable to them): who, both by their direct

entreaties, and by the insensible contagion of their feelings and dispositions,

are often able, unless counteracted by some equally strong personal

influence, to obtain a degree of command over the conduct of the superior,

altogether excessive and unreasonable. Through these various means, the

wife frequently exercises even too much power over the man; she is able to

affect his conduct in things in which she may not be qualified to influence it

for good — in which her influence may be not only unenlightened, but

employed on the morally wrong side; and in which he would act better if left

to his own prompting. But neither in the affairs of families nor in those of

states is power a compensation for the loss of freedom. Her power often gives

her what she has no right to, but does not enable her to assert her own rights.

A Sultan's favourite slave has slaves under her, over whom she tyrannises;

but the desirable thing would be that she should neither have slaves nor be a

slave. By entirely sinking her own existence in her husband; by having no

will (or persuading him that she has no will) but his, in anything which

regards their joint relation, and by making it the business of her life to work

upon his sentiments, a wife may gratify herself by influencing, and very

probably perverting, his conduct, in those of his external relations which she

has never qualified herself to judge of, or in which she is herself wholly

influenced by some personal or other partiality or prejudice. Accordingly, as

things now are, those who act most kindly to their wives, are quite as often

made worse, as better, by the wife's influence, in respect to all interests

extending beyond the family. She is taught that she has no business with

things out of that sphere; and accordingly she seldom has any honest and

conscientious opinion on them; and therefore hardly ever meddles with them

for any legitimate purpose, but generally for an interested one. She neither

knows nor cares which is the right side in politics, but she knows what will

bring in money or invitations, give her husband a title, her son a place, or her

daughter a good marriage.              But how, it will be asked, can any society exist without government?

In a family, as in a state, some one person must be the ultimate ruler. Who

shall decide when married people differ in opinion? Both cannot have their

way, yet a decision one way or the other must be come to.

              It is not true that in all voluntary association between two people,

one of them must be absolute master: still less that the law must determine

which of them it shall be. The most frequent case of voluntary association,

next to marriage, is partnership in business: and it is not found or thought

necessary to enact that in every partnership, one partner shall have entire

control over the concern, and the others shall be bound to obey his orders. No

one would enter into partnership on terms which would subject him to the

responsibilities of a principal, with only the powers and privileges of a clerk

or agent. If the law dealt with other contracts as it does with marriage, it

would ordain that one partner should administer the common business as if it

was his private concern; that the others should have only delegated powers;

and that this one should be designated by some general presumption of law,

for example as being the eldest. The law never does this: nor does experience

show it to be necessary that any theoretical inequality of power should exist

between the partners, or that the partnership should have any other conditions

than what they may themselves appoint by their articles of agreement. Yet it

might seem that the exclusive power might be conceded with less danger to

the rights and interests of the inferior, in the case of partnership than in that

of marriage, since he is free to cancel the power by withdrawing from the

connexion. The wife has no such power, and even if she had, it is almost

always desirable that she should try all measures before resorting to it.

              It is quite true that things which have to be decided everyday, and

cannot adjust themselves gradually, or wait for a compromise, ought to

depend on one will; one person must have their sole control. But it does not

follow that this should always be the same person. The natural arrangement is

a division of powers between the two; each being absolute in the executive

branch of their own department, and any change of system and principle

requiring the consent of both. The division neither can nor should be pre-

established by the law, since it must depend on individual capacities and

suitabilities. If the two persons chose, they might pre-appoint it by the

marriage contract, as pecuniary arrangements are now often pre-appointed.

There would seldom be any difficulty in deciding such things by mutualconsent, unless the marriage was one of those unhappy ones in which all

other things, as well as this, become subjects of bickering and dispute. The

division of rights would naturally follow the division of duties and functions;

and that is already made by consent, or at all events not by law, but by

general custom, modified and modifiable at the pleasure of the persons

concerned.

              The real practical decision of affairs, to whichever may be given the

legal authority, will greatly depend, as it even now does, upon comparative

qualifications. The mere fact that he is usually the eldest, will in most cases

give the preponderance to the man; at least until they both attain a time of life

at which the difference in their years is of no importance. There will naturally

also be a more potential voice on the side, whichever it is, that brings the

means of support. Inequality from this source does not depend on the law of

marriage, but on the general conditions of human society, as now constituted.

The influence of mental superiority, either general or special, and of superior

decision of character, will necessarily tell for much. It always does so at

present. And this fact shows how little foundation there is for the

apprehension that the powers and responsibilities of partners in life (as of

partners in business), cannot be satisfactorily apportioned by agreement

between themselves. They always are so apportioned, except in cases in

which the marriage institution is a failure. Things never come to an issue of

downright power on one side, and obedience on the other, except where the

connexion altogether has been a mistake, and it would be a blessing to both

parties to be relieved from it. Some may say that the very thing by which an

amicable settlement of differences becomes possible, is the power of legal

compulsion known to be in reserve; as people submit to an arbitration

because there is a court of law in the background, which they know that they

can be forced to obey. But to make the cases parallel, we must suppose that

the rule of the court of law was, not to try the cause, but to give judgment

always for the same side, suppose the defendant. If so, the amenability to it

would be a motive with the plaintiff to agree to almost any arbitration, but it

would be just the reverse with the defendant. The despotic power which the

law gives to the husband may be a reason to make the wife assent to any

compromise by which power is practically shared between the two, but it

cannot be the reason why the husband does. That there is always among

decently conducted people a practical compromise, though one of them at

least is under no physical or moral necessity of making it, shows that thenatural motives which lead to a voluntary adjustment of the united life of two

persons in a manner acceptable to both, do on the whole, excepting

unfavourable cases, prevail. The matter is certainly not improved by laying

down as an ordinance of law, that the superstructure of free government shall

be raised upon a legal basis of despotism on one side and subjection on the

other, and that every concession which the despot makes may, at his mere

pleasure, and without any warning, be recalled. Besides that no freedom is

worth much when held on so precarious a tenure, its conditions are not likely

to be the most equitable when the law throws so prodigious a weight into one

scale; when the adjustment rests between two persons one of whom is

declared to be entitled to everything, the other not only entitled to nothing

except during the good pleasure of the first, but under the strongest moral and

religious obligation not to rebel under any excess of oppression.

              A pertinacious adversary, pushed to extremities, may say, that

husbands indeed are willing to be reasonable, and to make fair concessions to

their partners without being compelled to it, but that wives are not: that if

allowed any rights of their own, they will acknowledge no rights at all in

anyone else, and never will yield in anything, unless they can be compelled,

by the man's mere authority, to yield in everything. This would have been

said by many persons some generations ago, when satires on women were in

vogue, and men thought it a clever thing to insult women for being what men

made them. But it will be said by no one now who is worth replying to. It is

not the doctrine of the present day that women are less susceptible of good

feeling, and consideration for those with whom they are united by the

strongest ties, than men are. On the contrary, we are perpetually told that

women are better than men, by those who are totally opposed to treating them

as if they were as good; so that the saying has passed into a piece of tiresome

cant, intended to put a complimentary face upon an injury, and resembling

those celebrations of royal clemency which, according to Gulliver, the king

of Lilliput always prefixed to his most sanguinary decrees. If women are

better than men in anything, it surely is in individual self-sacrifice for those

of their own family. But I lay little stress on this, so long as they are

universally taught that they are born and created for self-sacrifice. I believe

that equality of rights would abate the exaggerated self-abnegation which is

the present artificial ideal of feminine character, and that a good woman

would not be more self-sacrificing than the best man: but on the other hand,

men would be much more unselfish and self-sacrificing than at present,because they would no longer be taught to worship their own will as such a

grand thing that it is actually the law for another rational being. There is

nothing which men so easily learn as this self-worship: all privileged persons,

and all privileged classes, have had it. The more we descend in the scale of

humanity, the intenser it is; and most of all in those who are not, and can

never expect to be, raised above anyone except an unfortunate wife and

children. The honourable exceptions are proportionally fewer than in the case

of almost any other human infirmity. Philosophy and religion, instead of

keeping it in check, are generally suborned to defend it; and nothing controls

it but that practical feeling of the equality of human beings, which is the

theory of Christianity, but which Christianity will never practically teach,

while it sanctions institutions grounded on an arbitrary preference of one

human being over another.

              There are, no doubt, women, as there are men, whom equality of

consideration will not satisfy; with whom there is no peace while any will or

wish is regarded but their own. Such persons are a proper subject for the law

of divorce. They are only fit to live alone, and no human beings ought to be

compelled to associate their lives with them. But the legal subordination

tends to make such characters among women more, rather than less, frequent.

If the man exerts his whole power, the woman is of course crushed: but if she

is treated with indulgence, and permitted to assume power, there is no rule to

set limits to her encroachments. The law, not determining her rights, but

theoretically allowing her none at all, practically declares that the measure of

what she has a right to, is what she can contrive to get.

              The equality of married persons before the law, is not only the sole

mode in which that particular relation can be made consistent with justice to

both sides, and conducive to the happiness of both, but it is the only means of

rendering the daily life of mankind, in any high sense, a school of moral

cultivation. Though the truth may not be felt or generally acknowledged for

generations to come, the only school of genuine moral sentiment is society

between equals. The moral education of mankind has hitherto emanated

chiefly from the law of force, and is adapted almost solely to the relations

which force creates. In the less advanced states of society, people hardly

recognise any relation with their equals. To be an equal is to be an enemy.

Society, from its highest place to its lowest, is one long chain, or rather

ladder, where every individual is either above or below his nearest neighbour,and wherever he does not command he must obey. Existing moralities,

accordingly, are mainly fitted to a relation of command and obedience. Yet

command and obedience are but unfortunate necessities of human life:

society in equality is its normal state. Already in modern life, and more and

more as it progressively improves, command and obedience become

exceptional facts in life, equal association its general rule. The morality of the

first ages rested on the obligation to submit to power; that of the ages next

following, on the right of the weak to the forbearance and protection of the

strong. How much longer is one form of society and life to content itself with

the morality made for another? We have had the morality of submission, and

the morality of chivalry and generosity; the time is now come for the morality

of justice. Whenever, in former ages, any approach has been made to society

in equality, Justice has asserted its claims as the foundation of virtue. It was

thus in the free republics of antiquity. But even in the best of these, the equals

were limited to the free male citizens; slaves, women, and the unenfranchised

residents were under the law of force. The joint influence of Roman

civilisation and of Christianity obliterated these distinctions, and in theory (if

only partially in practice) declared the claims of the human being, as such, to

be paramount to those of sex, class, or social position. The barriers which had

begun to be levelled were raised again by the northern conquests; and the

whole of modern history consists of the slow process by which they have

since been wearing away. We are entering into an order of things in which

justice will again be the primary virtue; grounded as before on equal, but now

also on sympathetic association; having its root no longer in the instinct of

equals for self protection, but in a cultivated sympathy between them; and no

one being now left out, but an equal measure being extended to all. It is no

novelty that mankind do not distinctly foresee their own changes, and that

their sentiments are adapted to past, not to coming ages. To see the futurity of

the species has always been the privilege of the intellectual elite, or of those

who have learnt from them; to have the feelings of that futurity has been the

distinction, and usually the martyrdom, of a still rarer elite. Institutions,

books, education, society, all go on training human beings for the old, long

after the new has come; much more when it is only coming. But the true

virtue of human beings is fitness to live together as equals; claiming nothing

for themselves but what they as freely concede to everyone else; regarding

command of any kind as an exceptional necessity, and in all cases a

temporary one; and preferring, whenever possible, the society of those withwhom leading and following can be alternate and reciprocal. To these virtues,

nothing in life as at present constituted gives cultivation by exercise. The

family is a school of despotism, in which the virtues of despotism, but also its

vices, are largely nourished. Citizenship, in free countries, is partly a school

of society in equality; but citizenship fills only a small place in modern life,

and does not come near the daily habits or inmost sentiments. The family,

justly constituted, would be the real school of the virtues of freedom. It is

sure to be a sufficient one of everything else. It will always be a school of

obedience for the children, of command for the parents. What is needed is,

that it should be a school of sympathy in equality, of living together in love,

without power on one side or obedience on the other. This it ought to be

between the parents. It would then be an exercise of those virtues which each

requires to fit them for all other association, and a model to the children of

the feelings and conduct which their temporary training by means of

obedience is designed to render habitual, and therefore natural, to them. The

moral training of mankind will never be adapted to the conditions of the life

for which all other human progress is a preparation, until they practise in the

family the same moral rule which is adapted to the normal constitution of

human society. Any sentiment of freedom which can exist in a man whose

nearest and dearest intimacies, are with those of whom he is absolute master,

is not the genuine or Christian love of freedom, but, what the love of freedom

generally was in the ancients and in the middle ages — an intense feeling of

the dignity and importance of his own personality; making him disdain a

yoke for himself, of which he has no abhorrence whatever in the abstract, but

which he is abundantly ready to impose on others for his own interest or

glorification.

              I readily admit (and it is the very foundation of my hopes) that

numbers of married people even under the present law (in the higher classes

of England probably a great majority), live in the spirit of a just law of

equality. Laws never would be improved, if there were not numerous persons

whose moral sentiments are better than the existing laws. Such persons ought

to support the principles here advocated; of which the only object is to make

all other married couples similar to what these are now. But persons even of

considerable moral worth, unless they are also thinkers, are very ready to

believe that laws or practices, the evils of which they have not personally

experienced, do not produce any evils, but (if seeming to be generally

approved of) probably do good, and that it is wrong to object to them. Itwould, however, be a great mistake in such married people to suppose,

because the legal conditions of the tie which unites them do not occur to their

thoughts once in a twelve month, and because they live and feel in all

respects as if they were legally equals, that the same is the case with all other

married couples, wherever the husband is not a notorious ruffian. To suppose

this, would be to show equal ignorance of human nature and of fact. The less

fit a man is for the possession of power — the less likely to be allowed to

exercise it over any person with that person's voluntary consent — the more

does he hug himself in the consciousness of the power the law gives him,

exact its legal rights to the utmost point which custom (the custom of men

like himself) will tolerate, and take pleasure in using the power, merely to

enliven the agreeable sense of possessing it. What is more; in the most

naturally brutal and morally uneducated part of the lower classes, the legal

slavery of the woman, and something in the merely physical subjection to

their will as an instrument, causes them to feel a sort of disrespect and

contempt towards their own wife which they do not feel towards any other

woman, or any other human being, with whom they come in contact; and

which makes her seem to them an appropriate subject for any kind of

indignity. Let an acute observer of the signs of feeling, who has the requisite

opportunities, judge for himself whether this is not the case: and if he finds

that it is, let him not wonder at any amount of disgust and indignation that

can be felt against institutions which lead naturally to this depraved state of

the human mind.

              We shall be told, perhaps, that religion imposes the duty of

obedience; as every established fact which is too bad to admit of any other

defence, is always presented to us as an injunction of religion. The Church, it

is very true, enjoins it in her formularies, but it would be difficult to derive

any such injunction from Christianity. We are told that St. Paul said, "Wives,

obey your husbands": but he also said, "Slaves, obey your masters." It was

not St. Paul's business, nor was it consistent with his object, the propagation

of Christianity, to incite anyone to rebellion against existing laws. The

Apostle's acceptance of all social institutions as he found them, is no more to

be construed as a disapproval of attempts to improve them at the proper time,

than his declaration, "The powers that be are ordained of God," gives his

sanction to military despotism, and to that alone, as the Christian form of

political government, or commands passive obedience to it. To pretend that

Christianity was intended to stereotype existing forms of government andsociety, and protect them against change, is to reduce it to the level of

Islamism or of Brahminism. It is precisely because Christianity has not done

this, that it has been the religion of the progressive portion of mankind, and

Islamism, Brahminism, etc. have been those of the stationary portions; or

rather (for there is no such thing as a really stationary society) of the

declining portions. There have been abundance of people, in all ages of

Christianity, who tried to make it something of the same kind; to convert us

into a sort of Christian Mussulmans, with the Bible for a Koran, prohibiting

all improvement: and great has been their power, and many have had to

sacrifice their lives in resisting them. But they have been resisted, and the

resistance has made us what we are, and will yet make us what we are to be.

              After what has been said respecting the obligation of obedience, it is

almost superfluous to say anything concerning the more special point

included in the general one — a woman's right to her own property; for I

need not hope that this treatise can make any impression upon those who

need anything to convince them that a woman's inheritance or gains ought to

be as much her own after marriage as before. The rule is simple: whatever

would be the husband's or wife's if they were not married, should be under

their exclusive control during marriage; which need not interfere with the

power to tie up property by settlement, in order to preserve it for children.

Some people are sentimentally shocked at the idea of a separate interest in

money matters as inconsistent with the ideal fusion of two lives into one. For

my own part, I am one of the strongest supporters of community of goods,

when resulting from an entire unity of feeling in the owners, which makes all

things common between them. But I have no relish for a community of goods

resting on the doctrine, that what is mine is yours, but what is yours is not

mine; and I should prefer to decline entering into such a compact with

anyone, though I were myself the person to profit by it.

              This particular injustice and oppression to women, which is, to

common apprehensions, more obvious than all the rest, admits of remedy

without interfering with any other mischiefs: and there can belittle doubt that

it will be one of the earliest remedied. Already, in many of the new and

several of the old States of the American Confederation, provisions have

been inserted even in the written Constitutions, securing to women equality

of rights in this respect: and thereby improving materially the position, in the

marriage relation, of those women at least who have property, by leavingthem one instrument of power which they have not signed away; and

preventing also the scandalous abuse of the marriage institution, which is

perpetrated when a man entraps a girl into marrying him without a settlement,

for the sole purpose of getting possession of her money. When the support of

the family depends, not on property, but on earnings, the common

arrangement, by which the man earns the income and the wife superintends

the domestic expenditure, seems to me in general the most suitable division

of labour between the two persons. If, in addition to the physical suffering of

bearing children, and the whole responsibility of their care and education in

early years, the wife undertakes the careful and economical application of the

husband's earnings to the general comfort of the family; she takes not only

her fair share, but usually the larger share, of the bodily and mental exertion

required by their joint existence. If she undertakes any additional portion, it

seldom relieves her from this, but only prevents her from performing it

properly. The care which she is herself disabled from taking of the children

and the household, nobody else takes; those of the children who do not die,

grow up as they best can, and the management of the household is likely to

be so bad, as even in point of economy to be a great drawback from the value

of the wife's earnings. In another wise just state of things, it is not, therefore, I

think, a desirable custom, that the wife should contribute by her labour to the

income of the family. In an unjust state of things, her doing so may be useful

to her, by making her of more value in the eyes of the man who is legally her

master; but, on the other hand, it enables him still farther to abuse his power,

by forcing her to work, and leaving the support of the family to her exertions,

while he spends most of his time in drinking and idleness. The power of

earning is essential to the dignity of a woman, if she has not independent

property. But if marriage were an equal contract, not implying the obligation

of obedience; if the connexion were no longer enforced to the oppression of

those to whom it is purely a mischief, but a separation, on just terms (I do not

now speak of a divorce), could be obtained by any woman who was morally

entitled to it; and if she would then find all honourable employments as freely

open to her as to men; it would not be necessary for her protection, that

during marriage she should make this particular use of her faculties. Like a

man when he chooses a profession, so, when a woman marries, it may in

general be understood that she makes choice of the management of a

household, and the bringing up of a family, as the first call upon her

exertions, during as many years of her life as may be required for thepurpose; and that she renounces, not all other objects and occupations, but all

which are not consistent with the requirements of this. The actual exercise, in

a habitual or systematic manner, of outdoor occupations, or such as cannot be

carried on at home, would by this principle be practically interdicted to the

greater number of married women. But the utmost latitude ought to exist for

the adaptation of general rules to individual suitabilities; and there ought to

be nothing to prevent faculties exceptionally adapted to any other pursuit,

from obeying their vocation notwithstanding marriage: due provision being

made for supplying otherwise any falling-short which might become

inevitable, in her full performance of the ordinary functions of mistress of a

family. These things, if once opinion were rightly directed on the subject,

might with perfect safety be left to be regulated by opinion, without any

interference of law.

 

 

                                       Chapter 3

 

 

              On the other point which is involved in the just equality of women,

their admissibility to all the functions and occupations hitherto retained as the

monopoly of the stronger sex, I should anticipate no difficulty in convincing

anyone who has gone with me on the subject of the equality of women in the

family. I believe that their disabilities elsewhere are only clung to in order to

maintain their subordination in domestic life; because the generality of the

male sex cannot yet tolerate the idea of living with an equal. Were it not for-

that, I think that almost everyone, in the existing state of opinion in politics

and political economy, would admit the injustice of excluding half the human

race from the greater number of lucrative occupations, and from almost all

high social functions; ordaining from their birth either that they are not, and

cannot by any possibility become, fit for employments which are legally open

to the stupidest and basest of the other sex, or else that however fit they may

be, those employments shall be interdicted to them, in order to be preserved

for the exclusive benefit of males. In the last two centuries, when (which was

seldom the case) any reason beyond the mere existence of the fact was

thought to be required to justify the disabilities of women, people seldom

assigned as a reason their inferior mental capacity; which, in times when

there was a real trial of personal faculties (from which all women were not

excluded) in the struggles of public life, no one really believed in. The reason

given in those days was not women's unfitness, but the interest of society, by

which was meant the interest of men: just as the raison d 'etat, meaning the

convenience of the government, and the support of existing authority, was

deemed a sufficient explanation and excuse for the most flagitious crimes. In

the present day, power holds a smoother language, and whomsoever it

oppresses, always pretends to do so for their own good: accordingly, when

anything is forbidden to women, it is thought necessary to say, and desirable

to believe, that they are incapable of doing it, and that they depart from their

real path of success and happiness when they aspire to it. But to make this

reason plausible (I do not say valid), those by whom it is urged must be

prepared to carry it to a much greater length than anyone ventures to do in the

face of present experience. It is not sufficient to maintain that women on theaverage are less gifted then men on the average, with certain of the higher

mental faculties, or that a smaller number of women than of men are fit for

occupations and functions of the highest intellectual character. It is necessary

to maintain that no women at all are fit for them, and that the most eminent

women arc inferior in mental faculties to the most mediocre of the men on

whom those functions at present devolve. For if the performance of the

function is decided either by competition, or by any mode of choice which

secures regard to the public interest, there needs be no apprehension that any

important employments will fall into the hands of women inferior to average

men, or to the average of their male competitors. The only result would be

that there would be fewer women than men in such employments; a result

certain to happen in any case, if only from the preference always likely to be

felt by the majority of women for the one vocation in which there is nobody

to compete with them. Now, the most determined depreciator of women will

not venture to deny, that when we add the experience of recent times to that

of ages past, women, and not a few merely, but many women, have proved

themselves capable of everything, perhaps without a single exception, which

is done by men, and of doing it successfully and creditably. The utmost that

can be said is, that there arc many things which none of them have succeeded

in doing as well as they have been done by some men — many in which they

have not reached the very highest rank. But there are extremely few,

dependent only on mental faculties, in which they have not attained the rank

next to the highest. Is not this enough, and much more than enough, to make

it a tyranny to them, and a detriment to society, that they should not be

allowed to compete with men for the exercise of these functions? Is it not a

mere truism to say, that such functions are often filled by men far less fit for

them than numbers of women, and who would be beaten by women in any

fair field of competition? What difference does it make that there may be men

somewhere, fully employed about other things, who may be still better

qualified for the things in question than these women? Does not this take

place in all competitions? Is there so great a superfluity of men fit for high

duties, that society can afford to reject the service of any competent person?

Are we so certain of always finding a man made to our hands for any duty or

function of social importance which falls vacant, that we lose nothing by

putting a ban upon one half of mankind, and refusing beforehand to make

their faculties available, however distinguished they may be? And even if we

could do without them, would it be consistent with justice to refuse to themtheir fair share of honour and distinction, or to deny to them the equal moral

right of all human beings to choose their occupation (short of injury to others)

according to their own preferences, at their own risk? Nor is the injustice

confined to them: it is shared by those who are in a position to benefit by

their services. To ordain that any kind of persons shall not be physicians, or

shall not be advocates, or shall not be Members of Parliament, is to injure not

them only, but all who employ physicians or advocates, or elect Members of

Parliament, and who are deprived of the stimulating effect of greater

competition on the exertions of the competitors, as well as restricted to a

narrower range of individual choice.

              It will perhaps be sufficient if I confine myself, in the details of my

argument, to functions of a public nature: since, if I am successful as to those,

it probably will be readily granted that women should be admissible to all

other occupations to which it is at all material whether they are admitted or

not. And here let me begin by marking out one function, broadly

distinguished from all others, their right to which is entirely independent of

any question which can be raised concerning their faculties. I mean the

suffrage, both parliamentary and municipal. The right to share in the choice

of those who are to exercise a public trust, is altogether a distinct thing from

that of competing for the trust itself. If no one could vote for a Member of

Parliament who was not fit to be a candidate, the government would be a

narrow oligarchy indeed. To have a voice in choosing those by whom one is

to be governed, is a means of self-protection due to everyone, though he were

to remain for ever excluded from the function of governing: and that women

are considered fit to have such a choice, may be presumed from the fact, that

the law already gives it to women in the most important of all cases to

themselves: for the choice of the man who is to govern a woman to the end of

life, is always supposed to be voluntarily made by herself. In the case of

election to public trusts, it is the business of constitutional law to surround

the right of suffrage with all needful securities and limitations; but whatever

securities are sufficient in the case of the male sex, no others need be required

in the case of women. Under whatever conditions, and within whatever

limits, men are admitted to the suffrage, there is not a shadow of justification

for not admitting women under the same. The majority of the women of any

class are not likely to differ in political opinion from the majority of the men

of the same class, unless the question be one in which the interests of women,

as such, are in some way involved; and if they are so, women require thesuffrage, as their guarantee of just and equal consideration. This ought to be

obvious even to those who coincide in no other of the doctrines for which I

contend. Even if every woman were a wife, and if every wife ought to be a

slave, all the more would these slaves stand in need of legal protection: and

we know what legal protection the slaves have, where the laws are made by

their masters.

              With regard to the fitness of women, not only to participate in

elections, but themselves to hold offices or practise professions involving

important public responsibilities; I have already observed that this

consideration is not essential to the practical question in dispute: since any

woman, who succeeds n an open profession, proves by that very fact that she

is qualified for it. And in the case of public offices, if the political system of

the country is such as to exclude unfit men, it will equally exclude unfit

women: while if it is not, there is no additional evil in the fact that the unfit

persons whom it admits may be either women or men. As long therefore as it

is acknowledged that even a few women may be fit for these duties, the laws

which shut the door on those exceptions cannot be justified by any opinion

which can be held respecting the capacities of women in general. But, though

this last consideration is not essential, it is far from being irrelevant. An

unprejudiced view of it gives additional strength to the arguments against the

disabilities of women, and reinforces them by high considerations of practical

utility.

              Let us first make entire abstraction of all psychological

considerations tending to show, that any of the mental differences supposed

to exist between women and men are but the natural effect of the differences

in their education and circumstances, and indicate no radical difference, far

less radical inferiority, of nature. Let us consider women only as they already

are, or as they are known to have been; and the capacities which they have

already practically shown. What they have done, that at least, if nothing else,

it is proved that they can do. When we consider how sedulously they are all

trained away from, instead of being trained towards, any of the occupations

or objects reserved for men, it is evident that I am taking a very humble

ground for them, when I rest their case on what they have actually achieved.

For, in this case, negative evidence is worth little,-while any positive

evidence is conclusive. It cannot be inferred to be impossible that a woman

should be a Homer, or an Aristotle, or a Michael Angelo, or a Beethoven,because no woman has yet actually produced works comparable to theirs in

any of those lines of excellence. This negative fact at most leaves the

question uncertain, and open to psychological discussion. But it is quite

certain that a woman can be a Queen Elizabeth, or a Deborah, or a Joan of

Arc, since this is not inference, but fact. Now it is a curious consideration,

that the only things which the existing law excludes women from doing, are

the things which they have proved that they are able to do. There is no law to

prevent a woman from having written all the plays of Shakespeare, or

composed all the operas of Mozart. But Queen Elizabeth or Queen Victoria,

had they not inherited the throne, could not have been entrusted with the

smallest of the political duties, of which the former showed herself equal to

the greatest.

              If anything conclusive could be inferred from experience, without

psychological analysis, it would be that the things which women are not

allowed to do are the very ones for which they are peculiarly qualified; since

their vocation for government has made its way, and become conspicuous,

through the very few opportunities which have been given; while in the lines

of distinction which apparently were freely open to them, they have by no

means so eminently distinguished themselves.

              We know how small a number of reigning queens history presents,

in comparison with that of kings. of this smaller number a far larger

proportion have shown talents for rule; though many of them have occupied

the throne in difficult periods. It is remarkable, too, that they have, in a great

number of instances, been distinguished by merits the most opposite to the

imaginary and conventional character of women: they have been as much

remarked for the firmness and vigour of their rule, as for its intelligence.

When, to queens and empresses, we add regents, and viceroys of provinces,

the list of women who have been eminent rulers of mankind swells to a great
      *
length. This fact is so undeniable, that someone, long ago, tried to retort the

argument, and turned the admitted truth into an additional insult, by saying

that queens are better than kings, because under kings women govern, but

under queens, men.

        *
               Especially is this true if we take into consideration Asia as well as

Europe. If a Hindoo principality is strongly, vigilantly, and economically

governed; if order is preserved without oppression; if cultivation is extending,

and the people prosperous, in three cases out of four that principality is undera woman's rule. This fact, to me an entirely unexpected one, I have collected

from a long knowledge of Hindoo governments. There are many such

instances: for though, by Hindoo institutions, a woman cannot reign, she is

the legal regent of a kingdom during the minority of the heir; and minorities

are frequent, the lives of the male rulers being so often prematurely

terminated through the effect of inactivity and sensual excesses. When we

consider that these princesses have never been seen in public, have never

conversed with any man not of their own family except from behind a

curtain, that they do not read, and if they did there is no book in their

languages which ca give them the smallest instruction on political affairs; the

example they afford of the natural capacity of women for government is very

striking.

              It may seem a waste of reasoning to argue against a bad joke; but

such things do affect people's minds; and I have heard men quote this saying,

with an air as if they thought that there was something in it. At any rate, it

will serve as anything, else for a starting-point in discussion. I say, then, that

it is not true that under kings, women govern. Such cases are entirely

exceptional: and weak kings have quite as often governed ill through the

influence of male favourites, as of female. When a king is governed by a

woman merely through his amatory propensities, good government is not

probable, though even then there are exceptions. But French history counts

two kings who have voluntarily given the direction of affairs during many

years, the one to his mother, the other to his sister: one of them, Charles VIII,

was a mere boy, but in doing so he followed the intentions of his father Louis

XI, the ablest monarch of his age. The other, Saint Louis, was the best, and

one of the most vigorous rulers, since the time of Charlemagne. Both these

princesses ruled in a manner hardly equalled by any prince among their

contemporaries. The Emperor Charles the Fifth, the most politic prince of his

time, who had as great a number of able men in his service as a ruler ever

had, and was one of the least likely of all sovereigns to sacrifice his interest

to personal feelings, made two princesses of his family successively

Governors of the Netherlands, and kept one or other of them in that post

during his whole life (they were afterwards succeeded by a third). Both ruled

very successfully, and one of them, Margaret of Austria, as one of the ablest

politicians of the age. So much for one side of the question. Now as to the

other. When it is said that under queens men govern, is the same meaning to

be understood as when kings are said to be governed by women? Is it meantthat queens choose as their instruments of government, the associates of their

personal pleasures? The case is rare even with those who are as unscrupulous

on the latter point as Catherine II: and it is not in these cases that the good

government, alleged to arise from male influence, is to be found. If it be true,

then, that the administration is in the hands of better men under a queen than

under an average king, it must be that queens have a superior capacity for

choosing them; and women must be better qualified than men both for the

position of sovereign, and for that of chief minister; for the principal business

of a Prime Minister is not to govern in person, but to find the fittest persons

to conduct every department of public affairs. The more rapid insight into

character, which is one of the admitted points of superiority in women over

men, must certainly make them, with anything like parity of qualifications in

other respects, more apt than men in that choice of instruments, which is

nearly the most important business of everyone who has to do with governing

mankind. Even the unprincipled Catherine de Medici could feel the value of a

Chancellor de l'Hopital. But it is also true that most great queens have been

great by their own talents for government, and have been well served

precisely for that reason. They retained the supreme direction of affairs in

their own hands: and if they listened to good advisers, they gave by that fact

the strongest proof that their judgment fitted them for dealing with the great

questions of government.

              Is it reasonable to think that those who are fit for the greater

functions of politics, are incapable of qualifying themselves for the less? Is

there any reason in the nature of things, that the wives and sisters of princes

should, whenever called on, be found as competent as the princes themselves

to their business, but that the wives and sisters of statesmen, and

administrators, and directors of companies, and managers of public

institutions, should be unable to do what is done by their brothers and

husbands? The real reason is plain enough; it is that princesses, being more

raised above the generality of men by their rank than placed below them by

their sex, have never been taught that it was improper for them to concern

themselves with politics; but have been allowed to feel the liberal interest

natural to any cultivated human being, in the great transactions which took

place around them, and in which they might be called on to take a part. The

ladies of reigning families are the only women who are allowed the same

range of interests and freedom of development as men; and it is precisely in

their case that there is not found to be any inferiority. Exactly where and inproportion as women's capacities for government have been tried, in that

proportion have they been found adequate.

              This fact is in accordance with the best general conclusions which

the world's imperfect experience seems as yet to suggest, concerning the

peculiar tendencies and aptitudes characteristic of women, as women have

hitherto been. I do not say, as they will continue to be; for, as I have already

said more than once, I consider it presumption in anyone to pretend to decide

what women are or are not, can or cannot be, by natural constitution. They

have always hitherto been kept, as far as regards spontaneous development,

in so unnatural a state, that their nature cannot but have been greatly distorted

and disguised; and no one can safely pronounce that if women's nature were

left to choose its direction as freely as men's, and if no artificial bent were

attempted to be given to it except that required by the conditions of human

society, and given to both sexes alike, there would be any material difference,

or perhaps any difference at all, in the character and capacities which would

unfold themselves. I shall presently show, that even the least contestable of

the differences which now exist, are such as may very well have been

produced merely by circumstances, without any difference of natural

capacity. But, looking at women as they are known in experience, it may be

said of them, with more truth than belongs to most other generalisations on

the subject, that the general bent of their talents is towards the practical. This

statement is conformable to all the public history of women, in the present

and the past. It is no less borne out by common and daily experience. Let us

consider the special nature of the mental capacities most characteristic of a

woman of talent. They are all of a kind which fits them for practice, and

makes them tend towards it. What is meant by a woman's capacity of

intuitive perception? It means, a rapid and correct insight into present fact. It

has nothing to do with general principles. Nobody ever perceived a scientific

law of nature by intuition, nor arrived at a general rule of duty or prudence by

it. These are results of slow and careful collection and comparison of

experience; and neither the men nor the women. of intuition usually shine in

this department, unless, indeed, the experience necessary is such as they can

acquire by themselves. For what is called their intuitive sagacity makes them

peculiarly apt in gathering such general truths as can be collected from their

individual means of observation. When, consequently, they chance to be as

well provided as men are with the results of other people's experience, by

reading and education (I use the word chance advisedly, for, in respect to theknowledge that tends to fit them for the greater concerns of life, the only

educated women are the self-educated) they are better furnished than men in

general with the essential requisites of skilful and successful practice. Men

who have been much taught, are apt to be deficient in the sense of present

fact; they do not see, in the facts which they are called upon to deal with,

what is really there, but what they have been taught to expect. This is seldom

the case with women of any ability. Their capacity of "intuition" preserves

them from it. With equality of experience and of general faculties, a woman

usually sees much more than a man of what is immediately before her. Now

this sensibility to the present, is the main quality on which the capacity for

practice, as distinguished from theory, depends. To discover general

principles, belongs to the speculative faculty: to discern and discriminate the

particular cases in which they are and are not applicable, constitutes practical

talent: and for this, women as they now are have a peculiar aptitude. I admit

that there can be no good practice without principles, and that the

predominant place which quickness of observation holds among a woman's

faculties, makes her particularly apt to build overhasty generalisations upon

her own observation; though at the same time no less ready in rectifying

those generalisations, as her observation takes a wider range. But the

corrective to this defect, is access to the experience of the human race;

general knowledge — exactly the thing which education can best supply. A

woman's mistakes are specifically those of a clever self-educated man, who

often sees what men trained in routine do not see, but falls into errors for

want of knowing things which have long been known. Of course he has

acquired much of the pre-existing knowledge, or he could not have got on at

all; but what he knows of it he has picked up in fragments and at random, as

women do.

              But this gravitation of women's minds to the present, to the real, to

actual fact, while in its exclusiveness it is a source of errors, is also a most

useful counteractive of the contrary error. The principal and most

characteristic aberration of speculative minds as such, consists precisely in

the deficiency of this lively perception and ever-present sense of objective

fact. For want of this, they often not only overlook the contradiction which

outward facts oppose to their theories, but lose sight of the legitimate purpose

of speculation altogether, and let their speculative faculties go astray into

regions not peopled with real beings, animate or inanimate, even idealised,

but with personified shadows created by the illusions of metaphysics or bythe mere entanglement of words, and think these shadows the proper objects

of the highest, the most transcendant, philosophy. Hardly anything can be of

greater value to a man of theory and speculation who employs himself not in

collecting materials of knowledge by observation, but in working them up by

processes of thought into comprehensive truths of science and laws of

conduct, than to carry on his speculations in the companionship, and under

the criticism, of a really superior woman. There is nothing comparable to it

for keeping his thoughts within the limits of real things, and the actual facts

of nature. A woman seldom runs wild after an abstraction. The habitual

direction of her mind to dealing with things as individuals rather than in

groups, and (what is closely connected with it) her more lively interest in the

present feelings of persons, which makes her consider first of all, in anything

which claims to be applied to practice, in what manner persons will be

affected by it — these two things make her extremely unlikely to put faith in

any speculation which loses sight of individuals, and deals with things as if

they existed for the benefit of some imaginary entity, some mere creation of

the mind, not resolvable into the feelings of living beings. Women's thoughts

are thus as useful in giving reality to those of thinking men, as men's thoughts

in giving width and largeness to those of women. In depth, as distinguished

from breadth, I greatly doubt if even now, women, compared with men, are at

any disadvantage.

              If the existing mental characteristics of women are thus valuable

even in aid of speculation, they are still more important, when speculation

has done its work, for carrying out the results of speculation into practice. For

the reasons already given, women are comparatively unlikely to fall into the

common error of men, that of sticking to their rules in a case whose

specialities either take it out of the class to which the rules are applicable, or

require a special adaptation of them. Let us now consider another of the

admitted superiorities of clever women, greater quickness of apprehension. Is

not this pre-eminently a quality which fits a person for practice? In action,

everything continually depends upon deciding promptly. In speculation,

nothing does. A mere thinker can wait, can take time to consider, can collect

additional evidence; he is not obliged to complete his philosophy at once, lest

the opportunity should go by. The power of drawing the best conclusion

possible from insufficient data is not indeed useless in philosophy; the

construction of a provisional hypothesis consistent with all known facts is

often the needful basis for further inquiry. But this faculty is ratherserviceable in philosophy, than the main qualification for it: and, for the

auxiliary as well as for the main operation, the philosopher can allow himself

any time he pleases. He is in no need of the capacity of doing rapidly what he

does; what he rather needs is patience, to work on slowly until imperfect

lights have become perfect, and a conjecture has ripened into a theorem. For

those, on the contrary, whose business is with the fugitive and perishable —

with individual facts, not kinds of facts — rapidity of thought is a

qualification next only in importance to the power of thought itself. He who

has not his faculties under immediate command, in the contingencies of

action, might as well not have them at all. He may be fit to criticise, but he is

not fit to act. Now it is in this that women, and the men who are most like

women, confessedly excel. The other sort of man, however pre-eminent may

be his faculties, arrives slowly at complete command of them: rapidity of

judgment and promptitude of judicious action, even in the things he knows

best, are the gradual and late result of strenuous effort grown into habit.

              It will be said, perhaps, that the greater nervous susceptibility of

women is a disqualification for practice, in anything but domestic life, by

rendering them mobile, changeable, too vehemently under the influence of

the moment, incapable of dogged perseverance, unequal and uncertain in the

power of using their faculties. I think that these phrases sum up the greater

part of the objections commonly made to the fitness of women for the higher

class of serious business. Much of all this is the mere overflow of nervous

energy run to waste, and would cease when the energy was directed to a

definite end. Much is also the result of conscious or unconscious cultivation;

as we see by the almost total disappearance of "hysterics" and fainting-fits,

since they have gone out of fashion. Moreover, when people are brought up,

like many women of the higher classes (though less so in our own country

than any other), a kind of hot-house plants, shielded from the wholesome

vicissitudes of air and temperature, and untrained in any of the occupations

and exercises which give stimulus and development to the circulatory and

muscular system, while their nervous system, especially in its emotional

department, is kept in unnaturally active play; it is no wonder if those of them

who do not die of consumption, grow up with constitutions liable to

derangement from slight causes, both internal and external, and without

stamina to support any task, physical or mental, requiring continuity of effort.

But women brought up to work for their livelihood show none of these

morbid characteristics, unless indeed they are chained to an excess ofsedentary work in confined and unhealthy rooms. Women who in their early

years have shared in the healthful physical education and bodily freedom of

their brothers, and who obtain a sufficiency of pure air and exercise in after-

life, very rarely have any excessive susceptibility of nerves which can

disqualify them for active pursuits. There is indeed a certain proportion of

persons, in both sexes, in whom an unusual degree of nervous sensibility is

constitutional, and of so marked a character as to be the feature of their

organisation which exercises the greatest influence over the whole character

of the vital phenomena. This constitution, like other physical conformations,

is hereditary, and is transmitted to sons as well as daughters; but it is

possible, and probable, that the nervous temperament (as it is called) is

inherited by a greater number of women than of men. We will assume this as

a fact: and let me then ask, are men of nervous temperament found to be unfit

for the duties and pursuits usually followed by men? If not, why should

women of the same temperament be unfit for them? The peculiarities of the

temperament are, no doubt, within certain limits, an obstacle to success in

some employments, though an aid to it in others. But when the occupation is

suitable to the temperament, and sometimes even when it is unsuitable, the

most brilliant examples of success are continually given by the men of high

nervous sensibility. They are distinguished in their practical manifestations

chiefly by this, that being susceptible of a higher degree of excitement than

those of another physical constitution, their powers when excited differ more

than in the case of other people, from those shown in their ordinary state:

they are raised, as it were, above themselves, and do things with ease which

they are wholly incapable of at other times. But this lofty excitement is not,

except in weak bodily constitutions, a mere flash, which passes away

immediately, leaving no permanent traces, and incompatible with persistent

and steady pursuit of an object. It is the character of the nervous temperament

to be capable of sustained excitement, holding out through long-continued

efforts. It is what is meant by spirit. It is what makes the high-bred racehorse

run without slackening speed till he drops down dead. It is what has enabled

so many delicate women to maintain the most sublime constancy not only at

the stake, but through a long preliminary succession of mental and bodily

tortures. It is evident that people of this temperament are particularly apt for

what may be called the executive department of the leadership of mankind.

They are the material of great orators, great preachers, impressive diffusers of

moral influences. Their constitution might be deemed less favourable to thequalities required from a statesman in the cabinet, or from a judge. It would

be so, if the consequence necessarily followed that because people are

excitable they must always be in a state of excitement. But this is wholly a

question of training. Strong feeling is the instrument and element of strong

self-control: but it requires to be cultivated in that direction. When it is, it

forms not the heroes of impulse only, but those also of self-conquest. History

and experience prove that the most passionate characters are the most

fanatically rigid in their feelings of duty, when their passion has been trained

to act in that direction. The judge who gives a just decision in a case where

his feelings are intensely interested on the other side, derives from that same

strength of feeling the determined sense of the obligation of justice, which

enables him to achieve this victory over himself. The capability of that lofty

enthusiasm which takes the human being out of his every-day character,

reacts upon the daily character itself. His aspirations and powers when he is

in this exceptional state, become the type with which he compares, and by

which he estimates, his sentiments and proceedings at other times: and his

habitual purposes assume a character moulded by and assimilated to the

moments of lofty excitement, although those, from the physical nature of a

human being, can only be transient. Experience of races, as well as of

individuals, does not show those of excitable temperament to be less fit, on

the average, either for speculation or practice, than the more unexcitable. The

French, and the Italians, are undoubtedly by nature more nervously excitable

than the Teutonic races, and, compared at least with the English, they have a

much greater habitual and daily emotional life: but have they been less great

in science, in public business, in legal and judicial eminence, or in war?

There is abundant evidence that the Greeks were of old, as their descendants

and successors still are, one of the most excitable of the races of mankind. It

is superfluous to ask, what among the achievements of men they did not

excel in. The Romans, probably, as an equally southern people, had the same

original temperament: but the stern character of their national discipline, like

that of the Spartans, made them an example of the opposite type of national

character; the greater strength of their natural feelings being chiefly apparent

in the intensity which the same original temperament made it possible to give

to the artificial. If these cases exemplify what a naturally excitable people

may be made, the Irish Celts afford one of the aptest examples of what they

are when left to themselves; (if those can be said to be left to themselves who

have been for centuries under the indirect influence of bad government, andthe direct training of a Catholic hierarchy and of a sincere belief in the

Catholic religion). The Irish character must be considered, therefore, as an

unfavourable case: yet, whenever the circumstances of the individual have

been at all favourable, what people have shown greater capacity for the most

varied and multifarious individual eminence? Like the French compared with

the English, the Irish with the Swiss, the Greeks or Italians compared with the

German races, so women compared with men may be found, on the average,

to do the same things with some variety in the particular kind of excellence.

But, that they would do them fully as well on the whole, if their education

and cultivation were adapted to correcting instead of aggravating the

infirmities incident to their temperament, I see not the smallest reason to

doubt.

              Supposing it, however, to be true that women's minds are by nature

more mobile than those of men, less capable of persisting long in the same

continuous effort, more fitted for dividing their faculties among many things

than for travelling in any one path to the highest point which can be reached

by it: this may be true of women as they now are (though not without great

and numerous exceptions), and may account for their having remained behind

the highest order of men in precisely the things in which this absorption of

the whole mind in one set of ideas and occupations may seem to be most

requisite. Still, this difference is one which can only affect the kind of

excellence, not the excellence itself, or its practical worth: and it remains to

be shown whether this exclusive working of a part of the mind, this

absorption of the whole thinking faculty in a single subject, and concentration

of it on a single work, is the normal and healthful condition of the human

faculties, even for speculative uses. I believe that what is gained in special

development by this concentration, is lost in the capacity of the mind for the

other purposes of life; and even in abstract thought, it is my decided opinion

that the mind does more by frequently returning to a difficult problem, than

by sticking to it without interruption. For the purposes, at all events, of

practice, from its highest to its humblest departments, the capacity of passing

promptly from one subject of consideration to another, without letting the

active spring of the intellect run down between the two, is a power far more

valuable; and this power women pre-eminently possess, by virtue of the very

mobility of which they are accused. They perhaps have it from nature, but

they certainly have it by training and education; for nearly the whole of the

occupations of women consist in the management of small but multitudinousdetails, on each of which the mind cannot dwell even for a minute, but must

pass on to other things, and if anything requires longer thought, must steal

time at odd moments for thinking of it. The capacity indeed which women

show for doing their thinking in circumstances and at times which almost any

man would make an excuse to himself for not attempting it, has often been

noticed: and a woman's mind, though it may be occupied only with small

things, can hardly ever permit its elf to be vacant, as a man's so often is when

not engaged in what he chooses to consider the business of his life. The

business of a woman's ordinary life is things in general, and can as little cease

to go on as the world to go round.

              But (it is said) there is anatomical evidence of the superior mental

capacity of men compared with women: they have a larger brain. I reply, that

in the first place the fact itself is doubtful. It is by no means established that

the brain of a woman is smaller than that of a man. If it is inferred merely

because a woman's bodily frame generally is of less dimensions than a man's,

this criterion would lead to strange consequences. A tall and large-boned man

must on this showing be wonderfully superior in intelligence to a small man,

and an elephant or a whale must prodigiously excel mankind. The size of the

brain in human beings, anatomists say, varies much less than the size of the

body, or even of the head, and the one cannot be at all inferred from the

other. It is certain that some women have as large a brain as any man. It is

within my knowledge that a man who had weighed many human brains, said

that the heaviest he knew of, heavier even than Cuvier's (the heaviest

previously recorded), was that of a woman. Next, I must observe that the

precise relation which exists between the brain and the intellectual powers is

not yet well understood, but is a subject of great dispute. That there is a very

close relation we cannot doubt. The brain is certainly the material organ of

thought and feeling: and (making abstraction of the great unsettled

controversy respecting the appropriation of different parts of the brain to

different mental faculties) I admit that it would be an anomaly, and an

exception to all we know of the general laws of life and organisation, if the

size of the organ were wholly indifferent to the function; if no accession of

power were derived from the great magnitude of the instrument. But the

exception and the anomaly would be fully as great if the organ exercised

influence by its magnitude only. In all the more delicate operations of nature

— of which those of the animated creation are the most delicate, and those of

the nervous system by far the most delicate of these — differences in theeffect depend as much on differences of quality in the physical agents, as on

their quantity: and if the quality of an instrument is to be tested by the nicety

and delicacy of the work it can do, the indications point to a greater average

fineness of quality in the brain and nervous system of women than of men.

Dismissing abstract difference of quality, a thing difficult to verify, the

efficiency of an organ is known to depend not solely on its size but on its

activity: and of this we have an approximate measure in the energy with

which the blood circulates through it, both the stimulus and the reparative

force being mainly dependent on the circulation. It would not be surprising

— it is indeed an hypothesis which accords well with the differences actually

observed between the mental operations of the two sexes — if men on the

average should have the advantage in the size of the brain, and women in

activity of cerebral circulation. The results which conjecture, founded on

analogy, would lead us to expect from this difference of organisation, would

correspond to some of those which we most commonly see. In the first place,

the mental operations of men might be expected to be slower. They would

neither be so prompt as women in thinking, nor so quick to feel. Large bodies

take more time to get into full action. on the other hand, when once got

thoroughly into play, men's brain would bear more work. It would be more

persistent in the line first taken; it would have more difficulty in changing

from one mode of action to another, but, in the one thing it was doing, it

could go on longer without loss of power or sense of fatigue. And do we not

find that the things in which men most excel women are those which require

most plodding and long hammering at a single thought, while women do best

what must be done rapidly? A woman's brain is sooner fatigued, sooner

exhausted; but given the degree of exhaustion, we should expect to find that

it would recover itself sooner. I repeat that this speculation is entirely

hypothetical; it pretends to no more than to suggest a line of inquiry. I have

before repudiated the notion of its being yet certainly known that there is any

natural difference at all in the average strength or direction of the mental

capacities of the two sexes, much less what that difference is. Nor is it

possible that this should be known, so long as the psychological laws of the

formation of character have been so little studied, even in a general way, and

in the particular case never scientifically applied at all; so long as the most

obvious external causes of difference of character are habitually disregarded

— left unnoticed by the observer, and looked down upon with a kind of

supercilious contempt by the prevalent schools both of natural history and ofmental philosophy: who, whether they look for the source of what mainly

distinguishes human beings from one another, in the world of matter or in

that of spirit, agree in running down those who prefer to explain these

differences by the different relations of human beings to society and life.

              To so ridiculous an extent are the notions formed of the nature of

women, mere empirical generalisations, framed, without philosophy or

analysis, upon the first instances which present themselves, that the popular

idea of it is different in different countries, according as the opinions and

social circumstances of the country have given to the women living in it any

speciality of development or non-development. An oriental thinks that

women are by nature peculiarly voluptuous; see the violent abuse of them on

this ground in Hindoo writings. An Englishman usually thinks that they are

by nature cold. The sayings about women's fickleness are mostly of French

origin; from the famous distich of Francis the First, upward and downward.

In England it is a common remark, how much more constant women are than

men. Inconstancy has been longer reckoned discreditable to a woman, in

England than in France; and Englishwomen are besides, in their inmost

nature, much more subdued to opinion. It may be remarked by the way, that

Englishmen are in peculiarly unfavourable circumstances for attempting to

judge what is or is not natural, not merely to women, but to men, or to human

beings altogether, at least if they have only English experience to go upon:

because there is no place where human nature shows so little of its original

lineaments. Both in a good and a bad sense, the English are farther from a

state of nature than any other modern people. They are, more than any other

people, a product of civilisation and discipline. England is the country in

which social discipline has most succeeded, not so much in conquering, as in

suppressing, whatever is liable to conflict with it. The English, more than any

other people, not only act but feel according to rule. In other countries, the

taught opinion, or the requirement of society, may be the stronger power, but

the promptings of the individual nature are always visible under it, and often

resisting it: rule may be stronger than nature, but nature is still there. In

England, rule has to a great degree substituted itself for nature. The greater

part of life is carried on, not by following inclination under the control of

rule, but by having no inclination but that of following a rule. Now this has

its good side doubtless, though it has also a wretchedly bad one; but it must

render an Englishman peculiarly ill-qualified to pass a judgment on the

original tendencies of human nature from his own experience. The errors towhich observers elsewhere are liable on the subject, are of a different

character. An Englishman is ignorant respecting human nature, a Frenchman

is prejudiced. An Englishman's errors are negative, a Frenchman's positive.

An Englishman fancies that things do not exist, because he never sees them; a

Frenchman thinks they must always and necessarily exist, because he does

see them. An Englishman does not know nature, because he has had no

opportunity of observing it; a Frenchman generally knows a great deal of it,

but often mistakes it, because he has only seen it sophisticated and distorted.

For the artificial state superinduced by society disguises the natural

tendencies of the thing which is the subject of observation, in two different

ways: by extinguishing the nature, or by transforming it. In the one case there

is but a starved residuum of nature remaining to be studied; in the other case

there is much, but it may have expanded in any direction rather than that in

which it would spontaneously grow.

              I have-said that it cannot now be known how much of the existing

mental differences between men and women is natural and how much

artificial; whether there are any natural differences at all; or, supposing all

artificial causes of difference to be withdrawn, what natural character would

be revealed I am not about to attempt what I have pronounced impossible: but

doubt does not forbid conjecture, and where certainty is unattainable, there

may yet be the means of arriving at some degree of probability. The first

point, the origin of the differences actually observed, is the one most

accessible to speculation; and I shall attempt to approach it, by the only path

by which it can be reached; by tracing the mental consequences of external

influences. We cannot isolate a human being from the circumstances of his

condition, so as to ascertain experimentally what he would have been by

nature. but we can consider what he is, and what his circumstances have

been, and whether the one would have been capable of producing the other.

              Let us take, then, the only marked case which observation affords, of

apparent inferiority of women to men, if we except the merely physical one

of bodily strength. No production in philosophy, science, or art, entitled to

the first rank, has been the work of a woman. Is there any mode of accounting

for this, without supposing that women are naturally incapable of producing

them?

              In the first place, we may fairly question whether experience has

afforded sufficient grounds for an induction. It is scarcely three generationssince women, saving very rare exceptions have begun to try their capacity in

philosophy, science, or art. It is only in the present generation that their

attempts have been at all numerous; and they are even now extremely few,

everywhere but in England and France. It is a relevant question, whether a

mind possessing the requisites of first rate eminence in speculation or

creative art could have been expected, on the mere calculation of chances, to

turn up during that lapse of time, among the women whose tastes and

personal position admitted of their devoting themselves to these pursuits In

all things which there has yet been time for — in all but the very highest

grades in the scale of excellence, especially in the department in which they

have been longest engaged, literature (both prose and poetry) — women have

done quite as much, have obtained fully as high prizes and as many of them,

as could be expected from the length of time and the number of competitors.

If we go back to the earlier period when very few women made the attempt,

yet some of those few made it with distinguished success. The Greeks always

accounted Sappho among their great poets; and we may well suppose that

Myrtis, said to have been the teacher of Pindar, and Corinna, who five times

bore away from him the prize of poetry, must at least have had sufficient

merit to admit of being compared with that great name. Aspasia did not leave

any philosophical writings; but it is an admitted fact that Socrates resorted to

her for instruction, and avowed himself to have obtained it.

              If we consider the works of women in modem times, and contrast

them with those of men, either in the literary or the artistic department, such

inferiority as may be observed resolves itself essentially into one thing: but

that is a most material one; deficiency of originality. Not total deficiency; for

every production of mind which is of any substantive value, has an originality

of its own — is a conception of the mind itself, not a copy of something else.

Thoughts original, in the sense of being unborrowed — of being derived from

the thinker's own observations or intellectual processes — are abundant in the

writings of women. But they have not yet produced any of those great and

luminous new ideas which form an era in thought, nor those fundamentally

new conceptions in art, which open a vista of possible effects not before

thought of, and found a new school. Their compositions are mostly grounded

on the existing fund of thought, and their creations do-not deviate widely

from existing types. This is the sort of inferiority which their works manifest:

for in point of execution, in the detailed application of thought, and the

perfection of style, there is no inferiority. Our best novelists in point ofcomposition, and of the management of detail, have mostly been women; and

there is not in all modern literature a more eloquent vehicle of thought than

the style of Madame de Stael, nor, as a specimen of purely artistic excellence,

anything superior to the prose of Madame Sand, whose style acts upon the

nervous system like a symphony of Haydn or Mozart. High originality of

conception is, as I have said, what is chiefly wanting. And now to examine if

there is any manner in which this deficiency can be accounted for.

              Let us remember, then, so far as regards mere thought, that during all

that period in the world's existence, and in the progress of cultivation, in

which great and fruitful new truths I could be arrived at by mere force of

genius, with little precious study and accumulation of knowledge — during

all that time women did not concern themselves with speculation at all. From

the days of Hypatia to those of the Reformation, the illustrious Heloisa is

almost the only woman to whom any such achievement might have been

possible; and we know not how great a capacity of speculation in her may

have been lost to mankind by the misfortunes of her life. Never since any

considerable number of women have began to cultivate serious thought, has

originality been possible on easy terms. Nearly all the thoughts which can be

reached by mere strength of original faculties, have long since been arrived

at; and originality, in any high sense of the word, is now scarcely ever

attained but by minds which have undergone elaborate discipline, and are

deeply versed in the results of previous thinking. It is Mr. Maurice, I think,

who has remarked on the present age, that its most original thinkers are those

who have known most thoroughly what had been thought by their;

predecessors: and this will always henceforth be the case. Every fresh stone

in the edifice has now to be placed on the top of so many others, that a long

process of climbing, and of carrying up materials, has to be gone through by

whoever aspires to take a share in the present stage of the work. How many

women are there who have gone through any such process? Mrs. Somerville,

alone perhaps of women, knows as much of mathematics as is now needful

for making any considerable mathematical discovery: is it any proof of

inferiority in women, that she has not happened to be one of the two or three

persons who in her lifetime have associated their names with some striking

advancement of the science? Two women, since political economy has been

made a science, have known enough of it to write usefully on the subject: of

how many of the innumerable men who have written on it during the same

time, is it possible with truth to say more? If no woman has hitherto been agreat historian, what woman has had the necessary erudition? If no woman is

a great philologist, what woman has studied Sanscrit and Slavonic, the Gothic

of Ulphila and the Persic of the Zendavesta? Even in practical matters we all

know what is the value of the originality of untaught geniuses. It means,

inventing over again in its rudimentary form something already invented and

improved upon by many successive inventors. When women have had the

preparation which all men now require to be eminently original, it will be

time enough to begin judging by experience of their capacity for originality.

              It no doubt often happens that a person, who has not widely and

accurately studied the thoughts of others on a subject, has by natural sagacity

a happy intuition, which he can suggest, but cannot prove, which yet when

matured may be an important addition to knowledge: but even then, no

justice can be done to it until some other person, who does possess the

previous acquirements, takes it in hand, tests it, gives it a scientific or

practical form, and fits it into its place among the existing truths of

philosophy or science. Is it supposed that such felicitous thoughts do not

occur to women? They occur by hundreds to every woman of intellect. But

they are mostly lost, for want of a husband or friend who has the other

knowledge which can enable him to estimate them properly and bring them

before the world: and even when they are brought before it, they generally

appear as his ideas, not their real author's. Who can tell how many of the

most original thoughts put forth by male writers, belong to a woman by

suggestion, to themselves only by verifying and working out? If I may judge

by my own case, a very large proportion indeed.

              If we turn from pure speculation to literature in the narrow sense of

the term, and the fine arts, there is a very obvious reason why women's

literature is, in its general conception and in its main features, an imitation of

men's. Why is the Roman literature, as critics proclaim to satiety, not

original, but an imitation of the Greek? Simply because the Greeks came first.

If women lived in a different country from men, and had never read any of

their writings, they would have had a literature of their own. As it is, they

have not created one, because they found a highly advanced literature already

created. If there had been no suspension of the knowledge of antiquity, or if

the Renaissance had occurred before the Gothic cathedrals were built, they

never would have been built. We see that, in France and Italy, imitation of the

ancient literature stopped the original development even after it hadcommenced. All women who write are pupils of the great male writers. A

painter's early pictures, even if he be a Raffaello, are undistinguishable in

style from those of his master. Even a Mozart does not display his powerful

originality in his earliest pieces. What years are to a gifted individual,

generations are to a mass. If women's literature is destined to have a different

collective character from that of men, depending on any difference of natural

tendencies, much longer time is necessary than has yet elapsed, before it can

emancipate itself from the influence of accepted models, and guide itself by

its own impulses. But if, as I believe, there will not prove to be any natural

tendencies common to women, and distinguishing their genius from that of

men, yet every individual writer among them has her individual tendencies,

which at present are still subdued by the influence of precedent and example:

and it will require generations more, before their individuality is sufficiently

developed to make head against that influence.

              It is in the fine arts, properly so called, that the prima facie evidence

of inferior original powers in women at first sight appears the strongest: since

opinion (it may be said) does not exclude them from these, but rather

encourages them, and their education, instead of passing over this

department, is in the affluent classes mainly composed of it. Yet in this line

of exertion they have fallen still more short than in many others, of the

highest eminence attained by men. This shortcoming, however, needs no

other explanation than the familiar fact, more universally true in the fine arts

than in anything else; the vast superiority of professional persons over

amateurs. Women in the educated classes are almost universally taught more

or less of some branch or other of the fine arts, but not that they may gain

their living or their social consequence by it. Women artists are all amateurs.

The exceptions are only of the kind which confirm the general truth. Women.

are taught music, I but not for the purpose of composing, only of executing it:

and accordingly it is only as composers, that men, in music, are superior to

women. The only one of the fine arts which women do follow, to any extent,

as a profession, and an occupation for life, is the histrionic; and in that they

are confessedly equal, if not superior, to men. To make the comparison fair, it

should be made between the productions of women in any branch of art, and

those of men not following it as a profession. In musical composition, for

example, women surely have produced fully as good things as have ever been

produced by male amateurs. There are now a few women, a very few, who

practise painting as a profession, and these are already beginning to show