of the generated phenomenon, than a knowledge of the properties of oxygen

and sulphur enables us to deduce those of sulphuric acid without specific

observation and experiment. Whatever, therefore, may be the final issue of

the attempt to account for the origin of our judgments, our desires, or our

volitions, from simpler mental phenomena, it is not the less imperative to

ascertain the sequences of the complex phenomena themselves, by special

study in conformity to the canons of Induction. Thus, in respect to Belief,

psychologists will always have to inquire what beliefs we have by direct

consciousness, and according to what laws one belief produces another; what

are the laws in virtue of which one thing is recognized by the mind, either

rightly or erroneously, as evidence of another thing. In regard to Desire, they

will have to examine what objects we desire naturally, and by what causes we

are made to desire things originally indifferent, or even disagreeable to us;

and so forth. It may be remarked that the general laws of association prevail

among these more intricate states of mind, in the same manner as among the

simpler ones. A desire, an emotion, an idea of the higher order of abstraction,

even our judgments and volitions, when they have become habitual, are

called up by association, according to precisely the same laws as our simple

ideas.

              § 4. In the course of these inquiries, it will be natural and necessary

to examine how far the production of one state of mind by another is

influenced by any assignable state of body. The commonest observation

shows that different minds are susceptible in very different degrees to the

action of the same psychological causes. The idea, for example, of a given

desirable object will excite in different minds very different degrees of

intensity of desire. The same subject of meditation, presented to different

minds, will excite in them very unequal degrees of intellectual action. These

differences of mental susceptibility in different individuals may be, first,

original and ultimate facts; or, secondly, they may be consequences of the

previous mental history of those individuals; or, thirdly and lastly, they may

depend on varieties of physical organization. That the previous mental history

of the individuals must have some share in producing or in modifying the

whole of their mental character, is an inevitable consequence of the laws of

mind; but that differences of bodily structure also co-operate, is the opinion

of all physiologists, confirmed by common experience. It is to be regretted

that hitherto this experience, being accepted in the gross, without due

analysis, has been made the groundwork of empirical generalizations mostdetrimental to the progress of real knowledge.

              It is certain that the natural differences which really exist in the

mental predispositions or susceptibilities of different persons are often not

unconnected with diversities in their organic constitution. But it does not

therefore follow that these organic differences must in all cases influence the

mental phenomena directly and immediately. They often affect them through

the medium of their psychological causes. For example, the idea of some

particular pleasure may excite in different persons, even independently of

habit or education, very different strengths of desire, and this may be the

effect of their different degrees or kinds of nervous susceptibility; but these

organic differences, we must remember, will render the pleasurable sensation

itself more intense in one of these persons than in the other; so that the idea

of the pleasure will also be an intenser feeling, and will, by the operation of

mere mental laws, excite an intenser desire, without its being necessary to

suppose that the desire itself is directly influenced by the physical peculiarity.

As in this, so in many cases, such differences in the kind or in the intensity of

the physical sensations as must necessarily result from differences of bodily

organization, will of themselves account for many differences not only in the

degree, but even in the kind, of the other mental phenomena. So true is this,

that even different qualities of mind, different types of mental character, will

naturally be produced by mere differences of intensity in the sensations

generally; as is well pointed out in the able essay on Dr. Priestley, by Mr.

Martineau, mentioned in a former chapter:

              “The sensations which form the elements of all knowledge are

received either simultaneously or successively: when several are received

simultaneously, as the smell, the taste, the color, the form, etc., of a fruit,

their association together constitutes our idea of an object ; when received

successively, their association makes up the idea of an event . Any thing,

then, which favors the associations of synchronous ideas will tend to produce

a knowledge of objects, a perception of qualities; while any thing which

favors association in the successive order, will tend to produce a knowledge

of events, of the order of occurrences, and of the connection of cause and

effect: in other words, in the one case a perceptive mind, with a discriminate

feeling of the pleasurable and painful properties of things, a sense of the

grand and the beautiful will be the result: in the other, a mind attentive to the

movements and phenomena, a ratiocinative and philosophic intellect. Now itis an acknowledged principle, that all sensations experienced during the

presence of any vivid impression become strongly associated with it, and

with each other; and does it not follow that the synchronous feelings of a

sensitive constitution (i.e. , the one which has vivid impressions) will be more

intimately blended than in a differently formed mind? If this suggestion has

any foundation in truth, it leads to an inference not unimportant; that where

nature has endowed an individual with great original susceptibility, he will

probably be distinguished by fondness for natural history, a relish for the

beautiful and great, and moral enthusiasm; where there is but a mediocrity of

sensibility, a love of science, of abstract truth, with a deficiency of taste and

of fervor, is likely to be the result.”

              We see from this example, that when the general laws of mind are

more accurately known, and, above all, more skillfully applied to the detailed

explanation of mental peculiarities, they will account for many more of those

peculiarities than is ordinarily supposed. Unfortunately the reaction of the last

and present generation against the philosophy of the eighteenth century has

produced a very general neglect of this great department of analytical inquiry;

of which, consequently, the recent progress has been by no means

proportional to its early promise. The majority of those who speculate on

human nature prefer dogmatically to assume that the mental differences

which they perceive, or think they perceive, among human beings, are

ultimate facts, incapable of being either explained or altered, rather than take

the trouble of fitting themselves, by the requisite processes of thought, for

referring those mental differences to the outward causes by which they are for

the most part produced, and on the removal of which they would cease to

exist. The German school of metaphysical speculation, which has not yet lost

its temporary predominance in European thought, has had this among many

other injurious influences; and at the opposite extreme of the psychological

scale, no writer, either of early or of recent date, is chargeable in a higher

degree with this aberration from the true scientific spirit, than M. Comte.

              It is certain that, in human beings at least, differences in education

and in outward circumstances are capable of affording an adequate

explanation of by far the greatest portion of character; and that the remainder

may be in great part accounted for by physical differences in the sensations

produced in different individuals by the same external or internal cause.

There are, however, some mental facts which do not seem to admit of thesemodes of explanation. Such, to take the strongest case, are the various

instincts of animals, and the portion of human nature which corresponds to

those instincts. No mode has been suggested, even by way of hypothesis, in

which these can receive any satisfactory, or even plausible, explanation from

psychological causes alone; and there is great reason to think that they have

as positive, and even as direct and immediate, a connection with physical

conditions of the brain and nerves as any of our mere sensations have. A

supposition which (it is perhaps not superfluous to add) in no way conflicts

with the indisputable fact that these instincts may be modified to any extent,

or entirely conquered, in human beings, and to no inconsiderable extent even

in some of the domesticated animals, by other mental influences, and by

education.

              Whether organic causes exercise a direct influence over any other

classes of mental phenomena, is hitherto as far from being ascertained as is

the precise nature of the organic conditions even in the case of instincts. The

physiology, however, of the brain and nervous system is in a state of such

rapid advance, and is continually bringing forth such new and interesting

results, that if there be really a connection between mental peculiarities and

any varieties cognizable by our senses in the structure of the cerebral and

nervous apparatus, the nature of that connection is now in a fair way of being

found out. The latest discoveries in cerebral physiology appear to have

proved that any such connection which may exist is of a radically different

character from that contended for by Gall and his followers, and that,

whatever may hereafter be found to be the true theory of the subject,

phrenology at least is untenable.

 

 

     Chapter V. – Of Ethology, Or The Science Of The Formation Of

                                      Character.

 

 

              § 1. The laws of mind as characterized in the preceding chapter,

compose the universal or abstract portion of the philosophy of human nature;

and all the truths of common experience, constituting a practical knowledge

of mankind, must, to the extent to which they are truths, be results or

consequences of these. Such familiar maxims, when collected a posteriori

from observation of life, occupy among the truths of the science the place of

what, in our analysis of Induction, have so often been spoken of under the

title of Empirical Laws.

              An Empirical Law (it will be remembered) is a uniformity, whether

of succession or of co-existence, which holds true in all instances within our

limits of observation, but is not of a nature to afford any assurance that it

would hold beyond those limits; either because the consequent is not really

the effect of the antecedent, but forms part along with it of a chain of effects

flowing from prior causes not yet ascertained, or because there is ground to

believe that the sequence (though a case of causation) is resolvable into

simpler sequences, and, depending therefore on a concurrence of several

natural agencies, is exposed to an unknown multitude of possibilities of

counteraction. In other words, an empirical law is a generalization, of which,

not content with finding it true, we are obliged to ask, why is it true? knowing

that its truth is not absolute, but dependent on some more general conditions,

and that it can only be relied on in so far as there is ground of assurance that

those conditions are realized.

              Now, the observations concerning human affairs collected from

common experience are precisely of this nature. Even if they were universally

and exactly true within the bounds of experience, which they never are, still

they are not the ultimate laws of human action; they are not the principles of

human nature, but results of those principles under the circumstances in

which mankind have happened to be placed. When the Psalmist “said in his

haste that all men are liars,” he enunciated what in some ages and countries is

borne out by ample experience; but it is not a law of man’s nature to lie;though it is one of the consequences of the laws of human nature, that lying is

nearly universal when certain external circumstances exist universally,

especially circumstances productive of habitual distrust and fear. When the

character of the old is asserted to be cautious, and of the young impetuous,

this, again, is but an empirical law; for it is not because of their youth that the

young are impetuous, nor because of their age that the old are cautious. It is

chiefly, if not wholly, because the old, during their many years of life, have

generally had much experience of its various evils, and having suffered or

seen others suffer much from incautious exposure to them, have acquired

associations favorable to circumspection; while the young, as well from the

absence of similar experience as from the greater strength of the inclinations

which urge them to enterprise, engage themselves in it more readily. Here,

then, is the explanation of the empirical law; here are the conditions which

ultimately determine whether the law holds good or not. If an old man has not

been oftener than most young men in contact with danger and difficulty, he

will be equally incautious; if a youth has not stronger inclinations than an old

man, he probably will be as little enterprising. The empirical law derives

whatever truth it has from the causal laws of which it is a consequence. If we

know those laws, we know what are the limits to the derivative law; while, if

we have not yet accounted for the empirical law — if it rests only on

observation — there is no safety in applying it far beyond the limits of time,

place, and circumstance in which the observations were made.

              The really scientific truths, then, are not these empirical laws, but the

causal laws which explain them. The empirical laws of those phenomena

which depend on known causes, and of which a general theory can therefore

be constructed, have, whatever may be their value in practice, no other

function in science than that of verifying the conclusions of theory. Still more

must this be the case when most of the empirical laws amount, even within

the limits of observation, only to approximate generalizations.

              § 2. This, however, is not, so much as is sometimes supposed, a

peculiarity of the sciences called moral. It is only in the simplest branches of

science that empirical laws are ever exactly true; and not always in those.

Astronomy, for example, is the simplest of all the sciences which explain, in

the concrete, the actual course of natural events. The causes or forces on

which astronomical phenomena depend, are fewer in number than those

which determine any other of the great phenomena of nature. Accordingly, aseach effect results from the conflict of but few causes, a great degree of

regularity and uniformity might be expected to exist among the effects; and

such is really the case: they have a fixed order, and return in cycles. But

propositions which should express, with absolute correctness, all the

successive positions of a planet until the cycle is completed, would be of

almost unmanageable complexity, and could be obtained from theory alone.

The generalizations which can be collected on the subject from direct

observation, even such as Kepler’s law, are mere approximations; the planets,

owing to their perturbations by one another, do not move in exact ellipses.

Thus even in astronomy, perfect exactness in the mere empirical laws is not

to be looked for; much less, then, in more complex subjects of inquiry.

              The same example shows how little can be inferred against the

universality or even the simplicity of the ultimate laws, from the

impossibility of establishing any but approximate empirical laws of the

effects. The laws of causation according to which a class of phenomena are

produced may be very few and simple, and yet the effects themselves may be

so various and complicated that it shall be impossible to trace any regularity

whatever completely through them. For the phenomena in question may be of

an eminently modifiable character; insomuch that innumerable circumstances

are capable of influencing the effect, although they may all do it according to

a very small number of laws. Suppose that all which passes in the mind of

man is determined by a few simple laws; still, if those laws be such that there

is not one of the facts surrounding a human being, or of the events which

happen to him, that does not influence in some mode or degree his

subsequent mental history, and if the circumstances of different human

beings are extremely different, it will be no wonder if very few propositions

can be made respecting the details of their conduct or feelings, which will be

true of all mankind.

              Now, without deciding whether the ultimate laws of our mental

nature are few or many, it is at least certain that they are of the above

description. It is certain that our mental states, and our mental capacities and

susceptibilities, are modified, either for a time or permanently, by every thing

which happens to us in life. Considering, therefore, how much these

modifying causes differ in the case of any two individuals, it would be

unreasonable to expect that the empirical laws of the human mind, the

generalizations which can be made respecting the feelings or actions ofmankind without reference to the causes that determine them, should be any

thing but approximate generalizations. They are the common wisdom of

common life, and as such are invaluable; especially as they are mostly to be

applied to cases not very dissimilar to those from which they were collected.

But when maxims of this sort, collected from Englishmen, come to be

applied to Frenchmen, or when those collected from the present day are

applied to past or future generations, they are apt to be very much at fault.

Unless we have resolved the empirical law into the laws of the causes on

which it depends, and ascertained that those causes extend to the case which

we have in view, there can be no reliance placed in our inferences. For every

individual is surrounded by circumstances different from those of every other

individual; every nation or generation of mankind from every other nation or

generation: and none of these differences are without their influence in

forming a different type of character. There is, indeed, also a certain general

resemblance; but peculiarities of circumstances are continually constituting

exceptions even to the propositions which are true in the great majority of

cases.

              Although, however, there is scarcely any mode of feeling or conduct

which is, in the absolute sense, common to all mankind; and though the

generalizations which assert that any given variety of conduct or feeling will

be found universally (however nearly they may approximate to truth within

given limits of observation), will be considered as scientific propositions by

no one who is at all familiar with scientific investigation; yet all modes of

feeling and conduct met with among mankind have causes which produce

them; and in the propositions which assign those causes will be found the

explanation of the empirical laws, and the limiting principle of our reliance

on them. Human beings do not all feel and act alike in the same

circumstances; but it is possible to determine what makes one person, in a

given position, feel or act in one way, another in another; how any given

mode of feeling and conduct, compatible with the general laws (physical and

mental) of human nature, has been, or may be, formed. In other words,

mankind have not one universal character, but there exist universal laws of

the Formation of Character. And since it is by these laws, combined with the

facts of each particular case, that the whole of the phenomena of human

action and feeling are produced, it is on these that every rational attempt to

construct the science of human nature in the concrete, and for practical

purposes, must proceed.              § 3. The laws, then, of the formation of character being the principal

object of scientific inquiry into human nature, it remains to determine the

method of investigation best fitted for ascertaining them. And the logical

principles according to which this question is to be decided, must be those

which preside over every other attempt to investigate the laws of very

complex phenomena. For it is evident that both the character of any human

being, and the aggregate of the circumstances by which that character has

been formed, are facts of a high order of complexity. Now to such cases we

have seen that the Deductive Method, setting out from general laws, and

verifying their consequences by specific experience, is alone applicable. The

grounds of this great logical doctrine have formerly been stated; and its truth

will derive additional support from a brief examination of the specialties of

the present case.

              There are only two modes in which laws of nature can be ascertained

— deductively and experimentally; including under the denomination of

experimental inquiry, observation as well as artificial experiment. Are the

laws of the formation of character susceptible of a satisfactory investigation

by the method of experimentation? Evidently not; because, even if we

suppose unlimited power of varying the experiment (which is abstractedly

possible, though no one but an Oriental despot has that power, or, if he had,

would probably be disposed to exercise it), a still more essential condition is

wanting — the power of performing any of the experiments with scientific

accuracy.

              The instances requisite for the prosecution of a directly experimental

inquiry into the formation of character, would be a number of human beings

to bring up and educate, from infancy to mature age. And to perform any one

of these experiments with scientific propriety, it would be necessary to know

and record every sensation or impression received by the young pupil from a

period long before it could speak; including its own notions respecting the

sources of all those sensations and impressions. It is not only impossible to

do this completely, but even to do so much of it as should constitute a

tolerable approximation. One apparently trivial circumstance which eluded

our vigilance might let in a train of impressions and associations sufficient to

vitiate the experiment as an authentic exhibition of the effects flowing from

given causes. No one who has sufficiently reflected on education is ignorant

of this truth; and whoever has not, will find it most instructively illustrated inthe writings of Rousseau and Helvetius on that great subject.

              Under this impossibility of studying the laws of the formation of

character by experiments purposely contrived to elucidate them, there

remains the resource of simple observation. But if it be impossible to

ascertain the influencing circumstances with any approach to completeness

even when we have the shaping of them ourselves, much more impossible is

it when the cases are further removed from our observation, and altogether

out of our control. Consider the difficulty of the very first step — of

ascertaining what actually is the character of the individual, in each particular

case that we examine. There is hardly any person living concerning some

essential part of whose character there are not differences of opinion even

among his intimate acquaintances; and a single action, or conduct continued

only for a short time, goes a very little way toward ascertaining it. We can

only make our observations in a rough way and en masse ; not attempting to

ascertain completely in any given instance, what character has been formed,

and still less by what causes; but only observing in what state of previous

circumstances it is found that certain marked mental qualities or deficiencies

oftenest exist. These conclusions, besides that they are mere approximate

generalizations, deserve no reliance, even as such, unless the instances are

sufficiently numerous to eliminate not only chance, but every assignable

circumstance in which a number of the cases examined may happen to have

resembled one another. So numerous and various, too, are the circumstances

which form individual character, that the consequence of any particular

combination is hardly ever some definite and strongly marked character,

always found where that combination exists, and not otherwise. What is

obtained, even after the most extensive and accurate observation, is merely a

comparative result; as, for example, that in a given number of Frenchmen,

taken indiscriminately, there will be found more persons of a particular

mental tendency, and fewer of the contrary tendency, than among an equal

number of Italians or English, similarly taken; or thus: of a hundred

Frenchmen and an equal number of Englishmen, fairly selected, and arranged

according to the degree in which they possess a particular mental

characteristic, each number, 1, 2, 3, etc., of the one series, will be found to

possess more of that characteristic than the corresponding number of the

other. Since, therefore, the comparison is not one of kinds, but of ratios and

degrees; and since, in proportion as the differences are slight, it requires a

greater number of instances to eliminate chance, it can not often happen toany one to know a sufficient number of cases with the accuracy requisite for

making the sort of comparison last mentioned; less than which, however,

would not constitute a real induction. Accordingly, there is hardly one current

opinion respecting the characters of nations, classes, or descriptions of
                                                                      272
persons, which is universally acknowledged as indisputable.

              And finally, if we could even obtain by way of experiment a much

more satisfactory assurance of these generalizations than is really possible,

they would still be only empirical laws. They would show, indeed, that there

was some connection between the type of character formed and the

circumstances existing in the case; but not what the precise connection was,

nor to which of the peculiarities of those circumstances the effect was really

owing. They could only, therefore, be received as results of causation,

requiring to be resolved into the general laws of the causes: until the

determination of which, we could not judge within what limits the derivative

laws might serve as presumptions in cases yet unknown, or even be depended

on as permanent in the very cases from which they were collected. The

French people had, or were supposed to have, a certain national character; but

they drive out their royal family and aristocracy, alter their institutions, pass

through a series of extraordinary events for the greater part of a century, and

at the end of that time their character is found to have undergone important

changes. A long list of mental and moral differences are observed, or

supposed to exist between men and women; but at some future and, it may be

hoped, not distant period, equal freedom and an equally independent social

position come to be possessed by both, and their differences of character are

either removed or totally altered.

              But if the differences which we think we observe between French

and English, or between men and women, can be connected with more

general laws; if they be such as might be expected to be produced by the

differences of government, former customs, and physical peculiarities in the

two nations, and by the diversities of education, occupations, personal

independence, and social privileges, and whatever original differences there

may be in bodily strength and nervous sensibility between the two sexes;

then, indeed, the coincidence of the two kinds of evidence justifies us in

believing that we have both reasoned rightly and observed rightly. Our

observation, though not sufficient as proof, is ample as verification. And

having ascertained not only the empirical laws, but the causes, of thepeculiarities, we need be under no difficulty in judging how far they may be

expected to be permanent, or by what circumstances they would be modified

or destroyed.

              § 4. Since then it is impossible to obtain really accurate propositions

respecting the formation of character from observation and experiment alone,

we are driven perforce to that which, even if it had not been the

indispensable, would have been the most perfect, mode of investigation, and

which it is one of the principal aims of philosophy to extend; namely, that

which tries its experiments not on the complex facts, but on the simple ones

of which they are compounded; and after ascertaining the laws of the causes,

the composition of which gives rise to the complex phenomena, then

considers whether these will not explain and account for the approximate

generalizations which have been framed empirically respecting the sequences

of those complex phenomena. The laws of the formation of character are, in

short, derivative laws, resulting from the general laws of mind, and are to be

obtained by deducing them from those general laws by supposing any given

set of circumstances, and then considering what, according to the laws of

mind, will be the influence of those circumstances on the formation of

character.

              A science is thus formed, to which I would propose to give the name

of Ethology, or the Science of Character, from ἦθος, a word more nearly

corresponding to the term “character” as I here use it, than any other word in

the same language. The name is perhaps etymologically applicable to the

entire science of our mental and moral nature; but if, as is usual and

convenient, we employ the name Psychology for the science of the

elementary laws of mind, Ethology will serve for the ulterior science which

determines the kind of character produced in conformity to those general

laws by any set of circumstances, physical and moral. According to this

definition, Ethology is the science which corresponds to the art of education

in the widest sense of the term, including the formation of national or

collective character as well as individual. It would indeed be vain to expect

(however completely the laws of the formation of character might be

ascertained) that we could know so accurately the circumstances of any given

case as to be able positively to predict the character that would be produced

in that case. But we must remember that a degree of knowledge far short of

the power of actual prediction is often of much practical value. There may begreat power of influencing phenomena, with a very imperfect knowledge of

the causes by which they are in any given instance determined. It is enough

that we know that certain means have a tendency to produce a given effect,

and that others have a tendency to frustrate it. When the circumstances of an

individual or of a nation are in any considerable degree under our control, we

may, by our knowledge of tendencies, be enabled to shape those

circumstances in a manner much more favorable to the ends we desire, than

the shape which they would of themselves assume. This is the limit of our

power; but within this limit the power is a most important one.

              This science of Ethology may be called the Exact Science of Human

Nature; for its truths are not, like the empirical laws which depend on them,

approximate generalizations, but real laws. It is, however (as in all cases of

complex phenomena), necessary to the exactness of the propositions, that

they should be hypothetical only, and affirm tendencies, not facts. They must

not assert that something will always, or certainly, happen; but only that such

and such will be the effect of a given cause, so far as it operates

uncounteracted. It is a scientific proposition, that bodily strength tends to

make men courageous; not that it always makes them so: that an interest on

one side of a question tends to bias the judgment; not that it invariably does

so: that experience tends to give wisdom; not that such is always its effect.

These propositions, being assertive only of tendencies, are not the less

universally true because the tendencies may be frustrated.

              § 5. While, on the one hand, Psychology is altogether, or principally,

a science of observation and experiment, Ethology, as I have conceived it, is,

as I have already remarked, altogether deductive. The one ascertains the

simple laws of Mind in general, the other traces their operation in complex

combinations of circumstances. Ethology stands to Psychology in a relation

very similar to that in which the various branches of natural philosophy stand

to mechanics. The principles of Ethology are properly the middle principles,

the axiomata media (as Bacon would have said) of the science of mind: as

distinguished, on the one hand, from the empirical laws resulting from simple

observation, and, on the other, from the highest generalizations.

              And this seems a suitable place for a logical remark, which, though

of general application, is of peculiar importance in reference to the present

subject. Bacon has judiciously observed that the axiomata media of every

science principally constitute its value. The lowest generalizations, untilexplained by and resolved into the middle principles of which they are the

consequences, have only the imperfect accuracy of empirical laws; while the

most general laws are too general, and include too few circumstances, to give

sufficient indication of what happens in individual cases, where the

circumstances are almost always immensely numerous. In the importance,

therefore, which Bacon assigns, in every science, to the middle principles, it

is impossible not to agree with him. But I conceive him to have been

radically wrong in his doctrine respecting the mode in which these axiomata

media should be arrived at; though there is no one proposition laid down in

his works for which he has been more extravagantly eulogized. He enunciates

as a universal rule that induction should proceed from the lowest to the

middle principles, and from those to the highest, never reversing that order,

and, consequently, leaving no room for the discovery of new principles by

way of deduction at all. It is not to be conceived that a man of his sagacity

could have fallen into this mistake if there had existed in his time, among the

sciences which treat of successive phenomena, one single instance of a

deductive science, such as mechanics, astronomy, optics, acoustics, etc., now

are. In those sciences it is evident that the higher and middle principles are by

no means derived from the lowest, but the reverse. In some of them the very

highest generalizations were those earliest ascertained with any scientific

exactness; as, for example (in mechanics), the laws of motion. Those general

laws had not, indeed, at first the acknowledged universality which they

acquired after having been successfully employed to explain many classes of

phenomena to which they were not originally seen to be applicable; as when

the laws of motion were employed, in conjunction with other laws, to explain

deductively the celestial phenomena. Still, the fact remains, that the

propositions which were afterward recognized as the most general truths of

the science were, of all its accurate generalizations, those earliest arrived at.

Bacon’s greatest merit can not therefore consist, as we are so often told that it

did, in exploding the vicious method pursued by the ancients of flying to the

highest generalizations first, and deducing the middle principles from them;

since this is neither a vicious nor an exploded, but the universally accredited

method of modern science, and that to which it owes its greatest triumphs.

The error of ancient speculation did not consist in making the largest

generalizations first, but in making them without the aid or warrant of

rigorous inductive methods, and applying them deductively without the

needful use of that important part of the Deductive Method termedVerification.

              The order in which truths of the various degrees of generality should

be ascertained can not, I apprehend, be prescribed by any unbending rule. I

know of no maxim which can be laid down on the subject, but to obtain those

first in respect to which the conditions of a real induction can be first and

most completely realized. Now, wherever our means of investigation can

reach causes, without stopping at the empirical laws of the effects, the

simplest cases, being those in which fewest causes are simultaneously

concerned, will be most amenable to the inductive process; and these are the

cases which elicit laws of the greatest comprehensiveness. In every science,

therefore, which has reached the stage at which it becomes a science of

causes, it will be usual as well as desirable first to obtain the highest

generalizations, and then deduce the more special ones from them. Nor can I

discover any foundation for the Baconian maxim, so much extolled by

subsequent writers, except this: That before we attempt to explain

deductively from more general laws any new class of phenomena, it is

desirable to have gone as far as is practicable in ascertaining the empirical

laws of those phenomena; so as to compare the results of deduction, not with

one individual instance after another, but with general propositions

expressive of the points of agreement which have been found among many

instances. For if Newton had been obliged to verify the theory of gravitation,

not by deducing from it Kepler’s laws, but by deducing all the observed

planetary positions which had served Kepler to establish those laws, the

Newtonian theory would probably never have emerged from the state of an
            273
hypothesis.

              The applicability of these remarks to the special case under

consideration can not admit of question. The science of the formation of

character is a science of causes. The subject is one to which those among the

canons of induction, by which laws of causation are ascertained, can be

rigorously applied. It is, therefore, both natural and advisable to ascertain the

simplest, which are necessarily the most general, laws of causation first, and

to deduce the middle principles from them. In other words, Ethology, the

deductive science, is a system of corollaries from Psychology, the

experimental science.

              § 6. Of these, the earlier alone has been, as yet, really conceived or

studied as a science; the other, Ethology, is still to be created. But its creationhas at length become practicable. The empirical laws, destined to verify its

deductions, have been formed in abundance by every successive age of

humanity; and the premises for the deductions are now sufficiently complete.

Excepting the degree of uncertainty which still exists as to the extent of the

natural differences of individual minds, and the physical circumstances on

which these may be dependent (considerations which are of secondary

importance when we are considering mankind in the average, or en masse ), I

believe most competent judges will agree that the general laws of the

different constituent elements of human nature are even now sufficiently

understood to render it possible for a competent thinker to deduce from those

laws, with a considerable approach to certainty, the particular type of

character which would be formed in mankind generally by any assumed set

of circumstances. A science of Ethology, founded on the laws of Psychology,

is therefore possible; though little has yet been done, and that little not at all

systematically, toward forming it. The progress of this important but most

imperfect science will depend on a double process: first, that of deducing

theoretically the ethological consequences of particular circumstances of

position, and comparing them with the recognized results of common

experience; and, secondly, the reverse operation; increased study of the

various types of human nature that are to be found in the world; conducted by

persons not only capable of analyzing and recording the circumstances in

which these types severally prevail, but also sufficiently acquainted with

psychological laws to be able to explain and account for the characteristics of

the type, by the peculiarities of the circumstances: the residuum alone, when

there proves to be any, being set down to the account of congenital

predispositions.

              For the experimental or a posteriori part of this process, the

materials are continually accumulating by the observation of mankind. So far

as thought is concerned, the great problem of Ethology is to deduce the

requisite middle principles from the general laws of Psychology. The subject

to be studied is, the origin and sources of all those qualities in human beings

which are interesting to us, either as facts to be produced, to be avoided, or

merely to be understood; and the object is, to determine, from the general

laws of mind, combined with the general position of our species in the

universe, what actual or possible combinations of circumstances are capable

of promoting or of preventing the production of those qualities. A science

which possesses middle principles of this kind, arranged in the order, not ofcauses, but of the effects which it is desirable to produce or to prevent, is duly

prepared to be the foundation of the corresponding Art. And when Ethology

shall be thus prepared, practical education will be the mere transformation of

those principles into a parallel system of precepts, and the adaptation of these

to the sum total of the individual circumstances which exist in each particular

case.

              It is hardly necessary again to repeat that, as in every other deductive

science, verification a posteriori must proceed pari passu with deduction a

priori . The inference given by theory as to the type of character which would

be formed by any given circumstances must be tested by specific experience

of those circumstances whenever obtainable; and the conclusions of the

science as a whole must undergo a perpetual verification and correction from

the general remarks afforded by common experience respecting human nature

in our own age, and by history respecting times gone by. The conclusions of

theory can not be trusted, unless confirmed by observation; nor those of

observation, unless they can be affiliated to theory, by deducing them from

the laws of human nature, and from a close analysis of the circumstances of

the particular situation. It is the accordance of these two kinds of evidence

separately taken — the consilience of a priori reasoning and specific

experience — which forms the only sufficient ground for the principles of

any science so “immersed in matter,” dealing with such complex and

concrete phenomena, as Ethology.

 

 

       Chapter VI. – General Considerations On The Social Science.

 

 

              § 1. Next after the science of individual man comes the science of

man in society — of the actions of collective masses of mankind, and the

various phenomena which constitute social life.

              If the formation of individual character is already a complex subject

of study, this subject must be, in appearance at least, still more complex;

because the number of concurrent causes, all exercising more or less

influence on the total effect, is greater, in the proportion in which a nation, or

the species at large, exposes a larger surface to the operation of agents,

psychological and physical, than any single individual. If it was necessary to

prove, in opposition to an existing prejudice, that the simpler of the two is

capable of being a subject of science, the prejudice is likely to be yet stronger

against the possibility of giving a scientific character to the study of Politics,

and of the phenomena of Society. It is, accordingly, but of yesterday that the

conception of a political or social science has existed anywhere but in the

mind of here and there an insulated thinker, generally very ill prepared for its

realization: though the subject itself has of all others engaged the most

general attention, and been a theme of interested and earnest discussions,

almost from the beginning of recorded time.

              The condition, indeed, of politics as a branch of knowledge was,

until very lately, and has scarcely even yet ceased to be, that which Bacon

animadverted on, as the natural state of the sciences while their cultivation is

abandoned to practitioners; not being carried on as a branch of speculative

inquiry, but only with a view to the exigencies of daily practice, and the

fructifera experimenta , therefore, being aimed at, almost to the exclusion of

the lucifera . Such was medical investigation, before physiology and natural

history began to be cultivated as branches of general knowledge. The only

questions examined were, what diet is wholesome, or what medicine will

cure some given disease; without any previous systematic inquiry into the

laws of nutrition, and of the healthy and morbid action of the different

organs, on which laws the effect of any diet or medicine must evidently

depend. And in politics the questions which engaged general attention were

similar: Is such an enactment, or such a form of government, beneficial or thereverse — either universally, or to some particular community? without any

previous inquiry into the general conditions by which the operation of

legislative measures, or the effects produced by forms of government, are

determined. Students in politics thus attempted to study the pathology and

therapeutics of the social body, before they had laid the necessary foundation

in its physiology; to cure disease without understanding the laws of health.

And the result was such as it must always be when persons, even of ability,

attempt to deal with the complex questions of a science before its simpler and

more elementary truths have been established.

              No wonder that, when the phenomena of society have so rarely been

contemplated in the point of view characteristic of science, the philosophy of

society should have made little progress; should contain few general

propositions sufficiently precise and certain for common inquirers to

recognize in them a scientific character. The vulgar notion accordingly is,

that all pretension to lay down general truths on politics and society is

quackery; that no universality and no certainty are attainable in such matters.

What partly excuses this common notion is, that it is really not without

foundation in one particular sense. A large proportion of those who have laid

claim to the character of philosophic politicians have attempted not to

ascertain universal sequences, but to frame universal precepts. They have

imagined some one form of government, or system of laws, to fit all cases —

a pretension well meriting the ridicule with which it is treated by

practitioners, and wholly unsupported by the analogy of the art to which,

from the nature of its subject, that of politics must be the most nearly allied.

No one now supposes it possible that one remedy can cure all diseases, or

even the same disease in all constitutions and habits of body.

              It is not necessary even to the perfection of a science, that the

corresponding art should possess universal, or even general, rules. The

phenomena of society might not only be completely dependent on known

causes, but the mode of action of all those causes might be reducible to laws

of considerable simplicity, and yet no two cases might admit of being treated

in precisely the same manner. So great might be the variety of circumstances

on which the results in different cases depend, that the art might not have a

single general precept to give, except that of watching the circumstances of

the particular case, and adapting our measures to the effects which, according

to the principles of the science, result from those circumstances. Butalthough, in so complicated a class of subjects, it is impossible to lay down

practical maxims of universal application, it does not follow that the

phenomena do not conform to universal laws.

              § 2. All phenomena of society are phenomena of human nature,

generated by the action of outward circumstances upon masses of human

beings; and if, therefore, the phenomena of human thought, feeling, and

action are subject to fixed laws, the phenomena of society can not but

conform to fixed laws, the consequence of the preceding. There is, indeed, no

hope that these laws, though our knowledge of them were as certain and as

complete as it is in astronomy, would enable us to predict the history of

society, like that of the celestial appearances, for thousands of years to come.

But the difference of certainty is not in the laws themselves, it is in the data to

which these laws are to be applied. In astronomy the causes influencing the

result are few, and change little, and that little according to known laws; we

can ascertain what they are now, and thence determine what they will be at

any epoch of a distant future. The data, therefore, in astronomy are as certain

as the laws themselves. The circumstances, on the contrary, which influence

the condition and progress of society are innumerable, and perpetually

changing; and though they all change in obedience to causes, and therefore to

laws, the multitude of the causes is so great as to defy our limited powers of

calculation. Not to say that the impossibility of applying precise numbers to

facts of such a description would set an impassable limit to the possibility of

calculating them beforehand, even if the powers of the human intellect were

otherwise adequate to the task.

              But, as before remarked, an amount of knowledge quite insufficient

for prediction, may be most valuable for guidance. The science of society

would have attained a very high point of perfection if it enabled us, in any

given condition of social affairs, in the condition, for instance, of Europe or

any European country at the present time, to understand by what causes it

had, in any and every particular, been made what it was; whether it was

tending to any, and to what, changes; what effects each feature of its existing

state was likely to produce in the future; and by what means any of those

effects might be prevented, modified, or accelerated, or a different class of

effects superinduced. There is nothing chimerical in the hope that general

laws, sufficient to enable us to answer these various questions for any country

or time with the individual circumstances of which we are well acquainted,do really admit of being ascertained; and that the other branches of human

knowledge, which this undertaking presupposes, are so far advanced that the

time is ripe for its commencement. Such is the object of the Social Science.

              That the nature of what I consider the true method of the science

may be made more palpable, by first showing what that method is not, it will

be expedient to characterize briefly two radical misconceptions of the proper

mode of philosophizing on society and government, one or other of which is,

either explicitly or more often unconsciously, entertained by almost all who

have meditated or argued respecting the logic of politics, since the notion of

treating it by strict rules, and on Baconian principles, has been current among

the more advanced thinkers. These erroneous methods, if the word method

can be applied to erroneous tendencies arising from the absence of any

sufficiently distinct conception of method, may be termed the Experimental,

or Chemical, mode of investigation, and the Abstract, or Geometrical, mode.

We shall begin with the former.

 

 

   Chapter VII. – Of The Chemical, Or Experimental, Method In The

                                    Social Science.

 

 

              § 1. The laws of the phenomena of society are, and can be, nothing

but the laws of the actions and passions of human beings united together in

the social state. Men, however, in a state of society are still men; their actions

and passions are obedient to the laws of individual human nature. Men are

not, when brought together, converted into another kind of substance, with

different properties; as hydrogen and oxygen are different from water, or as

hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and azote, are different from nerves, muscles, and

tendons. Human beings in society have no properties but those which are

derived from, and may be resolved into, the laws of the nature of individual

man. In social phenomena the Composition of Causes is the universal law.

              Now, the method of philosophizing which may be termed chemical

overlooks this fact, and proceeds as if the nature of man as an individual were

not concerned at all, or were concerned in a very inferior degree, in the

operations of human beings in society. All reasoning in political or social

affairs, grounded on principles of human nature, is objected to by reasoners

of this sort, under such names as “abstract theory.” For the direction of their

opinions and conduct, they profess to demand, in all cases without exception,

specific experience.

              This mode of thinking is not only general with practitioners in

politics, and with that very numerous class who (on a subject which no one,

however ignorant, thinks himself incompetent to discuss) profess to guide

themselves by common sense rather than by science; but is often

countenanced by persons with greater pretensions to instruction — persons

who, having sufficient acquaintance with books and with the current ideas to

have heard that Bacon taught mankind to follow experience, and to ground

their conclusions on facts instead of metaphysical dogmas, think that, by

treating political facts in as directly experimental a method as chemical facts,

they are showing themselves true Baconians, and proving their adversaries to

be mere syllogizers and school-men. As, however, the notion of the

applicability of experimental methods to political philosophy can not co-existwith any just conception of these methods themselves, the kind of arguments

from experience which the chemical theory brings forth as its fruits (and

which form the staple, in this country especially, of parliamentary and

hustings oratory), are such as, at no time since Bacon, would have been

admitted to be valid in chemistry itself, or in any other branch of

experimental science. They are such as these: that the prohibition of foreign

commodities must conduce to national wealth, because England has

flourished under it, or because countries in general which have adopted it

have flourished; that our laws, or our internal administration, or our

constitution, are excellent for a similar reason; and the eternal arguments

from historical examples, from Athens or Rome, from the fires in Smithfield

or the French Revolution.

              I will not waste time in contending against modes of argumentation

which no person with the smallest practice in estimating evidence could

possibly be betrayed into; which draw conclusions of general application

from a single unanalyzed instance, or arbitrarily refer an effect to some one

among its antecedents, without any process of elimination or comparison of

instances. It is a rule both of justice and of good sense to grapple not with the

absurdest, but with the most reasonable form of a wrong opinion. We shall

suppose our inquirer acquainted with the true conditions of experimental

investigation, and competent in point of acquirements for realizing them, so

far as they can be realized. He shall know as much of the facts of history as

mere erudition can teach — as much as can be proved by testimony, without

the assistance of any theory; and if those mere facts, properly collated, can

fulfill the conditions of a real induction, he shall be qualified for the task.

              But that no such attempt can have the smallest chance of success,
                                                                              274
has been abundantly shown in the tenth chapter of the Third Book. We

there examined whether effects which depend on a complication of causes

can be made the subject of a true induction by observation and experiment;

and concluded, on the most convincing grounds, that they can not. Since, of

all effects, none depend on so great a complication of causes as social

phenomena, we might leave our case to rest in safety on that previous

showing. But a logical principle as yet so little familiar to the ordinary run of

thinkers, requires to be insisted on more than once, in order to make the due

impression; and the present being the case which of all others exemplifies it

the most strongly, there will be advantage in re-stating the grounds of thegeneral maxim, as applied to the specialties of the class of inquiries now

under consideration.

              § 2. The first difficulty which meets us in the attempt to apply

experimental methods for ascertaining the laws of social phenomena, is that

we are without the means of making artificial experiments. Even if we could

contrive experiments at leisure, and try them without limit, we should do so

under immense disadvantage; both from the impossibility of ascertaining and

taking note of all the facts of each case, and because (those facts being in a

perpetual state of change), before sufficient time had elapsed to ascertain the

result of the experiment, some material circumstances would always have

ceased to be the same. But it is unnecessary to consider the logical objections

which would exist to the conclusiveness of our experiments, since we

palpably never have the power of trying any. We can only watch those which

nature produces, or which are produced for other reasons. We can not adapt

our logical means to our wants, by varying the circumstances as the

exigencies of elimination may require. If the spontaneous instances, formed

by contemporary events and by the successions of phenomena recorded in

history, afford a sufficient variation of circumstances, an induction from

specific experience is attainable; otherwise not. The question to be resolved

is, therefore, whether the requisites for induction respecting the causes of

political effects or the properties of political agents, are to be met with in

history? including under the term, contemporary history. And in order to give

fixity to our conceptions, it will be advisable to suppose this question asked

in reference to some special subject of political inquiry or controversy; such

as that frequent topic of debate in the present century, the operation of

restrictive and prohibitory commercial legislation upon national wealth. Let

this, then, be the scientific question to be investigated by specific experience.

              § 3. In order to apply to the case the most perfect of the methods of

experimental inquiry, the Method of Difference, we require to find two

instances which tally in every particular except the one which is the subject

of inquiry. If two nations can be found which are alike in all natural

advantages and disadvantages; whose people resemble each other in every

quality, physical and moral, spontaneous and acquired; whose habits, usages,

opinions, laws, and institutions are the same in all respects, except that one of

them has a more protective tariff, or in other respects interferes more with the

freedom of industry; if one of these nations is found to be rich and the otherpoor, or one richer than the other, this will be an experimentum crucis : a real

proof by experience, which of the two systems is most favorable to national

riches. But the supposition that two such instances can be met with is

manifestly absurd. Nor is such a concurrence even abstractedly possible. Two

nations which agreed in every thing except their commercial policy would

agree also in that. Differences of legislation are not inherent and ultimate

diversities; are not properties of Kinds. They are effects of pre-existing

causes. If the two nations differ in this portion of their institutions, it is from

some difference in their position, and thence in their apparent interests, or in

some portion or other of their opinions, habits, and tendencies; which opens a

view of further differences without any assignable limit, capable of operating

on their industrial prosperity, as well as on every other feature of their

condition, in more ways than can be enumerated or imagined. There is thus a

demonstrated impossibility of obtaining, in the investigations of the social

science, the conditions required for the most conclusive form of inquiry by

specific experience.

              In the absence of the direct, we may next try, as in other cases, the

supplementary resource, called in a former place the Indirect Method of

Difference; which, instead of two instances differing in nothing but the

presence or absence of a given circumstance, compares two classes of

instances respectively agreeing in nothing but the presence of a circumstance

on the one side and its absence on the other. To choose the most

advantageous case conceivable (a case far too advantageous to be ever

obtained), suppose that we compare one nation which has a restrictive policy

with two or more nations agreeing in nothing but in permitting free trade. We

need not now suppose that either of these nations agrees with the first in all

its circumstances; one may agree with it in some of its circumstances, and

another in the remainder. And it may be argued, that if these nations remain

poorer than the restrictive nation, it can not be for want either of the first or of

the second set of circumstances, but it must be for want of the protective

system. If (we might say) the restrictive nation had prospered from the one

set of causes, the first of the free-trade nations would have prospered equally;

if by reason of the other, the second would; but neither has; therefore the

prosperity was owing to the restrictions. This will be allowed to be a very

favorable specimen of an argument from specific experience in politics, and

if this be inconclusive, it would not be easy to find another preferable to it.              Yet, that it is inconclusive, scarcely requires to be pointed out. Why

must the prosperous nation have prospered from one cause exclusively?

National prosperity is always the collective result of a multitude of favorable

circumstances; and of these, the restrictive nation may unite a greater number

than either of the others, though it may have all of those circumstances in

common with either one or the other of them. Its prosperity may be partly

owing to circumstances common to it with one of those nations, and partly

with the other, while they, having each of them only half the number of

favorable circumstances, have remained inferior. So that the closest imitation

which can be made, in the social science, of a legitimate induction from

direct experience, gives but a specious semblance of conclusiveness, without

any real value.

              § 4. The Method of Difference in either of its forms being thus

completely out of the question, there remains the Method of Agreement. But

we are already aware of how little value this method is, in cases admitting

Plurality of Causes; and social phenomena are those in which the plurality

prevails in the utmost possible extent.

              Suppose that the observer makes the luckiest hit which could be

given by any conceivable combination of chances; that he finds two nations

which agree in no circumstance whatever, except in having a restrictive

system, and in being prosperous; or a number of nations, all prosperous,

which have no antecedent circumstances common to them all but that of

having a restrictive policy. It is unnecessary to go into the consideration of

the impossibility of ascertaining from history, or even from contemporary

observation, that such is really the fact; that the nations agree in no other

circumstance capable of influencing the case. Let us suppose this

impossibility vanquished, and the fact ascertained that they agree only in a

restrictive system as an antecedent, and industrial prosperity as a consequent.

What degree of presumption does this raise that the restrictive system caused

the prosperity? One so trifling as to be equivalent to none at all. That some

one antecedent is the cause of a given effect, because all other antecedents

have been found capable of being eliminated, is a just inference, only if the

effect can have but one cause. If it admits of several, nothing is more natural

than that each of these should separately admit of being eliminated. Now, in

the case of political phenomena, the supposition of unity of cause is not only

wide of the truth, but at an immeasurable distance from it. The causes ofevery social phenomenon which we are particularly interested about, security,

wealth, freedom, good government, public virtue, general intelligence, or

their opposites, are infinitely numerous, especially the external or remote

causes, which alone are, for the most part, accessible to direct observation.

No one cause suffices of itself to produce any of these phenomena; while

there are countless causes which have some influence over them, and may co-

operate either in their production or in their prevention. From the mere fact,

therefore, of our having been able to eliminate some circumstance, we can by

no means infer that this circumstance was not instrumental to the effect in

some of the very instances from which we have eliminated it. We can

conclude that the effect is sometimes produced without it; but not that, when

present, it does not contribute its share.

              Similar objections will be found to apply to the Method of

Concomitant Variations. If the causes which act upon the state of any society

produced effects differing from one another in kind; if wealth depended on

one cause, peace on another, a third made people virtuous, a fourth

intelligent; we might, though unable to sever the causes from one another,

refer to each of them that property of the effect which waxed as it waxed, and

which waned as it waned. But every attribute of the social body is influenced

by innumerable causes; and such is the mutual action of the co-existing

elements of society, that whatever affects any one of the more important of

them, will by that alone, if it does not affect the others directly, affect them

indirectly. The effects, therefore, of different agents not being different in

quality, while the quantity of each is the mixed result of all the agents, the

variations of the aggregate can not bear a uniform proportion to those of any

one of its component parts.

              § 5. There remains the Method of Residues; which appears, on the

first view, less foreign to this kind of inquiry than the three other methods,

because it only requires that we should accurately note the circumstances of

some one country, or state of society. Making allowance, thereupon, for the

effect of all causes whose tendencies are known, the residue which those

causes are inadequate to explain may plausibly be imputed to the remainder

of the circumstances which are known to have existed in the case. Something
                                                    275
similar to this is the method which Coleridge describes himself as having

followed in his political essays in the Morning Post . “On every great

occurrence I endeavored to discover in past history the event that most nearlyresembled it. I procured, whenever it was possible, the contemporary

historians, memorialists, and pamphleteers. Then fairly subtracting the points

of difference from those of likeness, as the balance favored the former or the

latter, I conjectured that the result would be the same or different. As, for

instance, in the series of essays entitled ‘A Comparison of France under

Napoleon with Rome under the first Cæsars,’ and in those which followed,

‘on the probable final restoration of the Bourbons.’ The same plan I pursued

at the commencement of the Spanish Revolution, and with the same success,

taking the war of the United Provinces with Philip II. as the groundwork of

the comparison.” In this inquiry he no doubt employed the Method of

Residues; for, in “subtracting the points of difference from those of likeness,”

he doubtless weighed, and did not content himself with numbering, them: he

doubtless took those points of agreement only which he presumed from their

own nature to be capable of influencing the effect, and, allowing for that

influence, concluded that the remainder of the result would be referable to the

points of difference.

              Whatever may be the efficacy of this method, it is, as we long ago

remarked, not a method of pure observation and experiment; it concludes, not

from a comparison of instances, but from the comparison of an instance with

the result of a previous deduction. Applied to social phenomena, it

presupposes that the causes from which part of the effect proceeded are

already known; and as we have shown that these can not have been known by

specific experience, they must have been learned by deduction from

principles of human nature; experience being called in only as a

supplementary resource, to determine the causes which produced an

unexplained residue. But if the principles of human nature may be had

recourse to for the establishment of some political truths, they may for all. If

it be admissible to say, England must have prospered by reason of the

prohibitory system, because after allowing for all the other tendencies which

have been operating, there is a portion of prosperity still to be accounted for;

it must be admissible to go to the same source for the effect of the prohibitory

system, and examine what account the laws of human motives and actions

will enable us to give of its tendencies. Nor, in fact, will the experimental

argument amount to any thing, except in verification of a conclusion drawn

from those general laws. For we may subtract the effect of one, two, three, or

four causes, but we shall never succeed in subtracting the effect of all causes

except one; while it would be a curious instance of the dangers of too muchcaution if, to avoid depending on a priori reasoning concerning the effect of a

single cause, we should oblige ourselves to depend on as many separate a

priori reasonings as there are causes operating concurrently with that

particular cause in some given instance.

              We have now sufficiently characterized the gross misconception of

the mode of investigation proper to political phenomena, which I have termed

the Chemical Method. So lengthened a discussion would not have been

necessary, if the claim to decide authoritatively on political doctrines were

confined to persons who had competently studied any one of the higher

departments of physical science. But since the generality of those who reason

on political subjects, satisfactorily to themselves and to a more or less

numerous body of admirers, know nothing whatever of the methods of

physical investigation beyond a few precepts which they continue to parrot

after Bacon, being entirely unaware that Bacon’s conception of scientific

inquiry has done its work, and that science has now advanced into a higher

stage, there are probably many to whom such remarks as the foregoing may

still be useful. In an age in which chemistry itself, when attempting to deal

with the more complex chemical sequences — those of the animal or even

the vegetable organism — has found it necessary to become, and has

succeeded in becoming, a Deductive Science, it is not to be apprehended that

any person of scientific habits, who has kept pace with the general progress

of the knowledge of nature, can be in danger of applying the methods of

elementary chemistry to explore the sequences of the most complex order of

phenomena in existence.

 

         Chapter VIII. – Of The Geometrical, Or Abstract, Method.

 

 

              § 1. The misconception discussed in the preceding chapter is, as we

said, chiefly committed by persons not much accustomed to scientific

investigation: practitioners in politics, who rather employ the commonplaces

of philosophy to justify their practice than seek to guide their practice by

philosophic principles; or imperfectly educated persons, who, in ignorance of

the careful selection and elaborate comparison of instances required for the

formation of a sound theory, attempt to found one upon a few coincidences

which they have casually noticed.

              The erroneous method of which we are now to treat is, on the

contrary, peculiar to thinking and studious minds. It never could have

suggested itself but to persons of some familiarity with the nature of

scientific research; who, being aware of the impossibility of establishing, by

casual observation or direct experimentation, a true theory of sequences so

complex as are those of the social phenomena, have recourse to the simpler

laws which are immediately operative in those phenomena, and which are no

other than the laws of the nature of the human beings therein concerned,

These thinkers perceive (what the partisans of the chemical or experimental

theory do not) that the science of society must necessarily be deductive. But,

from an insufficient consideration of the specific nature of the subject-matter

— and often because (their own scientific education having stopped short in

too early a stage) geometry stands in their minds as the type of all deductive

science — it is to geometry, rather than to astronomy and natural philosophy,

that they unconsciously assimilate the deductive science of society.

              Among the differences between geometry (a science of co-existent

facts, altogether independent of the laws of the succession of phenomena),

and those physical Sciences of Causation which have been rendered

deductive, the following is one of the most conspicuous: That geometry

affords no room for what so constantly occurs in mechanics and its

applications, the case of conflicting forces; of causes which counteract or

modify one another. In mechanics we continually find two or more moving

forces producing, not motion, but rest; or motion in a different direction from

that which would have been produced by either of the generating forces. It istrue that the effect of the joint forces is the same when they act

simultaneously, as if they had acted one after another, or by turns; and it is in

this that the difference between mechanical and chemical laws consists. But

still the effects, whether produced by successive or by simultaneous action,

do, wholly or in part, cancel one another: what the one force does, the other,

partly, or altogether undoes. There is no similar state of things in geometry.

The result which follows from one geometrical principle has nothing that

conflicts with the result which follows from another. What is proved true

from one geometrical theorem, what would be true if no other geometrical

principles existed, can not be altered and made no longer true by reason of

some other geometrical principle. What is once proved true is true in all

cases, whatever supposition may be made in regard to any other matter.

              Now a conception similar to this last would appear to have been

formed of the social science, in the minds of the earlier of those who have

attempted to cultivate it by a deductive method. Mechanics would be a

science very similar to geometry, if every motion resulted from one force

alone, and not from a conflict of forces. In the geometrical theory of society,

it seems to be supposed that this is really the case with the social phenomena;

that each of them results always from only one force, one single property of

human nature.

              At the point which we have now reached, it can not be necessary to

say any thing either in proof or in illustration of the assertion that such is not

the true character of the social phenomena. There is not, among these most

complex and (for that reason) most modifiable of all phenomena, any one

over which innumerable forces do not exercise influence; which does not

depend on a conjunction of very many causes. We have not, therefore, to

prove the notion in question to be an error, but to prove that the error has

been committed; that so mistaken a conception of the mode in which the

phenomena of society are produced has actually been ascertained.

              § 2. One numerous division of the reasoners who have treated social

facts according to geometrical methods, not admitting any modification of

one law by another, must for the present be left out of consideration, because

in them this error is complicated with, and is the effect of, another

fundamental misconception, of which we have already taken some notice,

and which will be further treated of before we conclude. I speak of those who

deduce political conclusions not from laws of nature, not from sequences ofphenomena, real or imaginary, but from unbending practical maxims. Such,

for example, are all who found their theory of politics on what is called

abstract right, that is to say, on universal precepts; a pretension of which we

have already noticed the chimerical nature. Such, in like manner, are those

who make the assumption of a social contract, or any other kind of original

obligation, and apply it to particular cases by mere interpretation. But in this

the fundamental error is the attempt to treat an art like a science, and to have

a deductive art; the irrationality of which will be shown in a future chapter. It

will be proper to take our exemplification of the geometrical theory from

those thinkers who have avoided this additional error, and who entertain, so

far, a juster idea of the nature of political inquiry.

              We may cite, in the first instance, those who assume as the principle

of their political philosophy that government is founded on fear; that the

dread of each other is the one motive by which human beings were originally

brought into a state of society, and are still held in it. Some of the earlier

scientific inquirers into politics, in particular Hobbes, assumed this

proposition, not by implication, but avowedly, as the foundation of their

doctrine, and attempted to build a complete philosophy of politics thereupon.

It is true that Hobbes did not find this one maxim sufficient to carry him

through the whole of his subject, but was obliged to eke it out by the double

sophism of an original contract. I call this a double sophism; first, as passing

off a fiction for a fact, and, secondly, assuming a practical principle, or

precept, as the basis of a theory; which is a petitio principii , since (as we

noticed in treating of that Fallacy) every rule of conduct, even though it be so

binding a one as the observance of a promise, must rest its own foundations

on the theory of the subject; and the theory, therefore, can not rest upon it.

              § 3. Passing over less important instances, I shall come at once to the

most remarkable example afforded by our own times of the geometrical

method in politics; emanating from persons who are well aware of the

distinction between science and art; who knew that rules of conduct must

follow, not precede, the ascertainment of laws of nature, and that the latter,

not the former, is the legitimate field for the application of the deductive

method. I allude to the interest-philosophy of the Bentham school.

              The profound and original thinkers who are commonly known under

this description, founded their general theory of government on one

comprehensive premise, namely, that men’s actions are always determined bytheir interests. There is an ambiguity in this last expression; for, as the same

philosophers, especially Bentham, gave the name of an interest to any thing

which a person likes, the proposition may be understood to mean only this,

that men’s actions are always determined by their wishes. In this sense,

however, it would not bear out any of the consequences which these writers

drew from it; and the word, therefore, in their political reasonings, must be

understood to mean (which is also the explanation they themselves, on such

occasions gave of it) what is commonly termed private, or worldly, interest.

              Taking the doctrine, then, in this sense, an objection presents itself in

limine which might be deemed a fatal one, namely, that so sweeping a

proposition is far from being universally true. Human beings are not

governed in all their actions by their worldly interests. This, however, is by

no means so conclusive an objection as it at first appears; because in politics

we are for the most part concerned with the conduct, not of individual

persons, but either of a series of persons (as a succession of kings), or a body

or mass of persons, as a nation, an aristocracy, or a representative assembly.

And whatever is true of a large majority of mankind, may without much error

be taken for true of any succession of persons, considered as a whole, or of

any collection of persons in which the act of the majority becomes the act of

the whole body. Although, therefore, the maxim is sometimes expressed in a

manner unnecessarily paradoxical, the consequences drawn from it will hold

equally good if the assertion be limited as follows: Any succession of

persons, or the majority of any body of persons, will be governed in the bulk

of their conduct by their personal interests. We are bound to allow to this

school of thinkers the benefit of this more rational statement of their

fundamental maxim, which is also in strict conformity to the explanations

which, when considered to be called for, have been given by themselves.

              The theory goes on to infer, quite correctly, that if the actions of

mankind are determined in the main by their selfish interests, the only rulers

who will govern according to the interest of the governed, are those whose

selfish interests are in accordance with it. And to this is added a third

proposition, namely, that no rulers have their selfish interest identical with

that of the governed, unless it be rendered so by accountability, that is, by

dependence on the will of the governed. In other words (and as the result of

the whole), that the desire of retaining or the fear of losing their power, and

whatever is thereon consequent, is the sole motive which can be relied on forproducing on the part of rulers a course of conduct in accordance with the

general interest.

              We have thus a fundamental theorem of political science, consisting

of three syllogisms, and depending chiefly on two general premises, in each

of which a certain effect is considered as determined only by one cause, not

by a concurrence of causes. In the one, it is assumed that the actions of

average rulers are determined solely by self-interest; in the other, that the

sense of identity of interest with the governed, is produced and producible by

no other cause than responsibility.

              Neither of these propositions is by any means true; the last is

extremely wide of the truth.

              It is not true that the actions even of average rulers are wholly, or

any thing approaching to wholly, determined by their personal interest, or

even by their own opinion of their personal interest. I do not speak of the

influence of a sense of duty, or feelings of philanthropy, motives never to be

mainly relied on, though (except in countries or during periods of great moral

debasement) they influence almost all rulers in some degree, and some rulers

in a very great degree. But I insist only on what is true of all rulers, viz., that

the character and course of their actions is largely influenced (independently

of personal calculation) by the habitual sentiments and feelings, the general

modes of thinking and acting, which prevail throughout the community of

which they are members; as well as by the feelings, habits, and modes of

thought which characterize the particular class in that community to which

they themselves belong. And no one will understand or be able to decipher

their system of conduct, who does not take all these things into account. They

are also much influenced by the maxims and traditions which have descended

to them from other rulers, their predecessors; which maxims and traditions

have been known to retain an ascendancy during long periods, even in

opposition to the private interests of the rulers for the time being. I put aside

the influence of other less general causes. Although, therefore, the private

interest of the rulers or of the ruling class is a very powerful force, constantly

in action, and exercising the most important influence upon their conduct,

there is also, in what they do, a large portion which that private interest by no

means affords a sufficient explanation of; and even the particulars which

constitute the goodness or badness of their government, are in some, and no

small degree, influenced by those among the circumstances acting uponthem, which can not, with any propriety, be included in the term self-interest.

              Turning now to the other proposition, that responsibility to the

governed is the only cause capable of producing in the rulers a sense of

identity of interest with the community, this is still less admissible as a

universal truth, than even the former. I am not speaking of perfect identity of

interest, which is an impracticable chimera; which, most assuredly,

responsibility to the people does not give. I speak of identity in essentials;

and the essentials are different at different places and times. There are a large

number of cases in which those things which it is most for the general interest

that the rulers should do, are also those which they are prompted to do by

their strongest personal interest, the consolidation of their power. The

suppression, for instance, of anarchy and resistance to law — the complete

establishment of the authority of the central government, in a state of society

like that of Europe in the Middle Ages — is one of the strongest interests of

the people, and also of the rulers simply because they are the rulers; and

responsibility on their part could not strengthen, though in many conceivable

ways it might weaken, the motives prompting them to pursue this object.

During the greater part, of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of many other

monarchs who might be named, the sense of identity of interest between the

sovereign and the majority of the people was probably stronger than it

usually is in responsible governments; every thing that the people had most at

heart, the monarch had at heart too. Had Peter the Great, or the rugged

savages whom he began to civilize, the truest inclination toward the things

which were for the real interest of those savages?

              I am not here attempting to establish a theory of government, and am

not called upon to determine the proportional weight which ought to be given

to the circumstances which this school of geometrical politicians left out of

their system, and those which they took into it. I am only concerned to show

that their method was unscientific; not to measure the amount of error which

may have affected their practical conclusions.

              It is but justice to them, however, to remark, that their mistake was

not so much one of substance as of form, and consisted in presenting in a

systematic shape, and as the scientific treatment of a great philosophical

question, what should have passed for that which it really was, the mere

polemics of the day. Although the actions of rulers are by no means wholly

determined by their selfish interests, it is chiefly as a security against thoseselfish interests that constitutional checks are required; and for that purpose

such checks, in England, and the other nations of modern Europe, can in no

manner be dispensed with. It is likewise true, that in these same nations, and

in the present age, responsibility to the governed is the only means practically

available to create a feeling of identity of interest, in the cases, and on the

points, where that feeling does not sufficiently exist. To all this, and to the

arguments which may be founded on it in favor of measures for the

correction of our representative system, I have nothing to object; but I

confess my regret, that the small though highly important portion of the

philosophy of government, which was wanted for the immediate purpose of

serving the cause of parliamentary reform, should have been held forth by

thinkers of such eminence as a complete theory.

              It is not to be imagined possible, nor is it true in point of fact, that

these philosophers regarded the few premises of their theory as including all

that is required for explaining social phenomena, or for determining the

choice of forms of government and measures of legislation and

administration. They were too highly instructed, of too comprehensive

intellect, and some of them of too sober and practical a character, for such an

error. They would have applied, and did apply, their principles with

innumerable allowances. But it is not allowances that are wanted. There is

little chance of making due amends in the superstructure of a theory for the

want of sufficient breadth in its foundations. It is unphilosophical to construct

a science out of a few of the agencies by which the phenomena are

determined, and leave the rest to the routine of practice or the sagacity of

conjecture. We either ought not to pretend to scientific forms, or we ought to

study all the determining agencies equally, and endeavor, so far as it can be

done, to include all of them within the pale of the science; else we shall

infallibly bestow a disproportionate attention upon those which our theory

takes into account, while we misestimate the rest, and probably underrate

their importance. That the deductions should be from the whole and not from

a part only of the laws of nature that are concerned, would be desirable even

if those omitted were so insignificant in comparison with the others, that they

might, for most purposes and on most occasions, be left out of the account.

But this is far indeed from being true in the social science. The phenomena of

society do not depend, in essentials, on some one agency or law of human

nature, with only inconsiderable modifications from others. The whole of the

qualities of human nature influence those phenomena, and there is not onewhich influences them in a small degree. There is not one, the removal or any

great alteration of which would not materially affect the whole aspect of

society, and change more or less the sequences of social phenomena

generally.

              The theory which has been the subject of these remarks is, in this

country at least, the principal contemporary example of what I have styled the

geometrical method of philosophizing in the social science; and our

examination of it has, for this reason, been more detailed than would

otherwise have been suitable to a work like the present. Having now

sufficiently illustrated the two erroneous methods, we shall pass without

further preliminary to the true method; that which proceeds (conformably to

the practice of the more complex physical sciences) deductively indeed, but

by deduction from many, not from one or a very few, original premises;

considering each effect as (what it really is) an aggregate result of many

causes, operating sometimes through the same, sometimes through different

mental agencies, or laws of human nature.

 

 

     Chapter IX. – Of The Physical, Or Concrete Deductive, Method.

 

 

              § 1. After what has been said to illustrate the nature of the inquiry

into social phenomena, the general character of the method proper to that

inquiry is sufficiently evident, and needs only to be recapitulated, not proved.

However complex the phenomena, all their sequences and co-existences

result from the laws of the separate elements. The effect produced, in social

phenomena, by any complex set of circumstances, amounts precisely to the

sum of the effects of the circumstances taken singly; and the complexity does

not arise from the number of the laws themselves, which is not remarkably

great, but from the extraordinary number and variety of the data or elements

— of the agents which, in obedience to that small number of laws, co-operate

toward the effect. The Social Science, therefore (which, by a convenient

barbarism, has been termed Sociology), is a deductive science; not, indeed,

after the model of geometry, but after that of the more complex physical

sciences. It infers the law of each effect from the laws of causation on which

that effect depends; not, however, from the law merely of one cause, as in the

geometrical method, but by considering all the causes which conjunctly

influence the effect, and compounding their laws with one another. Its

method, in short, is the Concrete Deductive Method: that of which astronomy

furnishes the most perfect, natural philosophy a somewhat less perfect,

example, and the employment of which, with the adaptations and precautions

required by the subject, is beginning to regenerate physiology.

              Nor does it admit of doubt, that similar adaptations and precautions

are indispensable in sociology. In applying to that most complex of all studies

what is demonstrably the sole method capable of throwing the light of

science even upon phenomena of a far inferior degree of complication, we

ought to be aware that the same superior complexity which renders the

instrument of Deduction more necessary, renders it also more precarious; and

we must be prepared to meet, by appropriate contrivances, this increase of

difficulty.

              The actions and feelings of human beings in the social state, are, no

doubt, entirely governed by psychological and ethological laws: whatever

influence any cause exercises upon the social phenomena, it exercisesthrough those laws. Supposing therefore the laws of human actions and

feelings to be sufficiently known, there is no extraordinary difficulty in

determining from those laws, the nature of the social effects which any given

cause tends to produce. But when the question is that of compounding several

tendencies together, and computing the aggregate result of many co-existent

causes; and especially when, by attempting to predict what will actually occur

in a given case, we incur the obligation of estimating and compounding the

influences of all the causes which happen to exist in that case, we attempt a

task to proceed far in which, surpasses the compass of the human faculties.

              If all the resources of science are not sufficient to enable us to

calculate, a priori , with complete precision, the mutual action of three bodies

gravitating toward one another, it may be judged with what prospect of

success we should endeavor to calculate the result of the conflicting

tendencies which are acting in a thousand different directions and promoting

a thousand different changes at a given instant in a given society; although

we might and ought to be able, from the laws of human nature, to distinguish

correctly enough the tendencies themselves, so far as they depend on causes

accessible to our observation; and to determine the direction which each of

them, if acting alone, would impress upon society, as well as, in a general

way at least, to pronounce that some of these tendencies are more powerful

than others.

              But, without dissembling the necessary imperfections of the a priori

method when applied to such a subject, neither ought we, on the other hand;

to exaggerate them. The same objections which apply to the Method of

Deduction in this its most difficult employment, apply to it, as we formerly
        276
showed, in its easiest; and would even there have been insuperable, if there

had not existed, as was then fully explained, an appropriate remedy. This

remedy consists in the process which, under the name of Verification, we

have characterized as the third essential constituent part of the Deductive

Method; that of collating the conclusions of the ratiocination either with the

concrete phenomena themselves, or, when such are obtainable, with their

empirical laws. The ground of confidence in any concrete deductive science

is not the a priori reasoning itself, but the accordance between its results and

those of observation a posteriori . Either of these processes, apart from the

other, diminishes in value as the subject increases in complication, and this is

in so rapid a ratio as soon to become entirely worthless; but the reliance to beplaced in the concurrence of the two sorts of evidence, not only does not

diminish in any thing like the same proportion, but is not necessarily much

diminished at all. Nothing more results than a disturbance in the order of

precedency of the two processes, sometimes amounting to its actual

inversion: insomuch that instead of deducing our conclusions by reasoning,

and verifying them by observation, we in some cases begin by obtaining them

provisionally from specific experience, and afterward connect them with the

principles of human nature by a priori reasonings, which reasonings are thus

a real Verification.

              The only thinker who, with a competent knowledge of scientific

methods in general, has attempted to characterize the Method of Sociology,

M. Comte, considers this inverse order as inseparably inherent in the nature

of sociological speculation. He looks upon the social science as essentially

consisting of generalizations from history, verified, not originally suggested,

by deduction from the laws of human nature. Though there is a truth

contained in this opinion, of which I shall presently endeavor to show the

importance, I can not but think that this truth is enunciated in too unlimited a

manner, and that there is considerable scope in sociological inquiry for the

direct, as well as for the inverse, Deductive Method.

              It will, in fact, be shown in the next chapter, that there is a kind of

sociological inquiries to which, from their prodigious complication, the

method of direct deduction is altogether inapplicable, while by a happy

compensation it is precisely in these cases that we are able to obtain the best

empirical laws: to these inquiries, therefore, the Inverse Method is

exclusively adapted. But there are also, as will presently appear, other cases

in which it is impossible to obtain from direct observation any thing worthy

the name of an empirical law; and it fortunately happens that these are the

very cases in which the Direct Method is least affected by the objection

which undoubtedly must always affect it in a certain degree.

              We shall begin, then, by looking at the Social Science as a science of

direct Deduction, and considering what can be accomplished in it, and under

what limitations, by that mode of investigation. We shall, then, in a separate

chapter, examine and endeavor to characterize the inverse process.

              § 2. It is evident, in the first place, that Sociology, considered as a

system of deductions a priori , can not be a science of positive predictions,but only of tendencies. We may be able to conclude, from the laws of human

nature applied to the circumstances of a given state of society, that a

particular cause will operate in a certain manner unless counteracted; but we

can never be assured to what extent or amount it will so operate, or affirm

with certainty that it will not be counteracted; because we can seldom know,

even approximately, all the agencies which may co-exist with it, and still less

calculate the “collective result” of so many combined elements. The remark,

however, must here be once more repeated, that knowledge insufficient for

prediction may be most valuable for guidance. It is not necessary for the wise

conduct of the affairs of society, no more than of any one’s private concerns,

that we should be able to foresee infallibly the results of what we do. We

must seek our objects by means which may perhaps be defeated, and take

precautions against dangers which possibly may never be realized. The aim

of practical politics is to surround any given society with the greatest possible

number of circumstances of which the tendencies are beneficial, and to

remove or counteract, as far as practicable, those of which the tendencies are

injurious. A knowledge of the tendencies only, though without the power of

accurately predicting their conjunct result, gives us to a considerable extent

this power.

              It would, however, be an error to suppose that even with respect to

tendencies we could arrive in this manner at any great number of propositions

which will be true in all societies without exception. Such a supposition

would be inconsistent with the eminently modifiable nature of the social

phenomena, and the multitude and variety of the circumstances by which

they are modified — circumstances never the same, or even nearly the same,

in two different societies, or in two different periods of the same society. This

would not be so serious an obstacle if, though the causes acting upon society

in general are numerous, those which influence any one feature of society

were limited in number; for we might then insulate any particular social

phenomenon, and investigate its laws without disturbance from the rest. But

the truth is the very opposite of this. Whatever affects, in an appreciable

degree, any one element of the social state, affects through it all the other

elements. The mode of production of all social phenomena is one great case

of Intermixture of Laws. We can never either understand in theory or

command in practice the condition of a society in any one respect, without

taking into consideration its condition in all other respects. There is no social

phenomenon which is not more or less influenced by every other part of thecondition of the same society, and therefore by every cause which is

influencing any other of the contemporaneous social phenomena. There is, in

short, what physiologists term a consensus , similar to that existing among

the various organs and functions of the physical frame of man and the more

perfect animals; and constituting one of the many analogies which have

rendered universal such expressions as the “body politic” and “body natural.”

It follows from this consensus , that unless two societies could be alike in all

the circumstances which surround and influence them (which would imply

their being alike in their previous history), no portion whatever of the

phenomena will, unless by accident, precisely correspond; no one cause will

produce exactly the same effects in both. Every cause, as its effect spreads

through society, comes somewhere in contact with different sets of agencies,

and thus has its effects on some of the social phenomena differently

modified; and these differences, by their reaction, produce a difference even

in those of the effects which would otherwise have been the same. We can

never, therefore, affirm with certainty that a cause which has a particular

tendency in one people or in one age will have exactly the same tendency in

another, without referring back to our premises, and performing over again

for the second age or nation, that analysis of the whole of its influencing

circumstances which we had already performed for the first. The deductive

science of society will not lay down a theorem, asserting in a universal

manner the effect of any cause; but will rather teach us how to frame the

proper theorem for the circumstances of any given case. It will not give the

laws of society in general, but the means of determining the phenomena of

any given society from the particular elements or data of that society.

              All the general propositions which can be framed by the deductive

science, are therefore, in the strictest sense of the word, hypothetical. They

are grounded on some suppositious set of circumstances, and declare how

some given cause would operate in those circumstances, supposing that no

others were combined with them. If the set of circumstances supposed have

been copied from those of any existing society, the conclusions will be true

of that society, provided, and in as far as, the effect of those circumstances

shall not be modified by others which have not been taken into the account. If

we desire a nearer approach to concrete truth, we can only aim at it by taking,

or endeavoring to take, a greater number of individualizing circumstances

into the computation.              Considering, however, in how accelerating a ratio the uncertainty of

our conclusions increases as we attempt to take the effect of a greater number

of concurrent causes into our calculations, the hypothetical combinations of

circumstances on which we construct the general theorems of the science, can

not be made very complex, without so rapidly accumulating a liability to

error as must soon deprive our conclusions of all value. This mode of inquiry,

considered as a means of obtaining general propositions, must, therefore, on

pain of frivolity, be limited to those classes of social facts which, though

influenced like the rest by all sociological agents, are under the immediate

influence, principally at least, of a few only.

              § 3. Notwithstanding the universal consensus of the social

phenomena, whereby nothing which takes place in any part of the operations

of society is without its share of influence on every other part; and

notwithstanding the paramount ascendancy which the general state of

civilization and social progress in any given society must hence exercise over

all the partial and subordinate phenomena; it is not the less true that different

species of social facts are in the main dependent, immediately and in the first

resort, on different kinds of causes; and therefore not only may with

advantage, but must, be studied apart: just as in the natural body we study

separately the physiology and pathology of each of the principal organs and

tissues, though every one is acted upon by the state of all the others; and

though the peculiar constitution and general state of health of the organism

co-operates with, and often preponderates over, the local causes, in

determining the state of any particular organ.

              On these considerations is grounded the existence of distinct and

separate, though not independent, branches or departments of sociological

speculation.

              There is, for example, one large class of social phenomena in which

the immediately determining causes are principally those which act through

the desire of wealth, and in which the psychological law mainly concerned is

the familiar one, that a greater gain is preferred to a smaller. I mean, of

course, that portion of the phenomena of society which emanate from the

industrial, or productive, operations of mankind; and from those of their acts

through which the distribution of the products of those industrial operations

takes place, in so far as not effected by force, or modified by voluntary gift.

By reasoning from that one law of human nature, and from the principaloutward circumstances (whether universal or confined to particular states of

society) which operate upon the human mind through that law, we may be

enabled to explain and predict this portion of the phenomena of society, so

far as they depend on that class of circumstances only; overlooking the

influence of any other of the circumstances of society; and therefore neither

tracing back the circumstances which we do take into account, to their

possible origin in some other facts in the social state, nor making allowance

for the manner in which any of those other circumstances may interfere with,

and counteract or modify, the effect of the former. A department of science

may thus be constructed, which has received the name of Political Economy.

              The motive which suggests the separation of this portion of the

social phenomena from the rest, and the creation of a distinct branch of

science relating to them is — that they do mainly depend, at least in the first

resort, on one class of circumstances only; and that even when other

circumstances interfere, the ascertainment of the effect due to the one class of

circumstances alone, is a sufficiently intricate and difficult business to make

it expedient to perform it once for all, and then allow for the effect of the

modifying circumstances; especially as certain fixed combinations of the

former are apt to recur often, in conjunction with ever-varying circumstances

of the latter class.

              Political Economy, as I have said on another occasion, concerns

itself only with “such of the phenomena of the social state as take place in

consequence of the pursuit of wealth. It makes entire abstraction of every

other human passion or motive; except those which may be regarded as

perpetually antagonizing principles to the desire of wealth, namely, aversion

to labor, and desire of the present enjoyment of costly indulgences. These it

takes, to a certain extent, into its calculations, because these do not merely,

like our other desires, occasionally conflict with the pursuit of wealth, but

accompany it always as a drag or impediment, and are therefore inseparably

mixed up in the consideration of it. Political Economy considers mankind as

occupied solely in acquiring and consuming wealth; and aims at showing

what is the course of action into which mankind, living in a state of society,

would be impelled, if that motive, except in the degree in which it is checked

by the two perpetual counter-motives above adverted to, were absolute ruler

of all their actions. Under the influence of this desire, it shows mankind

accumulating wealth, and employing that wealth in the production of otherwealth; sanctioning by mutual agreement the institution of property;

establishing laws to prevent individuals from encroaching upon the property

of others by force or fraud; adopting various contrivances for increasing the

productiveness of their labor; settling the division of the produce by

agreement, under the influence of competition (competition itself being

governed by certain laws, which laws are therefore the ultimate regulators of

the division of the produce); and employing certain expedients (as money,

credit, etc.) to facilitate the distribution. All these operations, though many of

them are really the result of a plurality of motives, are considered by political

economy as flowing solely from the desire of wealth. The science then

proceeds to investigate the laws which govern these several operations, under

the supposition that man is a being who is determined, by the necessity of his

nature, to prefer a greater portion of wealth to a smaller, in all cases, without

any other exception than that constituted by the two counter-motives already

specified. Not that any political economist was ever so absurd as to suppose

that mankind are really thus constituted, but because this is the mode in

which science must necessarily proceed. When an effect depends on a

concurrence of causes, these causes must be studied one at a time, and their

laws separately investigated, if we wish, through the causes, to obtain the

power of either predicting or controlling the effect; since the law of the effect

is compounded of the laws of all the causes which determine it. The law of

the centripetal and that of the projectile force must have been known, before

the motions of the earth and planets could be explained, or many of them

predicted. The same is the case with the conduct of man in society. In order

to judge how he will act under the variety of desires and aversions which are

concurrently operating upon him, we must know how he would act under the

exclusive influence of each one in particular. There is, perhaps, no action of a

man’s life in which he is neither under the immediate nor under the remote

influence of any impulse but the mere desire of wealth. With respect to those

parts of human conduct of which wealth is not even the principal object, to

these political economy does not pretend that its conclusions are applicable.

But there are also certain departments of human affairs, in which the

acquisition of wealth is the main and acknowledged end. It is only of these

that political economy takes notice. The manner in which it necessarily

proceeds is that of treating the main and acknowledged end as if it were the

sole end; which, of all hypotheses equally simple, is the nearest to the truth.

The political economist inquires, what are the actions which would beproduced by this desire, if within the departments in question it were

unimpeded by any other. In this way a nearer approximation is obtained than

would otherwise be practicable to the real order of human affairs in those

departments. This approximation has then to be corrected by making proper

allowance for the effects of any impulses of a different description, which can

be shown to interfere with the result in any particular case. Only in a few of

the most striking cases (such as the important one of the principle of

population) are these corrections interpolated into the expositions of political

economy itself; the strictness of purely scientific arrangement being thereby

somewhat departed from, for the sake of practical utility. So far as it is

known, or may be presumed, that the conduct of mankind in the pursuit of

wealth is under the collateral influence of any other of the properties of our

nature than the desire of obtaining the greatest quantity of wealth with the

least labor and self-denial, the conclusions of political economy will so far

fail of being applicable to the explanation or prediction of real events, until

they are modified by a correct allowance for the degree of influence exercised
                      277
by the other cause.”

              Extensive and important practical guidance may be derived, in any

given state of society, from general propositions such as those above

indicated; even though the modifying influence of the miscellaneous causes

which the theory does not take into account, as well as the effect of the

general social changes in progress, be provisionally overlooked. And though

it has been a very common error of political economists to draw conclusions

from the elements of one state of society, and apply them to other states in

which many of the elements are not the same, it is even then not difficult, by

tracing back the demonstrations, and introducing the new premises in their

proper places, to make the same general course of argument which served for

the one case, serve for the others too.

              For example, it has been greatly the custom of English political

economists to discuss the laws of the distribution of the produce of industry,

on a supposition which is scarcely realized anywhere out of England and

Scotland, namely, that the produce is “shared among three classes, altogether

distinct from one another, laborers, capitalists, and landlords; and that all

these are free agents, permitted in law and in fact to set upon their labor, their

capital, and their land, whatever price they are able to get for it. The

conclusions of the science, being all adapted to a society thus constituted,require to be revised whenever they are applied to any other. They are

inapplicable where the only capitalists are the landlords, and the laborers are

their property, as in slave countries. They are inapplicable where the almost

universal landlord is the state, as in India. They are inapplicable where the

agricultural laborer is generally the owner both of the land itself and of the

capital, as frequently in France, or of the capital only, as in Ireland.” But

though it may often be very justly objected to the existing race of political

economists “that they attempt to construct a permanent fabric out of

transitory materials; that they take for granted the immutability of

arrangements of society, many of which are in their nature fluctuating or

progressive, and enunciate with as little qualification as if they were universal

and absolute truths, propositions which are perhaps applicable to no state of

society except the particular one in which the writer happened to live;” this

does not take away the value of the propositions, considered with reference to

the state of society from which they were drawn. And even as applicable to

other states of society, “it must not be supposed that the science is so

incomplete and unsatisfactory as this might seem to prove. Though many of

its conclusions are only locally true, its method of investigation is applicable

universally; and as whoever has solved a certain number of algebraic

equations, can without difficulty solve all others of the same kind, so

whoever knows the political economy of England, or even of Yorkshire,

knows that of all nations, actual or possible, provided he have good sense

enough not to expect the same conclusion to issue from varying premises.”

Whoever has mastered with the degree of precision which is attainable the

laws which, under free competition, determine the rent, profits, and wages,

received by landlords, capitalists, and laborers, in a state of society in which

the three classes are completely separate, will have no difficulty in

determining the very different laws which regulate the distribution of the

produce among the classes interested in it in any of the states of cultivation
                                                              278
and landed property set forth in the foregoing extract.

              § 4. I would not here undertake to decide what other hypothetical or

abstract sciences similar to Political Economy, may admit of being carved out

of the general body of the social science; what other portions of the social

phenomena are in a sufficiently close and complete dependence, in the first

resort, on a peculiar class of causes, to make it convenient to create a

preliminary science of those causes; postponing the consideration of the

causes which act through them, or in concurrence with them, to a later periodof the inquiry. There is, however, among these separate departments one

which can not be passed over in silence, being of a more comprehensive and

commanding character than any of the other branches into which the social

science may admit of being divided. Like them, it is directly conversant with

the causes of only one class of social facts, but a class which exercises,

immediately or remotely, a paramount influence over the test. I allude to what

may be termed Political Ethology, or the theory of the causes which

determine the type of character belonging to a people or to an age. Of all the

subordinate branches of the social science, this is the most completely in its

infancy. The causes of national character are scarcely at all understood, and

the effect of institutions or social arrangements upon the character of the

people is generally that portion of their effects which is least attended to, and

least comprehended. Nor is this wonderful, when we consider the infant state

of the science of Ethology itself, from whence the laws must be drawn, of

which the truths of political ethology can be but results and exemplifications.

              Yet, to whoever well considers the matter, it must appear that the

laws of national (or collective) character are by far the most important class

of sociological laws. In the first place, the character which is formed by any

state of social circumstances is in itself the most interesting phenomenon

which that state of society can possibly present. Secondly, it is also a fact

which enters largely into the production of all the other phenomena. And

above all, the character, that is, the opinions, feelings, and habits, of the

people, though greatly the results of the state of society which precedes them,

are also greatly the causes of the state of society which follows them; and are

the power by which all those of the circumstances of society which are

artificial, laws and customs for instance, are altogether moulded: customs

evidently, laws no less really, either by the direct influence of public

sentiment upon the ruling powers, or by the effect which the state of national

opinion and feeling has in determining the form of government and shaping

the character of the governors.

              As might be expected, the most imperfect part of those branches of

social inquiry which have been cultivated as separate sciences, is the theory

of the manner in which their conclusions are affected by ethological

considerations. The omission is no defect in them as abstract or hypothetical

sciences, but it vitiates them in their practical application as branches of a

comprehensive social science. In political economy, for instance, empiricallaws of human nature are tacitly assumed by English thinkers, which are

calculated only for Great Britain and the United States. Among other things,

an intensity of competition is constantly supposed, which, as a general

mercantile fact, exists in no country in the world except those two. An

English political economist, like his countrymen in general, has seldom

learned that it is possible that men, in conducting the business of selling their

goods over a counter, should care more about their ease or their vanity than

about their pecuniary gain. Yet those who know the habits of the continent of

Europe are aware how apparently small a motive often outweighs the desire

of money getting, even in the operations which have money getting for their

direct object. The more highly the science of ethology is cultivated, and the

better the diversities of individual and national character are understood, the

smaller, probably, will the number of propositions become, which it will be

considered safe to build on as universal principles of human nature.

              These considerations show that the process of dividing off the social

science into compartments, in order that each may be studied separately, and

its conclusions afterward corrected for practice by the modifications supplied

by the others, must be subject to at least one important limitation. Those

portions alone of the social phenomena can with advantage be made the

subjects, even provisionally, of distinct branches of science, into which the

diversities of character between different nations or different times enter as

influencing causes only in a secondary degree. Those phenomena, on the

contrary, with which the influences of the ethological state of the people are

mixed up at every step (so that the connection of effects and causes can not

be even rudely marked out without taking those influences into

consideration) could not with any advantage, nor without great disadvantage,

be treated independently of political ethology, nor, therefore, of all the

circumstances by which the qualities of a people are influenced. For this

reason (as well as for others which will hereafter appear) there can be no

separate Science of Government; that being the fact which, of all others, is

most mixed up, both as cause and effect, with the qualities of the particular

people or of the particular age. All questions respecting the tendencies of

forms of government must stand part of the general science of society, not of

any separate branch of it.

              This general Science of Society, as distinguished from the separate

departments of the science (each of which asserts its conclusions onlyconditionally, subject to the paramount control of the laws of the general

science) now remains to be characterized. And as will be shown presently,

nothing of a really scientific character is here possible, except by the inverse

deductive method. But before we quit the subject of those sociological

speculations which proceed by way of direct deduction, we must examine in

what relation they stand to that indispensable element in all deductive

sciences, Verification by Specific Experience — comparison between the

conclusions of reasoning and the results of observation.

              § 5. We have seen that, in most deductive sciences, and among the

rest in Ethology itself, which is the immediate foundation of the Social

Science, a preliminary work of preparation is performed on the observed

facts, to fit them for being rapidly and accurately collated (sometimes even

for being collated at all) with the conclusions of theory. This preparatory

treatment consists in finding general propositions which express concisely

what is common to large classes of observed facts; and these are called the

empirical laws of the phenomena. We have, therefore, to inquire, whether any

similar preparatory process can be performed on the facts of the social

science; whether there are any empirical laws in history or statistics.

              In statistics, it is evident that empirical laws may sometimes be

traced; and the tracing them forms an important part of that system of indirect

observation on which we must often rely for the data of the Deductive

Science. The process of the science consists in inferring effects from their

causes; but we have often no means of observing the causes, except through

the medium of their effects. In such cases the deductive science is unable to

predict the effects, for want of the necessary data; it can determine what

causes are capable of producing any given effect, but not with what

frequency and in what quantities those causes exist. An instance in point is

afforded by a newspaper now lying before me. A statement was furnished by

one of the official assignees in bankruptcy showing among the various

bankruptcies which it had been his duty to investigate, in how many cases the

losses had been caused by misconduct of different kinds, and in how many by

unavoidable misfortunes. The result was, that the number of failures caused

by misconduct greatly preponderated over those arising from all other causes

whatever. Nothing but specific experience could have given sufficient ground

for a conclusion to this purport. To collect, therefore, such empirical laws

(which are never more than approximate generalizations) from directobservation, is an important part of the process of sociological inquiry.

              The experimental process is not here to be regarded as a distinct road

to the truth, but as a means (happening accidentally to be the only, or the

best, available) for obtaining the necessary data for the deductive science.

When the immediate causes of social facts are not open to direct observation,

the empirical law of the effects gives us the empirical law (which in that case

is all that we can obtain) of the causes likewise. But those immediate causes

depend on remote causes; and the empirical law, obtained by this indirect

mode of observation, can only be relied on as applicable to unobserved cases,

so long as there is reason to think that no change has taken place in any of the

remote causes on which the immediate causes depend. In making use,

therefore, of even the best statistical generalizations for the purpose of

inferring (though it be only conjecturally) that the same empirical laws will

hold in any new case, it is necessary that we be well acquainted with the

remoter causes, in order that we may avoid applying the empirical law to

cases which differ in any of the circumstances on which the truth of the law

ultimately depends. And thus, even where conclusions derived from specific

observation are available for practical inferences in new cases, it is necessary

that the deductive science should stand sentinel over the whole process; that

it should be constantly referred to, and its sanction obtained to every

inference.

              The same thing holds true of all generalizations which can be

grounded on history. Not only there are such generalizations, but it will

presently be shown that the general science of society, which inquires into the

laws of succession and co-existence of the great facts constituting the state of

society and civilization at any time, can proceed in no other manner than by

making such generalizations — afterward to be confirmed by connecting

them with the psychological and ethological laws on which they must really

depend.

              § 6. But (reserving this question for its proper place) in those more

special inquiries which form the subject of the separate branches of the social

science, this twofold logical process and reciprocal verification is not

possible; specific experience affords nothing amounting to empirical laws.

This is particularly the case where the object is to determine the effect of any

one social cause among a great number acting simultaneously; the effect, for

example, of corn laws, or of a prohibitive commercial system generally.Though it may be perfectly certain, from theory, what kind of effects corn

laws must produce, and in what general direction their influence must tell

upon industrial prosperity, their effect is yet of necessity so much disguised

by the similar or contrary effects of other influencing agents, that specific

experience can at most only show that on the average of some great number

of instances, the cases where there were corn laws exhibited the effect in a

greater degree than those where there were not. Now the number of instances

necessary to exhaust the whole round of combinations of the various

influential circumstances, and thus afford a fair average, never can be

obtained. Not only we can never learn with sufficient authenticity the facts of

so many instances, but the world itself does not afford them in sufficient

numbers, within the limits of the given state of society and civilization which

such inquiries always presuppose. Having thus no previous empirical

generalizations with which to collate the conclusions of theory, the only

mode of direct verification which remains is to compare those conclusions

with the result of an individual experiment or instance. But here the difficulty

is equally great. For in order to verify a theory by an experiment, the

circumstances of the experiment must be exactly the same with those

contemplated in the theory. But in social phenomena the circumstances of no

two cases are exactly alike. A trial of corn laws in another country, or in a

former generation, would go a very little way toward verifying a conclusion

drawn respecting their effect in this generation and in this country. It thus

happens, in most cases, that the only individual instance really fitted to verify

the predictions of theory is the very instance for which the predictions were

made; and the verification comes too late to be of any avail for practical

guidance.

              Although, however, direct verification is impossible, there is an

indirect verification, which is scarcely of less value, and which is always

practicable. The conclusion drawn as to the individual case can only be

directly verified in that case; but it is verified indirectly, by the verification of

other conclusions, drawn in other individual cases from the same laws. The

experience which comes too late to verify the particular proposition to which

it refers, is not too late to help toward verifying the general sufficiency of the

theory. The test of the degree in which the science affords safe ground for

predicting (and consequently for practically dealing with) what has not yet

happened, is the degree in which it would have enabled us to predict what has

actually occurred. Before our theory of the influence of a particular cause, ina given state of circumstances, can be entirely trusted, we must be able to

explain and account for the existing state of all that portion of the social

phenomena which that cause has a tendency to influence. If, for instance, we

would apply our speculations in political economy to the prediction or

guidance of the phenomena of any country, we must be able to explain all the

mercantile or industrial facts of a general character, appertaining to the

present state of that country; to point out causes sufficient to account for all

of them, and prove, or show good ground for supposing, that these causes

have really existed. If we can not do this, it is a proof either that the facts

which ought to be taken into account are not yet completely known to us, or

that although we know the facts, we are not masters of a sufficiently perfect

theory to enable us to assign their consequences. In either case we are not, in

the present state of our knowledge, fully competent to draw conclusions,

speculative or practical, for that country. In like manner, if we would attempt

to judge of the effect which any political institution would have, supposing

that it could be introduced into any given country, we must be able to show

that the existing state of the practical government of that country, and of

whatever else depends thereon, together with the particular character and

tendencies of the people, and their state in respect to the various elements of

social well-being, are such as the institutions they have lived under, in

conjunction with the other circumstances of their nature or of their position,

were calculated to produce.

              To prove, in short, that our science, and our knowledge of the

particular case, render us competent to predict the future, we must show that

they would have enabled us to predict the present and the past. If there be any

thing which we could not have predicted, this constitutes a residual

phenomenon, requiring further study for the purpose of explanation; and we

must either search among the circumstances of the particular case until we

find one which, on the principles of our existing theory, accounts for the

unexplained phenomenon, or we must turn back, and seek the explanation by

an extension and improvement of the theory itself.

 

 

       Chapter X. – Of The Inverse Deductive, Or Historical, Method.

 

 

              § 1. There are two kinds of sociological inquiry. In the first kind, the

question proposed is, what effect will follow from a given cause, a certain

general condition of social circumstances being presupposed. As, for

example, what would be the effect of imposing or of repealing corn laws, of

abolishing monarchy or introducing universal suffrage, in the present

condition of society and civilization in any European country, or under any

other given supposition with regard to the circumstances of society in

general, without reference to the changes which might take place, or which

may already be in progress, in those circumstances. But there is also a second

inquiry, namely, what are the laws which determine those general

circumstances themselves. In this last the question is, not what will be the

effect of a given cause in a certain state of society, but what are the causes

which produce, and the phenomena which characterize, states of society

generally. In the solution of this question consists the general Science of

Society; by which the conclusions of the other and more special kind of

inquiry must be limited and controlled.

              § 2. In order to conceive correctly the scope of this general science,

and distinguish it from the subordinate departments of sociological

speculation, it is necessary to fix the ideas attached to the phrase, “A State of

Society.” What is called a state of society, is the simultaneous state of all the

greater social facts or phenomena. Such are: the degree of knowledge, and of

intellectual and moral culture, existing in the community, and in every class

of it; the state of industry, of wealth and its distribution; the habitual

occupations of the community; their division into classes, and the relations of

those classes to one another; the common beliefs which they entertain on all

the subjects most important to mankind, and the degree of assurance with

which those beliefs are held; their tastes, and the character and degree of their

æsthetic development; their form of government, and the more important of

their laws and customs. The condition of all these things, and of many more

which will readily suggest themselves, constitute the state of society, or the

state of civilization, at any given time.

              When states of society, and the causes which produce them, arespoken of as a subject of science, it is implied that there exists a natural

correlation among these different elements; that not every variety of

combination of these general social facts is possible, but only certain

combinations; that, in short, there exist Uniformities of Co-existence between

the states of the various social phenomena. And such is the truth; as is indeed

a necessary consequence of the influence exercised by every one of those

phenomena over every other. It is a fact implied in the consensus of the

various parts of the social body.

              States of society are like different constitutions or different ages in

the physical frame; they are conditions not of one or a few organs or

functions, but of the whole organism. Accordingly, the information which we

possess respecting past ages, and respecting the various states of society now

existing in different regions of the earth, does, when duly analyzed, exhibit

uniformities. It is found that when one of the features of society is in a

particular state, a state of many other features, more or less precisely

determinate, always or usually co-exists with it.

              But the uniformities of co-existence obtaining among phenomena

which are effects of causes, must (as we have so often observed) be

corollaries from the laws of causation by which these phenomena are really

determined. The mutual correlation between the different elements of each

state of society, is, therefore, a derivative law, resulting from the laws which

regulate the succession between one state of society and another; for the

proximate cause of every state of society is the state of society immediately

preceding it. The fundamental problem, therefore, of the social science, is to

find the laws according to which any state of society produces the state which

succeeds it and takes its place. This opens the great and vexed question of the

progressiveness of man and society; an idea involved in every just conception

of social phenomena as the subject of a science.

              § 3. It is one of the characters, not absolutely peculiar to the sciences

of human nature and society, but belonging to them in a peculiar degree, to

be conversant with a subject-matter whose properties are changeable. I do not

mean changeable from day to day, but from age to age; so that not only the

qualities of individuals vary, but those of the majority are not the same in one

age as in another.

              The principal cause of this peculiarity is the extensive and constantreaction of the effects upon their causes. The circumstances in which

mankind are placed, operating according to their own laws and to the laws of

human nature, form the characters of the human beings; but the human

beings, in their turn, mould and shape the circumstances for themselves and

for those who come after them. From this reciprocal action there must

necessarily result either a cycle or a progress. In astronomy also, every fact is

at once effect and cause; the successive positions of the various heavenly

bodies produce changes both in the direction and in the intensity of the forces

by which those positions are determined. But in the case of the solar system,

these mutual actions bring around again, after a certain number of changes,

the former state of circumstances; which, of course, leads to the perpetual

recurrence of the same series in an unvarying order. Those bodies, in short,

revolve in orbits: but there are (or, conformably to the laws of astronomy,

there might be) others which, instead of an orbit, describe a trajectory — a

course not returning into itself. One or other of these must be the type to

which human affairs must conform.

              One of the thinkers who earliest conceived the succession of

historical events as subject to fixed laws, and endeavored to discover these

laws by an analytical survey of history, Vico, the celebrated author of the

Scienza Nuova , adopted the former of these opinions. He conceived the

phenomena of human society as revolving in an orbit; as going through

periodically the same series of changes. Though there were not wanting

circumstances tending to give some plausibility to this view, it would not

bear a close scrutiny: and those who have succeeded Vico in this kind of

speculations have universally adopted the idea of a trajectory or progress, in

lieu of an orbit or cycle.

              The words Progress and Progressiveness are not here to be

understood as synonymous with improvement and tendency to improvement.

It is conceivable that the laws of human nature might determine, and even

necessitate, a certain series of changes in man and society, which might not in

every case, or which might not on the whole, be improvements. It is my

belief, indeed, that the general tendency is, and will continue to be, saving

occasional and temporary exceptions, one of improvement; a tendency

toward a better and happier state. This, however, is not a question of the

method of the social science, but a theorem of the science itself. For our

purpose it is sufficient that there is a progressive change both in the characterof the human race and in their outward circumstances, so far as moulded by

themselves; that in each successive age the principal phenomena of society

are different from what they were in the age preceding, and still more

different from any previous age: the periods which most distinctly mark these

successive changes being intervals of one generation, during which a new set

of human beings have been educated, have grown up from childhood, and

taken possession of society.

              The progressiveness of the human race is the foundation on which a

method of philosophizing in the social science has been of late years erected,

far superior to either of the two modes which had previously been prevalent,

the chemical or experimental, and the geometrical modes. This method,

which is now generally adopted by the most advanced thinkers on the

Continent, consists in attempting, by a study and analysis of the general facts

of history, to discover (what these philosophers term) the law of progress:

which law, once ascertained, must according to them enable us to predict

future events, just as after a few terms of an infinite series in algebra we are

able to detect the principle, of regularity in their formation, and to predict the

rest of the series to any number of terms we please. The principal aim of

historical speculation in France, of late years, has been to ascertain this law.

But while I gladly acknowledge the great services which have been rendered

to historical knowledge by this school, I can not but deem them to be mostly

chargeable with a fundamental misconception of the true method of social

philosophy. The misconception consists in supposing that the order of

succession which we may be able to trace among the different states of

society and civilization which history presents to us, even if that order were

more rigidly uniform than it has yet been proved to be, could ever amount to

a law of nature. It can only be an empirical law. The succession of states of

the human mind and of human society can not have an independent law of its

own; it must depend on the psychological and ethological laws which govern

the action of circumstances on men and of men on circumstances. It is

conceivable that those laws might be such, and the general circumstances of

the human race such, as to determine the successive transformations of man

and society to one given and unvarying order. But even if the case were so, it

can not be the ultimate aim of science to discover an empirical law. Until that

law could be connected with the psychological and ethological laws on which

it must depend, and, by the consilience of deduction a priori with historical

evidence, could be converted from an empirical law into a scientific one, itcould not be relied on for the prediction of future events, beyond, at most,

strictly adjacent cases. M. Comte alone, among the new historical school, has

seen the necessity of thus connecting all our generalizations from history with

the laws of human nature.

              § 4. But, while it is an imperative rule never to introduce any

generalization from history into the social science unless sufficient grounds

can be pointed out for it in human nature, I do not think any one will contend

that it would have been possible, setting out from the principles of human

nature and from the general circumstances of the position of our species, to

determine a priori the order in which human development must take place,

and to predict, consequently, the general facts of history up to the present

time. After the first few terms of the series, the influence exercised, over each

generation by the generations which preceded it, becomes, (as is well

observed by the writer last referred to) more and more preponderant over all

other influences; until at length what we now are and do, is in a very small

degree the result of the universal circumstances of the human race, or even of

our own circumstances acting through the original qualities of our species,

but mainly of the qualities produced in us by the whole previous history of

humanity. So long a series of actions and reactions between Circumstances

and Man, each successive term being composed of an ever greater number

and variety of parts, could not possibly be computed by human faculties from

the elementary laws which produce it. The mere length of the series would be

a sufficient obstacle, since a slight error in any one of the terms would

augment in rapid progression at every subsequent step.

              If, therefore, the series of the effects themselves did not, when

examined as a whole, manifest any regularity, we should in vain attempt to

construct a general science of society. We must in that case have contented

ourselves with that subordinate order of sociological speculation formerly

noticed, namely, with endeavoring to ascertain what would be the effect of

the introduction of any new cause, in a state of society supposed to be fixed

— a knowledge sufficient for the more common exigencies of daily political

practice, but liable to fail in all cases in which the progressive movement of

society is one of the influencing elements; and therefore more precarious in

proportion as the case is more important. But since both the natural varieties

of mankind, and the original diversities of local circumstances, are much less

considerable than the points of agreement, there will naturally be a certaindegree of uniformity in the progressive development of the species and of its

works. And this uniformity tends to become greater, not less, as society

advances; since the evolution of each people, which is at first determined

exclusively by the nature and circumstances of that people, is gradually

brought under the influence (which becomes stronger as civilization

advances) of the other nations of the earth, and of the circumstances by which

they have been influenced. History accordingly does, when judiciously

examined, afford Empirical Laws of Society. And the problem of general

sociology is to ascertain these, and connect them with the laws of human

nature, by deductions showing that such were the derivative laws naturally to

be expected as the consequences of those ultimate ones.

              It is, indeed, hardly ever possible, even after history has suggested

the derivative law, to demonstrate a priori that such was the only order of

succession or of co-existence in which the effects could, consistently with the

laws of human nature, have been produced. We can at most make out that

there were strong a priori reasons for expecting it, and that no other order of

succession or co-existence would have been so likely to result from the

nature of man and the general circumstances of his position. Often we can not

do even this; we can not even show that what did take place was probable a

priori , but only that it was possible. This, however — which, in the Inverse

Deductive Method that we are now characterizing, is a real process of

verification — is as indispensable, as verification by specific experience has

been shown to be, where the conclusion is originally obtained by the direct

way of deduction. The empirical laws must be the result of but a few

instances, since few nations have ever attained at all, and still fewer by their

own independent development, a high stage of social progress. If, therefore,

even one or two of these few instances be insufficiently known, or

imperfectly analyzed into their elements, and therefore not adequately

compared with other instances, nothing is more probable than that a wrong

empirical law will emerge instead of the right one. Accordingly, the most

erroneous generalizations are continually made from the course of history;

not only in this country, where history can not yet be said to be at all

cultivated as a science, but in other countries where it is so cultivated, and by

persons well versed in it. The only check or corrective is, constant

verification by psychological and ethological laws. We may add to this, that

no one but a person competently skilled in those laws is capable of preparing

the materials for historical generalization, by analyzing the facts of history, oreven by observing the social phenomena of his own time. No other will be

aware of the comparative importance of different facts, nor consequently

know what facts to look for, or to observe; still less will he be capable of

estimating the evidence of facts which, as is the case with most, can not be

ascertained by direct observation or learned from testimony, but must be

inferred from marks.

              § 5. The Empirical Laws of Society are of two kinds; some are

uniformities of co-existence, some of succession. According as the science is

occupied in ascertaining and verifying the former sort of uniformities or the

latter, M. Comte gives it the title of Social Statics, or of Social Dynamics;

conformably to the distinction in mechanics between the conditions of

equilibrium and those of movement; or in biology, between the laws of

organization and those of life. The first branch of the science ascertains the

conditions of stability in the social union; the second, the laws of progress.

Social Dynamics is the theory of Society considered in a state of progressive

movement; while Social Statics is the theory of the consensus already spoken

of as existing among the different parts of the social organism; in other

words, the theory of the mutual actions and reactions of contemporaneous
                              279
social phenomena; making provisionally, as far as possible, abstraction, for

scientific purposes, of the fundamental movement which is at all times

gradually modifying the whole of them.

              “In this first point of view, the provisions of sociology will enable us

to infer one from another (subject to ulterior verification by direct

observation) the various characteristic marks of each distinct mode of social

existence, in a manner essentially analogous to what is now habitually

practiced in the anatomy of the physical body. This preliminary aspect,

therefore, of political science, of necessity supposes that (contrary to the

existing habits of philosophers) each of the numerous elements of the social

state, ceasing to be looked at independently and absolutely, shall be always

and exclusively considered relatively to all the other elements, with the whole

of which it is united by mutual interdependence. It would be superfluous to

insist here upon the great and constant utility of this branch of sociological

speculation. It is, in the first place, the indispensable basis of the theory of

social progress. It may, moreover, be employed, immediately, and of itself, to

supply the place, provisionally at least, of direct observation, which in many

cases is not always practicable for some of the elements of society, the realcondition of which may, however, be sufficiently judged of by means of the

relations which connect them with others previously known. The history of

the sciences may give us some notion of the habitual importance of this

auxiliary resource, by reminding us, for example, how the vulgar errors of

mere erudition concerning the pretended acquirements of the ancient

Egyptians in the higher astronomy were irrevocably dissipated (even before

sentence had been passed on them by a sounder erudition) from the single

consideration of the inevitable connection between the general state of

astronomy and that of abstract geometry, then evidently in its infancy. It

would be easy to cite a multitude of analogous cases, the character of which

could admit of no dispute. In order to avoid exaggeration, however, it should

be remarked, that these necessary relations among the different aspects of

society can not, from their very nature, be so simple and precise that the

results observed could only have arisen from some one mode of mutual co-

ordination. Such a notion, already too narrow in the science of life, would be

completely at variance with the still more complex nature of sociological

speculations. But the exact estimation of these limits of variation, both in the

healthy and in the morbid state, constitutes, at least as much as in the

anatomy of the natural body, an indispensable complement to every theory of

Sociological Statics; without which the indirect exploration above spoken of

would often lead into error.

              “This is not the place for methodically demonstrating the existence

of a necessary relation among all the possible aspects of the same social

organism; a point on which, in principle at least, there is now little difference

of opinion among sound thinkers. From whichever of the social elements we

choose to set out, we may easily recognize that it has always a connection,

more or less immediate, with all the other elements, even with those which at

first sight appear the most independent of it. The dynamical consideration of

the progressive development of civilized humanity, affords, no doubt, a still

more efficacious means of effecting this interesting verification of the

consensus of the social phenomena, by displaying the manner in which every

change in any one part, operates immediately, or very speedily, upon all the

rest. But this indication may be preceded, or at all events followed, by a

confirmation of a purely statical kind; for, in politics as in mechanics, the

communication of motion from one object to another proves a connection

between them. Without descending to the minute interdependence of the

different branches of any one science or art, is it not evident that among thedifferent sciences, as well as among most of the arts, there exists such a

connection, that if the state of any one well-marked division of them is

sufficiently known to us, we can with real scientific assurance infer, from

their necessary correlation, the contemporaneous state of every one of the

others? By a further extension of this consideration, we may conceive the

necessary relation which exists between the condition of the sciences in

general and that of the arts in general, except that the mutual dependence is

less intense in proportion as it is more indirect. The same is the case, when,

instead of considering the aggregate of the social phenomena in some one

people, we examine it simultaneously in different contemporaneous nations;

between which the perpetual reciprocity of influence, especially in modern

times, can not be contested, though the consensus must in this case be

ordinarily of a less decided character, and must decrease gradually with the

affinity of the cases and the multiplicity of the points of contact, so as at last,

in some cases, to disappear almost entirely; as for, example, between Western

Europe and Eastern Asia, of which the various general states of society

appear to have been hitherto almost independent of one another.

              These remarks are followed by illustrations of one of the most

important, and until lately, most neglected, of the general principles which, in

this division of the social science, may be considered as established; namely,

the necessary correlation between the form of government existing in any

society and the contemporaneous state of civilization: a natural law which

stamps the endless discussions and innumerable theories respecting forms of

government in the abstract, as fruitless and worthless, for any other purpose

than as a preparatory treatment of materials to be afterward used for the

construction of a better philosophy.

              As already remarked, one of the main results of the science of social

statics would be to ascertain the requisites of stable political union. There are

some circumstances which, being found in all societies without exception,

and in the greatest degree where the social union is most complete, may be

considered (when psychological and ethological laws confirm the indication)

as conditions of the existence of the complex phenomena called a State. For

example, no numerous society has ever been held together without laws, or

usages equivalent to them; without tribunals, and an organized force of some

sort to execute their decisions. There have always been public authorities

whom, with more or less strictness and in cases more or less accuratelydefined, the rest of the community obeyed, or according to general opinion

were bound to obey. By following out this course of inquiry we shall find a

number of requisites, which have been present in every society that has

maintained a collective existence, and on the cessation of which it has either

merged in some other society, or reconstructed itself on some new basis, in

which the conditions were conformed to. Although these results, obtained by

comparing different forms and states of society, amount in themselves only to

empirical laws; some of them, when once suggested, are found to follow with

so much probability from general laws of human nature, that the consilience

of the two processes raises the evidence to proof, and the generalizations to

the rank of scientific truths.

              This seems to be affirmable (for instance) of the conclusions arrived

at in the following passage, extracted, with some alterations, from a criticism
                                                              280
on the negative philosophy of the eighteenth century, and which I quote,

though (as in some former instances) from myself, because I have no better

way of illustrating the conception I have formed of the kind of theorems of

which sociological statics would consist.

              “The very first element of the social union, obedience to a

government of some sort, has not been found so easy a thing to establish in

the world. Among a timid and spiritless race like the inhabitants of the vast

plains of tropical countries, passive obedience may be of natural growth;

though even there we doubt whether it has ever been found among any

people with whom fatalism, or in other words, submission to the pressure of

circumstances as a divine decree, did not prevail as a religious doctrine. But

the difficulty of inducing a brave and warlike race to submit their individual

arbitrium to any common umpire, has always been felt to be so great, that

nothing short of supernatural power has been deemed adequate to overcome

it; and such tribes have always assigned to the first institution of civil society

a divine origin. So differently did those judge who knew savage men by

actual experience, from those who had no acquaintance with them except in

the civilized state. In modern Europe itself, after the fall of the Roman

empire, to subdue the feudal anarchy and bring the whole people of any

European nation into subjection to government (though Christianity in the

most concentrated form of its influence was co-operating in the work)

required thrice as many centuries as have elapsed since that time.

              “Now if these philosophers had known human nature under anyother type than that of their own age, and of the particular classes of society

among whom they lived, it would have occurred to them, that wherever this

habitual submission to law and government has been firmly and durably

established, and yet the vigor and manliness of character which resisted its

establishment have been in any degree preserved, certain requisites have

existed, certain conditions have been fulfilled, of which the following may be

regarded as the principal.

              “First: there has existed, for all who were accounted citizens — for

all who were not slaves, kept down by brute force — a system of education ,

beginning with infancy and continued through life, of which whatever else it

might include, one main and incessant ingredient was restraining discipline .

To train the human being in the habit, and thence the power, of subordinating

his personal impulses and aims to what were considered the ends of society;

of adhering, against all temptation, to the course of conduct which those ends

prescribed; of controlling in himself all feelings which were liable to militate

against those ends, and encouraging all such as tended toward them; this was

the purpose, to which every outward motive that the authority directing the

system could command, and every inward power or principle which its

knowledge of human nature enabled it to evoke, were endeavored to be

rendered instrumental. The entire civil and military policy of the ancient

commonwealths was such a system of training; in modern nations its place

has been attempted to be supplied, principally, by religious teaching. And

whenever and in proportion as the strictness of the restraining discipline was

relaxed, the natural tendency of mankind to anarchy re-asserted itself; the

state became disorganized from within; mutual conflict for selfish ends,

neutralized the energies which were required to keep up the contest against

natural causes of evil; and the nation, after a longer or briefer interval of

progressive decline, became either the slave of a despotism, or the prey of a

foreign invader.

              “The second condition of permanent political society has been found

to be, the existence, in some form or other, of the feeling of allegiance or

loyalty. This feeling may vary in its objects, and is not confined to any

particular form of government; but whether in a democracy or in a monarchy,

its essence is always the same; viz., that there be in the constitution of the

state something which is settled, something permanent, and not to be called in

question; something which, by general agreement, has a right to be where itis, and to be secure against disturbance, whatever else may change. This

feeling may attach itself, as among the Jews (and in most of the

commonwealths of antiquity), to a common God or gods, the protectors and

guardians of their state. Or it may attach itself to certain persons, who are

deemed to be, whether by divine appointment, by long prescription, or by the

general recognition of their superior capacity and worthiness, the rightful

guides and guardians of the rest. Or it may connect itself with laws; with

ancient liberties or ordinances. Or, finally, (and this is the only shape in

which the feeling is likely to exist hereafter), it may attach itself to the

principles of individual freedom and political and social equality, as realized

in institutions which as yet exist nowhere, or exist only in a rudimentary

state. But in all political societies which have had a durable existence, there

has been some fixed point: something which people agreed in holding sacred;

which, wherever freedom of discussion was a recognized principle, it was of

course lawful to contest in theory, but which no one could either fear or hope

to see shaken in practice; which, in short (except perhaps during some

temporary crisis), was in the common estimation placed beyond discussion.

And the necessity of this may easily be made evident. A state never is, nor

until mankind are vastly improved, can hope to be, for any long time exempt

from internal dissension; for there neither is nor has ever been any state of

society in which collisions did not occur between the immediate interests and

passions of powerful sections of the people. What, then, enables nations to

weather these storms, and pass through turbulent times without any

permanent weakening of the securities for peaceable existence? Precisely this

— that however important the interests about which men fell out, the conflict

did not affect the fundamental principle of the system of social union which

happened to exist; nor threaten large portions of the community with the

subversion of that on which they had built their calculations, and with which

their hopes and aims had become identified. But when the questioning of

these fundamental principles is (not the occasional disease, or salutary

medicine, but) the habitual condition of the body politic, and when all the

violent animosities are called forth, which spring naturally from such a

situation, the state is virtually in a position of civil war; and can never long

remain free from it in act and fact.

              “The third essential condition of stability in political society, is a

strong and active principle of cohesion among the members of the same

community or state. We need scarcely say that we do not mean nationality, inthe vulgar sense of the term; a senseless antipathy to foreigners; indifference

to the general welfare of the human race, or an unjust preference of the

supposed interests of our own country; a cherishing of bad peculiarities

because they are national, or a refusal to adopt what has been found good by

other countries. We mean a principle of sympathy, not of hostility; of union,

not of separation. We mean a feeling of common interest among those who

live under the same government, and are contained within the same natural or

historical boundaries. We mean, that one part of the community do not

consider themselves as foreigners with regard to another part; that they set a

value on their connection — feel that they are one people, that their lot is cast

together, that evil to any of their fellow-countrymen is evil to themselves, and

do not desire selfishly to free themselves from their share of any common

inconvenience by severing the connection. How strong this feeling was in

those ancient commonwealths which attained any durable greatness, every

one knows. How happily Rome, in spite of all her tyranny, succeeded in

establishing the feeling of a common country among the provinces of her vast

and divided empire, will appear when any one who has given due attention to

the subject shall take the trouble to point it out. In modern times the countries

which have had that feeling in the strongest degree have been the most

powerful countries: England, France, and, in proportion to their territory and

resources, Holland and Switzerland; while England in her connection with

Ireland is one of the most signal examples of the consequences of its absence.

Every Italian knows why Italy is under a foreign yoke; every German knows
                                                          281
what maintains despotism in the Austrian empire; the evils of Spain flow as

much from the absence of nationality among the Spaniards themselves, as

from the presence of it in their relations with foreigners: while the completest

illustration of all is afforded by the republics of South America, where the

parts of one and the same state adhere so slightly together, that no sooner

does any province think itself aggrieved by the general government than it

proclaims itself a separate nation.”

              § 6. While the derivative laws of social statics are ascertained by

analyzing different states of society, and comparing them with one another,

without regard to the order of their succession, the consideration of the

successive order is, on the contrary, predominant in the study of social

dynamics, of which the aim is to observe and explain the sequences of social

conditions. This branch of the social science would be as complete as it can

be made, if every one of the leading general circumstances of each generationwere traced to its causes in the generation immediately preceding. But the

consensus is so complete (especially in modern history), that in the filiation

of one generation and another, it is the whole which produces the whole,

rather than any part a part. Little progress, therefore, can be made in

establishing the filiation, directly from laws of human nature, without having

first ascertained the immediate or derivative laws according to which social

states generate one another as society advances; the axiomata media of

General Sociology.

              The empirical laws which are most readily obtained by

generalization from history do not amount to this. They are not the “middle

principles” themselves, but only evidence toward the establishment of such

principles. They consist of certain general tendencies which may be

perceived in society; a progressive increase of some social elements, and

diminution of others, or a gradual change in the general character of certain

elements. It is easily seen, for instance, that as society advances, mental tend

more and more to prevail over bodily qualities, and masses over individuals;

that the occupation of all that portion of mankind who are not under external

restraint is at first chiefly military, but society becomes progressively more

and more engrossed with productive pursuits, and the military spirit gradually

gives way to the industrial; to which many similar truths might be added.

And with generalizations of this description, ordinary inquirers, even of the

historical school now predominant on the Continent, are satisfied. But these

and all such results are still at too great a distance from the elementary laws

of human nature on which they depend — too many links intervene, and the

concurrence of causes at each link is far too complicated — to enable these

propositions to be presented as direct corollaries from those elementary

principles. They have, therefore, in the minds of most inquirers, remained in

the state of empirical laws, applicable only within the bounds of actual

observation; without any means of determining their real limits, and of

judging whether the changes which have hitherto been in progress are

destined to continue indefinitely, or to terminate, or even to be reversed.

              § 7. In order to obtain better empirical laws, we must not rest

satisfied with noting the progressive changes which manifest themselves in

the separate elements of society, and in which nothing is indicated but the

relation of fragments of the effect to corresponding fragments of the cause. It

is necessary to combine the statical view of social phenomena with thedynamical, considering not only the progressive changes of the different

elements, but the contemporaneous condition of each; and thus obtain

empirically the law of correspondence not only between the simultaneous

states, but between the simultaneous changes, of those elements. This law of

correspondence it is, which, duly verified a priori , would become the real

scientific derivative law of the development of humanity and human affairs.

              In the difficult process of observation and comparison which is here

required, it would evidently be a great assistance if it should happen to be the

fact, that some one element in the complex existence of social man is pre-

eminent over all others as the prime agent of the social movement. For we

could then take the progress of that one element as the central chain, to each

successive link of which, the corresponding links of all the other progressions

being appended, the succession of the facts would by this alone be presented

in a kind of spontaneous order, far more nearly approaching to the real order

of their filiation than could be obtained by any other merely empirical

process.

              Now, the evidence of history and that of human nature combine, by

a striking instance of consilience, to show that there really is one social

element which is thus predominant, and almost paramount, among the agents

of the social progression. This is, the state of the speculative faculties of

mankind; including the nature of the beliefs which by any means they have

arrived at, concerning themselves and the world by which they are

surrounded.

              It would be a great error, and one very little likely to be committed,

to assert that speculation, intellectual activity, the pursuit of truth, is among

the more powerful propensities of human nature, or holds a predominating

place in the lives of any, save decidedly exceptional, individuals. But,

notwithstanding the relative weakness of this principle among other

sociological agents, its influence is the main determining cause of the social

progress; all the other dispositions of our nature which contribute to that

progress being dependent on it for the means of accomplishing their share of

the work. Thus (to take the most obvious case first), the impelling force to

most of the improvements effected in the arts of life, is the desire of increased

material comfort; but as we can only act upon external objects in proportion

to our knowledge of them, the state of knowledge at any time is the limit of

the industrial improvements possible at that time; and the progress of industrymust follow, and depend on, the progress of knowledge. The same thing may

be shown to be true, though it is not quite so obvious, of the progress of the

fine arts. Further, as the strongest propensities of uncultivated or half-

cultivated human nature (being the purely selfish ones, and those of a

sympathetic character which partake most of the nature of selfishness)

evidently tend in themselves to disunite mankind, not to unite them — to

make them rivals, not confederates, social existence is only possible by a

disciplining of those more powerful propensities, which consists in

subordinating them to a common system of opinions. The degree of this

subordination is the measure of the completeness of the social union, and the

nature of the common opinions determines its kind. But in order that mankind

should conform their actions to any set of opinions, these opinions must exist,

must be believed by them. And thus, the state of the speculative faculties, the

character of the propositions assented to by the intellect, essentially

determines the moral and political state of the community, as we have already

seen that it determines the physical.

              These conclusions, deduced from the laws of human nature, are in

entire accordance with the general facts of history. Every considerable

change historically known to us in the condition of any portion of mankind,

when not brought about by external force, has been preceded by a change, of

proportional extent, in the state of their knowledge, or in their prevalent

beliefs. As between any given state of speculation, and the correlative state of

every thing else, it was almost always the former which first showed itself;

though the effects, no doubt, reacted potently upon the cause. Every

considerable advance in material civilization has been preceded by an

advance in knowledge: and when any great social change has come to pass,

either in the way of gradual development or of sudden conflict, it has had for

its precursor a great change in the opinions and modes of thinking of society.

Polytheism, Judaism, Christianity, Protestantism, the critical philosophy of

modern Europe, and its positive science — each of these has been a primary

agent in making society what it was at each successive period, while society

was but secondarily instrumental in making them , each of them (so far as

causes can be assigned for its existence) being mainly an emanation not from

the practical life of the period, but from the previous state of belief and

thought. The weakness of the speculative propensity in mankind generally

has not, therefore, prevented the progress of speculation from governing that

of society at large; it has only, and too often, prevented progress altogether,where the intellectual progression has come to an early stand for want of

sufficiently favorable circumstances.

              From this accumulated evidence, we are justified in concluding, that

the order of human progression in all respects will mainly depend on the

order of progression in the intellectual convictions of mankind, that is, on the

law of the successive transformations of human opinions. The question

remains, whether this law can be determined; at first from history as an

empirical law, then converted into a scientific theorem by deducing it a priori

from the principles of human nature. As the progress of knowledge and the

changes in the opinions of mankind are very slow, and manifest themselves

in a well-defined manner only at long intervals, it can not be expected that the

general order of sequence should be discoverable from the examination of

less than a very considerable part of the duration of the social progress. It is

necessary to take into consideration the whole of past time, from the first

recorded condition of the human race, to the memorable phenomena of the

last and present generations.

              § 8. The investigation which I have thus endeavored to characterize,

has been systematically attempted, up to the present time, by M. Comte

alone. His work is hitherto the only known example of the study of social

phenomena according to this conception of the Historical Method. Without

discussing here the worth of his conclusions, and especially of his predictions

and recommendations with respect to the Future of society, which appear to

me greatly inferior in value to his appreciation of the Past, I shall confine

myself to mentioning one important generalization, which M. Comte regards

as the fundamental law of the progress of human knowledge. Speculation he

conceives to have, on every subject of human inquiry, three successive

stages; in the first of which it tends to explain the phenomena by supernatural

agencies, in the second by metaphysical abstractions, and in the third or final

state confines itself to ascertaining their laws of succession and similitude.

This generalization appears to me to have that high degree of scientific

evidence which is derived from the concurrence of the indications of history

with the probabilities derived from the constitution of the human mind. Nor

could it be easily conceived, from the mere enunciation of such a proposition,

what a flood of light it lets in upon the whole course of history, when its

consequences are traced, by connecting with each of the three states of

human intellect which it distinguishes, and with each successive modification                                                                                      282
of those three states, the correlative condition of other social phenomena.

              But whatever decision competent judges may pronounce on the

results arrived at by any individual inquirer, the method now characterized is

that by which the derivative laws of social order and of social progress must

be sought. By its aid we may hereafter succeed not only in looking far

forward into the future history of the human race, but in determining what

artificial means may be used, and to what extent, to accelerate the natural

progress in so far as it is beneficial; to compensate for whatever may be its

inherent inconveniences or disadvantages; and to guard against the dangers or

accidents to which our species is exposed from the necessary incidents of its

progression. Such practical instructions, founded on the highest branch of

speculative sociology, will form the noblest and most beneficial portion of

the Political Art.

              That of this science and art even the foundations are but beginning to

be laid, is sufficiently evident. But the superior minds are fairly turning

themselves toward that object. It has become the aim of really scientific

thinkers to connect by theories the facts of universal history: it is

acknowledged to be one of the requisites of a general system of social

doctrine, that it should explain, so far as the data exist, the main facts of

history; and a Philosophy of History is generally admitted to be at once the

verification, and the initial form, of the Philosophy of the Progress of Society.

              If the endeavors now making in all the more cultivated nations, and

beginning to be made even in England (usually the last to enter into the

general movement of the European mind) for the construction of a

Philosophy of History, shall be directed and controlled by those views of the

nature of sociological evidence which I have (very briefly and imperfectly)

attempted to characterize; they can not fail to give birth to a sociological

system widely removed from the vague and conjectural character of all

former attempts, and worthy to take its place, at last, among the sciences.

When this time shall come, no important branch of human affairs will be any

longer abandoned to empiricism and unscientific surmise: the circle of human

knowledge will be complete, and it can only thereafter receive further

enlargement by perpetual expansion from within.

 

    Chapter XI. – Additional Elucidations Of The Science Of History.

 

 

              § 1. The doctrine which the preceding chapters were intended to

enforce and elucidate — that the collective series of social phenomena, in

other words the course of history, is subject to general laws, which

philosophy may possibly detect — has been familiar for generations to the

scientific thinkers of the Continent, and has for the last quarter of a century

passed out of their peculiar domain, into that of newspapers and ordinary

political discussion. In our own country, however, at the time of the first

publication of this Treatise, it was almost a novelty, and the prevailing habits

of thought on historical subjects were the very reverse of a preparation for it.

Since then a great change has taken place, and has been eminently promoted

by the important work of Mr. Buckle; who, with characteristic energy, flung

down this great principle, together with many striking exemplifications of it,

into the arena of popular discussion, to be fought over by a sort of

combatants, in the presence of a sort of spectators, who would never even

have been aware that there existed such a principle if they had been left to

learn its existence from the speculations of pure science. And hence has

arisen a considerable amount of controversy, tending not only to make the

principle rapidly familiar to the majority of cultivated minds, but also to clear

it from the confusions and misunderstandings by which it was but natural that

it should for a time be clouded, and which impair the worth of the doctrine to

those who accept it, and are the stumbling-block of many who do not.

              Among the impediments to the general acknowledgment, by

thoughtful minds, of the subjection of historical facts to scientific laws, the

most fundamental continues to be that which is grounded on the doctrine of

Free Will, or, in other words, on the denial that the law of invariable

Causation holds true of human volitions; for if it does not, the course of

history, being the result of human volitions, can not be a subject of scientific

laws, since the volitions on which it depends can neither be foreseen, nor

reduced to any canon of regularity even after they have occurred. I have

discussed this question, as far as seemed suitable to the occasion, in a former

chapter; and I only think it necessary to repeat, that the doctrine of the

Causation of human actions, improperly called the doctrine of Necessity,affirms no mysterious nexus , or overruling fatality: it asserts only that men’s

actions are the joint result of the general laws and circumstances of human

nature, and of their own particular characters; those characters again being

the consequence of the natural and artificial circumstances that constituted

their education, among which circumstances must be reckoned their own

conscious efforts. Any one who is willing to take (if the expression may be

permitted) the trouble of thinking himself into the doctrine as thus stated, will

find it, I believe, not only a faithful interpretation of the universal experience

of human conduct, but a correct representation of the mode in which he

himself, in every particular case, spontaneously interprets his own experience

of that conduct.

              But if this principle is true of individual man, it must be true of

collective man. If it is the law of human life, the law must be realized in

history. The experience of human affairs when looked at en masse , must be

in accordance with it if true, or repugnant to it if false. The support which this

a posteriori verification affords to the law, is the part of the case which has

been most clearly and triumphantly brought out by Mr. Buckle.

              The facts of statistics, since they have been made a subject of careful

recordation and study, have yielded conclusions, some of which have been

very startling to persons not accustomed to regard moral actions as subject to

uniform laws. The very events which in their own nature appear most

capricious and uncertain, and which in any individual case no attainable

degree of knowledge would enable us to foresee, occur, when considerable

numbers are taken into the account, with a degree of regularity approaching

to mathematical. What act is there which all would consider as more

completely dependent on individual character, and on the exercise of

individual free will, than that of slaying a fellow-creature? Yet in any large

country, the number of murders, in proportion to the population, varies (it has

been found) very little from one year to another, and in its variations never

deviates widely from a certain average. What is still more remarkable, there

is a similar approach to constancy in the proportion of these murders annually

committed with every particular kind of instrument. There is a like

approximation to identity, as between one year and another, in the

comparative number of legitimate and of illegitimate births. The same thing

is found true of suicides, accidents, and all other social phenomena of which

the registration is sufficiently perfect; one of the most curiously illustrativeexamples being the fact, ascertained by the registers of the London and Paris

post-offices, that the number of letters posted which the writers have

forgotten to direct, is nearly the same, in proportion to the whole number of

letters posted, in one year as in another. “Year after year,” says Mr. Buckle,

“the same proportion of letter-writers forget this simple act; so that for each

successive period we can actually foretell the number of persons whose

memory will fail them in regard to this trifling, and as it might appear,
                          283
accidental occurrence.”

              This singular degree of regularity en masse , combined with the

extreme of irregularity in the cases composing the mass, is a felicitous

verification a posteriori of the law of causation in its application to human

conduct. Assuming the truth of that law, every human action, every murder,

for instance, is the concurrent result of two sets of causes. On the one part,

the general circumstances of the country and its inhabitants; the moral,

educational, economical, and other influences operating on the whole people,

and constituting what we term the state of civilization. On the other part, the

great variety of influences special to the individual: his temperament, and

other peculiarities of organization, his parentage, habitual associates,

temptations, and so forth. If we now take the whole of the instances which

occur within a sufficiently large field to exhaust all the combinations of these

special influences, or, in other words, to eliminate chance; and if all these

instances have occurred within such narrow limits of time, that no material

change can have taken place in the general influences constituting the state of

civilization of the country; we may be certain, that if human actions are

governed by invariable laws, the aggregate result will be something like a

constant quantity. The number of murders committed within that space and

time, being the effect partly of general causes which have not varied, and

partly of partial causes the whole round of whose variations has been

included, will be, practically speaking, invariable.

              Literally and mathematically invariable it is not, and could not be

expected to be: because the period of a year is too short to include all the

possible combinations of partial causes, while it is, at the same time,

sufficiently long to make it probable that in some years at least, of every

series, there will have been introduced new influences of a more or less

general character; such as a more vigorous or a more relaxed police; some

temporary excitement from political or religious causes; or some incidentgenerally notorious, of a nature to act morbidly on the imagination. That in

spite of these unavoidable imperfections in the data, there should be so very

trifling a margin of variation in the annual results, is a brilliant continuation

of the general theory.

              § 2. The same considerations which thus strikingly corroborate the

evidence of the doctrine, that historical facts are the invariable effects of

causes, tend equally to clear that doctrine from various misapprehensions, the

existence of which has been put in evidence by the recent discussions. Some

persons, for instance, seemingly imagine the doctrine to imply, not merely

that the total number of murders committed in a given space and time is

entirely the effect of the general circumstances of society, but that every

particular murder is so too — that the individual murderer is, so to speak, a

mere instrument in the hands of general causes that he himself has no option,

or, if he has, and chose to exercise it, some one else would be necessitated to

take his place; that if any one of the actual murderers had abstained from the

crime, some person who would otherwise have remained innocent, would

have committed an extra murder to make up the average. Such a corollary

would certainly convict any theory which necessarily led to it of absurdity. It

is obvious, however, that each particular murder depends, not on the general

state of society only, but on that combined with causes special to the case,

which are generally much more powerful; and if these special causes, which

have greater influence than the general ones in causing every particular

murder, have no influence on the number of murders in a given period, it is

because the field of observation is so extensive as to include all possible

combinations of the special causes — all varieties of individual character and

individual temptation compatible with the general state of society. The

collective experiment, as it may be termed, exactly separates the effect of the

general from that of the special causes, and shows the net result of the

former; but it declares nothing at all respecting the amount of influence of the

special causes, be it greater or smaller, since the scale of the experiment

extends to the number of cases within which the effects of the special causes

balance one another, and disappear in that of the general causes.

              I will not pretend that all the defenders of the theory have always

kept their language free from this same confusion, and have shown no

tendency to exalt the influence of general causes at the expense of special. I

am of opinion, on the contrary, that they have done so in a very great degree,and by so doing have encumbered their theory with difficulties, and laid it

open to objections, which do not necessarily affect it. Some, for example

(among whom is Mr. Buckle himself), have inferred, or allowed it to be

supposed that they inferred, from the regularity in the recurrence of events

which depend on moral qualities, that the moral qualities of mankind are little

capable of being improved, or are of little importance in the general progress

of society, compared with intellectual or economic causes. But to draw this

inference is to forget that the statistical tables, from which the invariable

averages are deduced, were compiled from facts occurring within narrow

geographical limits and in a small number of successive years; that is, from a

field the whole of which was under the operation of the same general causes,

and during too short a time to allow of much change therein. All moral causes

but those common to the country generally, have been eliminated by the great

number of instances taken; and those which are common to the whole

country have not varied considerably, in the short space of time comprised in

the observations. If we admit the supposition that they have varied; if we

compare one age with another, or one country with another, or even one part

of a country with another, differing in position and character as to the moral

elements, the crimes committed within a year give no longer the same, but a

widely different numerical aggregate. And this can not but be the case: for,

inasmuch as every single crime committed by an individual mainly depends

on his moral qualities, the crimes committed by the entire population of the

country must depend in an equal degree on their collective moral qualities.

To render this element inoperative upon the large scale, it would be necessary

to suppose that the general moral average of mankind does not vary from

country to country or from age to age; which is not true, and, even if it were

true, could not possibly be proved by any existing statistics. I do not on this

account the less agree in the opinion of Mr. Buckle, that the intellectual

element in mankind, including in that expression the nature of their beliefs,

the amount of their knowledge, and the development of their intelligence, is

the predominant circumstance in determining their progress. But I am of this

opinion, not because I regard their moral or economical condition either as

less powerful or less variable agencies, but because these are in a great degree

the consequences of the intellectual condition, and are, in all cases, limited by

it; as was observed in the preceding chapter. The intellectual changes are the

most conspicuous agents in history, not from their superior force, considered

in themselves, but because practically they work with the united power                        284
belonging to all three.

              § 3. There is another distinction often neglected in the discussion of

this subject, which it is extremely important to observe. The theory of the

subjection of social progress to invariable laws, is often held in conjunction

with the doctrine, that social progress can not be materially influenced by the

exertions of individual persons, or by the acts of governments. But though

these opinions are often held by the same persons, they are two very different

opinions, and the confusion between them is the eternally recurring error of

confounding Causation with Fatalism. Because whatever happens will be the

effect of causes, human volitions among the rest, it does not follow that

volitions, even those of peculiar individuals, are not of great efficacy as

causes. If any one in a storm at sea, because about the same number of

persons in every year perish by shipwreck, should conclude that it was

useless for him to attempt to save his own life, we should call him a Fatalist;

and should remind him that the efforts of shipwrecked persons to save their

lives are so far from being immaterial, that the average amount of those

efforts is one of the causes on which the ascertained annual number of deaths

by shipwreck depend. However universal the laws of social development may

be, they can not be more universal or more rigorous than those of the physical

agencies of nature; yet human will can convert these into instruments of its

designs, and the extent to which it does so makes the chief difference

between savages and the most highly civilized people. Human and social

facts, from their more complicated nature, are not less, but more, modifiable

than mechanical and chemical facts; human agency, therefore, has still

greater power over them. And accordingly, those who maintain that the

evolution of society depends exclusively, or almost exclusively, on general

causes, always include among these the collective knowledge and intellectual

development of the race. But if of the race, why not also of some powerful

monarch or thinker, or of the ruling portion of some political society, acting

through its government? Though the varieties of character among ordinary

individuals neutralize one another on any large scale, exceptional individuals

in important positions do not in any given age neutralize one another; there

was not another Themistocles, or Luther, or Julius Cæsar, of equal powers

and contrary dispositions, who exactly balanced the given Themistocles,

Luther, and Cæsar, and prevented them from having any permanent effect.

Moreover, for aught that appears, the volitions of exceptional persons, or the

opinions and purposes of the individuals who at some particular timecompose a government, may be indispensable links in the chain of causation

by which even the general causes produce their effects; and I believe this to

be the only tenable form of the theory.

              Lord Macaulay, in a celebrated passage of one of his early essays

(let me add that it was one which he did not himself choose to reprint), gives

expression to the doctrine of the absolute inoperativeness of great men, more

unqualified, I should think, than has been given to it by any writer of equal

abilities. He compares them to persons who merely stand on a loftier height,

and thence receive the sun’s rays a little earlier, than the rest of the human

race. “The sun illuminates the hills while it is still below the horizon, and

truth is discovered by the highest minds a little before it becomes manifest to

the multitude. This is the extent of their superiority. They are the first to catch

and reflect a light which, without their assistance, must in a short time be
                                                285
visible to those who lie far beneath them.” If this metaphor is to be carried

out, it follows that if there had been no Newton, the world would not only

have had the Newtonian system, but would have had it equally soon; as the

sun would have risen just as early to spectators in the plain if there had been

no mountain at hand to catch still earlier rays. And so it would be, if truths,

like the sun, rose by their own proper motion, without human effort; but not

otherwise. I believe that if Newton had not lived, the world must have waited

for the Newtonian philosophy until there had been another Newton, or his

equivalent. No ordinary man, and no succession of ordinary men, could have

achieved it. I will not go the length of saying that what Newton did in a single

life, might not have been done in successive steps by some of those who

followed him, each singly inferior to him in genius. But even the least of

those steps required a man of great intellectual superiority. Eminent men do

not merely see the coming light from the hill-top, they mount on the hill-top

and evoke it; and if no one had ever ascended thither, the light, in many

cases, might never have risen upon the plain at all. Philosophy and religion

are abundantly amenable to general causes; yet few will doubt that, had there

been no Socrates, no Plato, and no Aristotle, there would have been no

philosophy for the next two thousand years, nor in all probability then; and

that if there had been no Christ, and no St. Paul, there would have been no

Christianity.

              The point in which, above all, the influence of remarkable

individuals is decisive, is in determining the celerity of the movement. Inmost states of society it is the existence of great men which decides even

whether there shall be any progress. It is conceivable that Greece, or that

Christian Europe, might have been progressive in certain periods of their

history through general causes only: but if there had been no Mohammed,

would Arabia have produced Avicenna or Averroes, or Caliphs of Bagdad or

of Cordova? In determining, however, in what manner and order the progress

of mankind shall take place if it take place at all, much less depends on the

character of individuals. There is a sort of necessity established in this respect

by the general laws of human nature — by the constitution of the human

mind. Certain truths can not be discovered, nor inventions made, unless

certain others have been made first; certain social improvements, from the

nature of the case, can only follow, and not precede, others. The order of

human progress, therefore, may to a certain extent have definite laws

assigned to it: while as to its celerity, or even as to its taking place at all, no

generalization, extending to the human species generally, can possibly be

made; but only some very precarious approximate generalizations, confined

to the small portion of mankind in whom there has been any thing like

consecutive progress within the historical period, and deduced from their

special position, or collected from their particular history. Even looking to the

manner of progress, the order of succession of social states, there is need of

great flexibility in our generalizations. The limits of variation in the possible

development of social, as of animal life, are a subject of which little is yet

understood, and are one of the great problems in social science. It is, at all

events, a fact, that different portions of mankind, under the influence of

different circumstances, have developed themselves in a more or less

different manner and into different forms; and among these determining

circumstances, the individual character of their great speculative thinkers or

practical organizers may well have been one. Who can tell how profoundly

the whole subsequent history of China may have been influenced by the

individuality of Confucius? and of Sparta (and hence of Greece and the

world) by that of Lycurgus?

              Concerning the nature and extent of what a great man under

favorable circumstances can do for mankind, as well as of what a government

can do for a nation, many different opinions are possible; and every shade of

opinion on these points is consistent with the fullest recognition that there are

invariable laws of historical phenomena. Of course the degree of influence

which has to be assigned to these more special agencies, makes a greatdifference in the precision which can be given to the general laws, and in the

confidence with which predictions can be grounded on them. Whatever

depends on the peculiarities of individuals, combined with the accident of the

positions they hold, is necessarily incapable of being foreseen. Undoubtedly

these casual combinations might be eliminated like any others, by taking a

sufficiently large cycle: the peculiarities of a great historical character make

their influence felt in history sometimes for several thousand years, but it is

highly probable that they will make no difference at all at the end of fifty

millions. Since, however, we can not obtain an average of the vast length of

time necessary to exhaust all the possible combinations of great men and

circumstances, as much of the law of evolution of human affairs as depends

upon this average, is and remains inaccessible to us; and within the next

thousand years, which are of considerably more importance to us than the

whole remainder of the fifty millions, the favorable and unfavorable

combinations which will occur will be to us purely accidental. We can not

foresee the advent of great men. Those who introduce new speculative

thoughts or great practical conceptions into the world, can not have their

epoch fixed beforehand. What science can do, is this. It can trace through

past history the general causes which had brought mankind into that

preliminary state which, when the right sort of great man appeared, rendered

them accessible to his influence. If this state continues, experience renders it

tolerably certain that in a longer or shorter period the great man will be

produced; provided that the general circumstances of the country and people

are (which very often they are not) compatible with his existence; of which

point also, science can in some measure judge. It is in this manner that the

results of progress, except as to the celerity of their production, can be, to a

certain extent, reduced to regularity and law. And the belief that they can be

so, is equally consistent with assigning very great, or very little efficacy, to

the influence of exceptional men, or of the acts of governments. And the

same may be said of all other accidents and disturbing causes.

              § 4. It would nevertheless be a great error to assign only a trifling

importance to the agency of eminent individuals, or of governments. It must

not be concluded that the influence of either is small, because they can not

bestow what the general circumstances of society, and the course of its

previous history, have not prepared it to receive. Neither thinkers nor

governments effect all that they intend, but in compensation they often

produce important results which they did not in the least foresee. Great men,and great actions, are seldom wasted; they send forth a thousand unseen

influences, more effective than those which are seen; and though nine out of

every ten things done, with a good purpose, by those who are in advance of

their age, produce no material effect, the tenth thing produces effects twenty

times as great as any one would have dreamed of predicting from it. Even the

men who for want of sufficiently favorable circumstances left no impress at

all upon their own age, have often been of the greatest value to posterity.

Who could appear to have lived more entirely in vain than some of the early

heretics? They were burned or massacred, their writings extirpated, their

memory anathematized, and their very names and existence left for seven or

eight centuries in the obscurity of musty manuscripts — their history to be

gathered, perhaps, only from the sentences by which they were condemned.

Yet the memory of these men — men who resisted certain pretensions or

certain dogmas of the Church in the very age in which the unanimous assent

of Christendom was afterward claimed as having been given to them, and

asserted as the ground of their authority — broke the chain of tradition,

established a series of precedents for resistance, inspired later Reformers with

the courage, and armed them with the weapons, which they needed when

mankind were better prepared to follow their impulse. To this example from

men, let us add another from governments. The comparatively enlightened

rule of which Spain had the benefit during a considerable part of the

eighteenth century, did not correct the fundamental defects of the Spanish

people; and in consequence, though it did great temporary good, so much of

that good perished with it, that it may plausibly be affirmed to have had no

permanent effect. The case has been cited as a proof how little governments

can do in opposition to the causes which have determined the general

character of the nation. It does show how much there is which they can not

do; but not that they can do nothing. Compare what Spain was at the

beginning of that half-century of liberal government, with what she had

become at its close. That period fairly let in the light of European thought

upon the more educated classes; and it never afterward ceased to go on

spreading. Previous to that time the change was in an inverse direction;

culture, light, intellectual and even material activity, were becoming

extinguished. Was it nothing to arrest this downward and convert it into an

upward course? How much that Charles the Third and Aranda could not do,

has been the ultimate consequence of what they did! To that half-century

Spain owes that she has got rid of the Inquisition, that she has got rid of themonks, that she now has parliaments and (save in exceptional intervals) a free

press, and the feelings of freedom and citizenship, and is acquiring railroads

and all the other constituents of material and economical progress. In the

Spain which preceded that era, there was not a single element at work which

could have led to these results in any length of time, if the country had

continued to be governed as it was by the last princes of the Austrian dynasty,

or if the Bourbon rulers had been from the first what, both in Spain and in

Naples, they afterward became.

              And if a government can do much, even when it seems to have done

little, in causing positive improvement, still greater are the issues dependent

on it in the way of warding off evils, both internal and external, which else

would stop improvement altogether. A good or a bad counselor, in a single

city at a particular crisis, has affected the whole subsequent fate of the world.

It is as certain as any contingent judgment respecting historical events can be,

that if there had been no Themistocles there would have been no victory of

Salamis; and had there not, where would have been all our civilization? How

different, again, would have been the issue if Epaminondas, or Timoleon, or

even Iphicrates, instead of Chares and Lysicles, had commanded at

Chæroneia. As is well said in the second of two Essays on the Study of
        286
History, in my judgment the soundest and most philosophical productions

which the recent controversies on this subject have called forth, historical

science authorizes not absolute, but only conditional predictions. General

causes count for much, but individuals also “produce great changes in

history, and color its whole complexion long after their death.... No one can

doubt that the Roman republic would have subsided into a military despotism

if Julius Cæsar had never lived” (thus much was rendered practically certain

by general causes); “but is it at all clear that in that case Gaul would ever

have formed a province of the empire? Might not Varus have lost his three

legions on the banks of the Rhone? and might not that river have become the

frontier instead of the Rhine? This might well have happened if Cæsar and

Crassus had changed provinces; and it is surely impossible to say that in such

an event the venue (as lawyers say) of European civilization might not have

been changed. The Norman Conquest in the same way was as much the act of

a single man, as the writing of a newspaper article; and knowing as we do the

history of that man and his family, we can retrospectively predict with all but

infallible certainty, that no other person” (no other in that age, I presume, is

meant) “could have accomplished the enterprise. If it had not beenaccomplished, is there any ground to suppose that either our history or our

national character would have been what they are?”

              As is most truly remarked by the same writer, the whole stream of

Grecian history, as cleared up by Mr. Grote, is one series of examples how

often events on which the whole destiny of subsequent civilization turned,

were dependent on the personal character for good or evil of some one

individual. It must be said, however, that Greece furnishes the most extreme

example of this nature to be found in history, and is a very exaggerated

specimen of the general tendency. It has happened only that once, and will

probably never happen again, that the fortunes of mankind depended upon

keeping a certain order of things in existence in a single town, or a country

scarcely larger than Yorkshire; capable of being ruined or saved by a hundred

causes, of very slight magnitude in comparison with the general tendencies of

human affairs. Neither ordinary accidents, nor the characters of individuals,

can ever again be so vitally important as they then were. The longer our

species lasts, and the more civilized it becomes, the more, as Comte remarks,

does the influence of past generations over the present, and of mankind en

masse over every individual in it, predominate over other forces; and though

the course of affairs never ceases to be susceptible of alteration both by

accidents and by personal qualities, the increasing preponderance of the

collective agency of the species over all minor causes, is constantly bringing

the general evolution of the race into something which deviates less from a

certain and preappointed track. Historical science, therefore, is always

becoming more possible; not solely because it is better studied, but because,

in every generation, it becomes better adapted for study.

 

 Chapter XII. – Of The Logic Of Practice, Or Art; Including Morality

                                      And Policy.

 

 

              § 1. In the preceding chapters we have endeavored to characterize

the present state of those among the branches of knowledge called Moral,

which are sciences in the only proper sense of the term, that is, inquiries into

the course of nature. It is customary, however, to include under the term

moral knowledge, and even (though improperly) under that of moral science,

an inquiry the results of which do not express themselves in the indicative,

but in the imperative mood, or in periphrases equivalent to it; what is called

the knowledge of duties; practical ethics, or morality.

              Now, the imperative mood is the characteristic of art, as

distinguished from science. Whatever speaks in rules, or precepts, not in

assertions respecting matters of fact, is art; and ethics, or morality, is properly

a portion of the art corresponding to the sciences of human nature and
        287
society.

              The Method, therefore, of Ethics, can be no other than that of Art, or

Practice, in general; and the portion yet uncompleted of the task which we

proposed to ourselves in the concluding Book, is to characterize the general

Method of Art, as distinguished from Science.

              § 2. In all branches of practical business there are cases in which

individuals are bound to conform their practice to a pre-established rule,

while there are others in which it is part of their task to find or construct the

rule by which they are to govern their conduct. The first, for example, is the

case of a judge, under a definite written code. The judge is not called upon to

determine what course would be intrinsically the most advisable in the

particular case in hand, but only within what rule of law it falls; what the

legislature has ordained to be done in the kind of case, and must therefore be

presumed to have intended in the individual case. The method must here be

wholly and exclusively one of ratiocination, or syllogism; and the process is

obviously, what in our analysis of the syllogism we showed that all

ratiocination is, namely the interpretation of a formula.

              In order that our illustration of the opposite case may be taken fromthe same class of subjects as the former, we will suppose, in contrast with the

situation of the judge, the position of the legislator. As the judge has laws for

his guidance, so the legislator has rules, and maxims of policy; but it would

be a manifest error to suppose that the legislator is bound by these maxims in

the same manner as the judge is bound by the laws, and that all he has to do is

to argue down from them to the particular case, as the judge does from the

laws. The legislator is bound to take into consideration the reasons or grounds

of the maxim; the judge has nothing to do with those of the law, except so far

as a consideration of them may throw light upon the intention of the law-

maker, where his words have left it doubtful. To the judge, the rule, once

positively ascertained, is final; but the legislator, or other practitioner, who

goes by rules rather than by their reasons, like the old-fashioned German

tacticians who were vanquished by Napoleon, or the physician who preferred

that his patients should die by rule rather than recover contrary to it, is rightly

judged to be a mere pedant, and the slave of his formulas.

              Now, the reasons of a maxim of policy, or of any other rule of art,

can be no other than the theorems of the corresponding science.

              The relation in which rules of art stand to doctrines of science may

be thus characterized. The art proposes to itself an end to be attained, defines

the end, and hands it over to the science. The science receives it, considers it

as a phenomenon or effect to be studied, and having investigated its causes

and conditions, sends it back to art with a theorem of the combination of

circumstances by which it could be produced. Art then examines these

combinations of circumstances, and according as any of them are or are not

in human power, pronounces the end attainable or not. The only one of the

premises, therefore, which Art supplies, is the original major premise, which

asserts that the attainment of the given end is desirable. Science then lends to

Art the proposition (obtained by a series of inductions or of deductions) that

the performance of certain actions will attain the end. From these premises

Art concludes that the performance of these actions is desirable, and finding

it also practicable, converts the theorem into a rule or precept.

              § 3. It deserves particular notice, that the theorem or speculative

truth is not ripe for being turned into a precept, until the whole, and not a part

merely, of the operation which belongs to science, has been performed.

Suppose that we have completed the scientific process only up to a certain

point; have discovered that a particular cause will produce the desired effect,but have not ascertained all the negative conditions which are necessary, that

is, all the circumstances which, if present, would prevent its production. If, in

this imperfect state of the scientific theory, we attempt to frame a rule of art,

we perform that operation prematurely. Whenever any counteracting cause,

overlooked by the theorem, takes place, the rule will be at fault; we shall

employ the means and the end will not follow. No arguing from or about the

rule itself will then help us through the difficulty; there is nothing for it but to

turn back and finish the scientific process which should have preceded the

formation of the rule. We must re-open the investigation to inquire into the

remainder of the conditions on which the effect depends; and only after we

have ascertained the whole of these are we prepared to transform the

completed law of the effect into a precept, in which those circumstances or

combinations of circumstances which the science exhibits as conditions are

prescribed as means.

              It is true that, for the sake of convenience, rules must be formed

from something less than this ideally perfect theory: in the first place,

because the theory can seldom be made ideally perfect; and next, because, if

all the counteracting contingencies, whether of frequent or of rare occurrence,

were included, the rules would be too cumbrous to be apprehended and

remembered by ordinary capacities, on the common occasions of life. The

rules of art do not attempt to comprise more conditions than require to be

attended to in ordinary cases; and are therefore always imperfect. In the

manual arts, where the requisite conditions are not numerous, and where

those which the rules do not specify are generally either plain to common

observation or speedily learned from practice, rules may often be safely acted

on by persons who know nothing more than the rule. But in the complicated

affairs of life, and still more in those of states and societies, rules can not be

relied on, without constantly referring back to the scientific laws on which

they are founded. To know what are the practical contingencies which require

a modification of the rule, or which are altogether exceptions to it, is to know

what combinations of circumstances would interfere with, or entirely

counteract, the consequences of those laws; and this can only be learned by a

reference to the theoretic grounds of the rule.

              By a wise practitioner, therefore, rules of conduct will only be

considered as provisional. Being made for the most numerous cases, or for

those of most ordinary occurrence, they point out the manner in which it willbe least perilous to act, where time or means do not exist for analyzing the

actual circumstances of the case, or where we can not trust our judgment in

estimating them. But they do not at all supersede the propriety of going

through, when circumstances permit, the scientific process requisite for

framing a rule from the data of the particular case before us. At the same

time, the common rule may very properly serve as an admonition that a

certain mode of action has been found by ourselves and others to be well

adapted to the cases of most common occurrence; so that if it be unsuitable to

the case in hand, the reason of its being so will be likely to arise from some

unusual circumstance.

              § 4. The error is therefore apparent of those who would deduce the

line of conduct proper to particular cases from supposed universal practical

maxims, overlooking the necessity of constantly referring back to the

principles of the speculative science, in order to be sure of attaining even the

specific end which the rules have in view. How much greater still, then, must

the error be, of setting up such unbending principles, not merely as universal

rules for attaining a given end, but as rules of conduct generally, without

regard to the possibility, not only that some modifying cause may prevent the

attainment of the given end by the means which the rule prescribes, but that

success itself may conflict with some other end, which may possibly chance

to be more desirable.

              This is the habitual error of many of the political speculators whom I

have characterized as the geometrical school; especially in France, where

ratiocination from rules of practice forms the staple commodity of journalism

and political oratory — a misapprehension of the functions of Deduction

which has brought much discredit, in the estimation of other countries, upon

the spirit of generalization so honorably characteristic of the French mind.

The commonplaces of politics in France are large and sweeping practical

maxims, from which, as ultimate premises, men reason downward to

particular applications; and this they call being logical and consistent. For

instance, they are perpetually arguing that such and such a measure ought to

be adopted, because it is a consequence of the principle on which the form of

government is founded; of the principle of legitimacy, or the principle of the

sovereignty of the people. To which it may be answered, that if these be

really practical principles, they must rest on speculative grounds; the

sovereignty of the people, for example, must be a right foundation forgovernment, because a government thus constituted tends to produce certain

beneficial effects. Inasmuch, however, as no government produces all

possible beneficial effects, but all are attended with more or fewer

inconveniences, and since these can not usually be combated by means drawn

from the very causes which produce them, it would be often a much stronger

recommendation of some practical arrangement, that it does not follow from

what is called the general principle of the government, than that it does.

Under a government of legitimacy, the presumption is far rather in favor of

institutions of popular origin; and in a democracy, in favor of arrangements

tending to check the impetus of popular will. The line of augmentation so

commonly mistaken in France for political philosophy, tends to the practical

conclusion that we should exert our utmost efforts to aggravate, instead of

alleviating, whatever are the characteristic imperfections of the system of

institutions which we prefer, or under which we happen to live.

              § 5. The grounds, then, of every rule of art, are to be found in the

theorems of science. An art, or a body of art, consists of the rules, together

with as much of the speculative propositions as comprises the justification of

those rules. The complete art of any matter includes a selection of such a

portion from the science as is necessary to show on what conditions the

effects, which the art aims at producing, depend. And Art in general, consists

of the truths of Science, arranged in the most convenient order for practice,

instead of the order which is the most convenient for thought. Science groups

and arranges its truths, so as to enable us to take in at one view as much as

possible of the general order of the universe. Art, though it must assume the

same general laws, follows them only into such of their detailed

consequences as have led to the formation of rules of conduct; and brings

together from parts of the field of science most remote from one another, the

truths relating to the production of the different and heterogeneous conditions

necessary to each effect which the exigencies of practical life require to be
          288
produced.

              Science, therefore, following one cause to its various effects, while

art traces one effect to its multiplied and diversified causes and conditions,

there is need of a set of intermediate scientific truths, derived from the higher

generalities of science, and destined to serve as the generalia or first

principles of the various arts. The scientific operation of framing these

intermediate principles, M. Comte characterizes as one of those results ofphilosophy which are reserved for futurity. The only complete example

which he points out as actually realized, and which can be held up as a type

to be imitated in more important matters, is the general theory of the art of

Descriptive Geometry, as conceived by M. Monge. It is not, however,

difficult to understand what the nature of these intermediate principles must

generally be. After framing the most comprehensive possible conception of

the end to be aimed at, that is, of the effect to be produced, and determining

in the same comprehensive manner the set of conditions on which that effect

depends, there remains to be taken, a general survey of the resources which

can be commanded for realizing this set of conditions; and when the result of

this survey has been embodied in the fewest and most extensive propositions

possible, those propositions will express the general relation between the

available means and the end, and will constitute the general scientific theory

of the art, from which its practical methods will follow as corollaries.

              § 6. But though the reasonings which connect the end or purpose of

every art with its means belong to the domain of Science, the definition of the

end itself belongs exclusively to Art, and forms its peculiar province. Every

art has one first principle, or general major premise, not borrowed from

science; that which enunciates the object aimed at, and affirms it to be a

desirable object. The builder’s art assumes that it is desirable to have

buildings; architecture, as one of the fine arts, that it is desirable to have them

beautiful or imposing. The hygienic and medical arts assume, the one that the

preservation of health, the other that the cure of disease, are fitting and

desirable ends. These are not propositions of science. Propositions of science

assert a matter of fact: an existence, a co-existence, a succession, or a

resemblance. The propositions now spoken of do not assert that any thing is,

but enjoin or recommend that something should be. They are a class by

themselves. A proposition of which the predicate is expressed by the words

ought or should be , is generically different from one which is expressed by is

, or will be . It is true, that in the largest sense of the words, even these

propositions assert something as a matter of fact. The fact affirmed in them

is, that the conduct recommended excites in the speaker’s mind the feeling of

approbation. This, however, does not go to the bottom of the matter; for the

speaker’s approbation is no sufficient reason why other people should

approve; nor ought it to be a conclusive reason even with himself. For the

purposes of practice, every one must be required to justify his approbation;

and for this there is need of general premises, determining what are theproper objects of approbation, and what the proper order of precedence

among those objects.

              These general premises, together with the principal conclusions

which may be deduced from them, form (or rather might form) a body of

doctrine, which is properly the Art of Life, in its three departments, Morality,

Prudence or Policy, and Æsthetics; the Right, the Expedient, and the

Beautiful or Noble, in human conduct and works. To this art (which, in the

main, is unfortunately still to be created), all other arts are subordinate; since

its principles are those which must determine whether the special aim of any

particular art is worthy and desirable, and what is its place in the scale of

desirable things. Every art is thus a joint result of laws of nature disclosed by

science, and of the general principles of what has been called Teleology, or
                        289
the Doctrine of Ends; which, borrowing the language of the German

metaphysicians, may also be termed, not improperly, the principles of

Practical Reason.

              A scientific observer or reasoner, merely as such, is not an adviser

for practice. His part is only to show that certain consequences follow from

certain causes, and that to obtain certain ends, certain means are the most

effectual. Whether the ends themselves are such as ought to be pursued, and

if so, in what cases and to how great a length, it is no part of his business as a

cultivator of science to decide, and science alone will never qualify him for

the decision. In purely physical science, there is not much temptation to

assume this ulterior office; but those who treat of human nature and society

invariably claim it: they always undertake to say, not merely what is, but

what ought to be. To entitle them to do this, a complete doctrine of Teleology

is indispensable. A scientific theory, however perfect, of the subject-matter,

considered merely as part of the order of nature, can in no degree serve as a

substitute. In this respect the various subordinate arts afford a misleading

analogy. In them there is seldom any visible necessity for justifying the end,

since in general its desirableness is denied by nobody, and it is only when the

question of precedence is to be decided between that end and some other, that

the general principles of Teleology have to be called in; but a writer on

Morals and Politics requires those principles at every step. The most

elaborate and well-digested exposition of the laws of succession and co-

existence among mental or social phenomena, and of their relation to one

another as causes and effects, will be of no avail toward the art of Life or ofSociety, if the ends to be aimed at by that art are left to the vague suggestions

of the intellectus sibi permissus , or are taken for granted without analysis or

questioning.

              § 7. There is, then, a philosophia prima peculiar to Art, as there is

one which belongs to Science. There are not only first principles of

Knowledge, but first principles of Conduct. There must be some standard by

which to determine the goodness or badness, absolute and comparative, of

ends, or objects of desire. And whatever that standard is, there can be but

one; for if there were several ultimate principles of conduct, the same conduct

might be approved by one of those principles and condemned by another; and

there would be needed some more general principle, as umpire between them.

              Accordingly, writers on Moral Philosophy have mostly felt the

necessity not only of referring all rules of conduct, and all judgments of

praise and blame, to principles, but of referring them to some one principle;

some rule, or standard, with which all other rules of conduct were required to

be consistent, and from which by ultimate consequence they could all be

deduced. Those who have dispensed with the assumption of such a universal

standard, have only been enabled to do so by supposing that a moral sense, or

instinct, inherent in our constitution, informs us, both what principles of

conduct we are bound to observe, and also in what order these should be

subordinated to one another.

              The theory of the foundations of morality is a subject which it would

be out of place, in a work like this, to discuss at large, and which could not to

any useful purpose be treated incidentally. I shall content myself, therefore,

with saying, that the doctrine of intuitive moral principles, even if true, would

provide only for that portion of the field of conduct which is properly called

moral. For the remainder of the practice of life some general principle, or

standard, must still be sought; and if that principle be rightly chosen, it will

be found, I apprehend, to serve quite as well for the ultimate principle of

Morality, as for that of Prudence, Policy, or Taste.

              Without attempting in this place to justify my opinion, or even to

define the kind of justification which it admits of, I merely declare my

conviction, that the general principle to which all rules of practice ought to

conform, and the test by which they should be tried, is that of conduciveness

to the happiness of mankind, or rather, of all sentient beings; in other words,                                                                                  290
that the promotion of happiness is the ultimate principle of Teleology.

              I do not mean to assert that the promotion of happiness should be

itself the end of all actions, or even of all rules of action. It is the justification,

and ought to be the controller, of all ends, but it is not itself the sole end.

There are many virtuous actions, and even virtuous modes of action (though

the cases are, I think, less frequent than is often supposed), by which

happiness in the particular instance is sacrificed, more pain being produced

than pleasure. But conduct of which this can be truly asserted, admits of

justification only because it can be shown that, on the whole, more happiness

will exist in the world, if feelings are cultivated which will make people, in

certain cases, regardless of happiness. I fully admit that this is true; that the

cultivation of an ideal nobleness of will and conduct should be to individual

human beings an end, to which the specific pursuit either of their own

happiness or of that of others (except so far as included in that idea) should,

in any case of conflict, give way. But I hold that the very question, what

constitutes this elevation of character, is itself to be decided by a reference to

happiness as the standard. The character itself should be, to the individual, a

paramount end, simply because the existence of this ideal nobleness of

character, or of a near approach to it, in any abundance, would go farther than

all things else toward making human life happy, both in the comparatively

humble sense of pleasure and freedom from pain, and in the higher meaning,

of rendering life, not what it now is almost universally, puerile and

insignificant, but such as human beings with highly developed faculties can

care to have.

              § 8. With these remarks we must close this summary view of the

application of the general logic of scientific inquiry to the moral and social

departments of science. Notwithstanding the extreme generality of the

principles of method which I have laid down (a generality which, I trust, is

not, in this instance, synonymous with vagueness), I have indulged the hope

that to some of those on whom the task will devolve of bringing those most

important of all sciences into a more satisfactory state, these observations

may be useful, both in removing erroneous, and in clearing up the true,

conceptions of the means by which, on subjects of so high a degree of

complication, truth can be attained. Should this hope be realized, what is

probably destined to be the great intellectual achievement of the next two or

three generations of European thinkers will have been in some degreeforwarded.

              THE END.

              FOOTNOTES

        1
               In the later editions of Archbishop Whately’s “Logic,” he states his

meaning to be, not that “rules” for the ascertainment of truths by inductive

investigation can not be laid down, or that they may not be “of eminent

service,” but that they “must always be comparatively vague and general, and

incapable of being built up into a regular demonstrative theory like that of the

Syllogism.” (Book iv., ch. iv., § 3.) And he observes, that to devise a system

for this purpose, capable of being “brought into a scientific form,” would be

an achievement which “he must be more sanguine than scientific who

expects.” (Book iv., ch. ii., § 4.) To effect this, however, being the express

object of the portion of the present work which treats of Induction, the words

in the text are no overstatement of the difference of opinion between

Archbishop Whately and me on the subject.

        2
               Now forming a chapter in his volume on “The Philosophy of

Discovery.”

        3
               Archbishop Whately.

        4
               I use these terms indiscriminately, because, for the purpose in view,

there is no need for making any distinction between them. But

metaphysicians usually restrict the name Intuition to the direct knowledge we

are supposed to have of things external to our minds, and Consciousness to

our knowledge of our own mental phenomena.

        5
               This important theory has of late been called in question by a writer

of deserved reputation, Mr. Samuel Bailey; but I do not conceive that the

grounds on which it has been admitted as an established doctrine for a

century past, have been at all shaken by that gentleman’s objections. I have

elsewhere said what appeared to me necessary in reply to his arguments.

(Westminster Review for October, 1842; reprinted in “Dissertations and

Discussions,” vol. ii.)

        6
               The view taken in the text, of the definition and purpose of Logic,

stands in marked opposition to that of the school of philosophy which, in this

country, is represented by the writings of Sir William Hamilton and of his

numerous pupils. Logic, as this school conceives it, is “the Science of theFormal Laws of Thought;” a definition framed for the express purpose of

excluding, as irrelevant to Logic, whatever relates to Belief and Disbelief, or

to the pursuit of truth as such, and restricting the science to that very limited

portion of its total province, which has reference to the conditions, not of

Truth, but of Consistency. What I have thought it useful to say in opposition

to this limitation of the field of Logic, has been said at some length in a

separate work, first published in 1865, and entitled “An Examination of Sir

William Hamilton’s Philosophy, and of the Principal Philosophical Questions

discussed in his Writings.” For the purposes of the present Treatise, I am

content that the justification of the larger extension which I give to the

domain of the science, should rest on the sequel of the Treatise itself. Some

remarks on the relation which the Logic of Consistency bears to the Logic of

Truth, and on the place which that particular part occupies in the whole to

which it belongs, will be found in the present volume (Book II., chap. iii., §

9).

        7
               Computation or Logic , chap. ii.

        8
               In the original “had, or had not .” These last words, as involving a

subtlety foreign to our present purpose, I have forborne to quote.

        9
               Vide infra, note at the end of § 3, book ii., chap. ii.

        10
               Notare , to mark; con notare, to mark along with ; to mark one

thing with or in addition to another.

        11
               Archbishop Whately, who, in the later editions of his Elements of

Logic , aided in reviving the important distinction treated of in the text,

proposes the term “Attributive” as a substitute for “Connotative” (p. 22, 9th

edit.). The expression is, in itself, appropriate; but as it has not the advantage

of being connected with any verb, of so markedly distinctive a character as

“to connote,” it is not, I think, fitted to supply the place of the word

Connotative in scientific use.

        12
               A writer who entitles his book Philosophy; or, the Science of

Truth , charges me in his very first page (referring at the foot of it to this

passage) with asserting that general names have properly no signification.

And he repeats this statement many times in the course of his volume, with

comments, not at all flattering, thereon. It is well to be now and then

reminded to how great a length perverse misquotation (for, strange as itappears, I do not believe that the writer is dishonest) can sometimes go. It is a

warning to readers when they see an author accused, with volume and page

referred to, and the apparent guarantee of inverted commas, of maintaining

something more than commonly absurd, not to give implicit credence to the

assertion without verifying the reference.

        13
               “Take the familiar term Stone. It is applied to mineral and rocky

materials, to the kernels of fruit, to the accumulations in the gall-bladder and

in the kidney; while it is refused to polished minerals (called gems), to rocks

that have the cleavage suited for roofing (slates), and to baked clay (bricks).

It occurs in the designation of the magnetic oxide of iron (loadstone), and not

in speaking of other metallic ores. Such a term is wholly unfit for accurate

reasoning, unless hedged round on every occasion by other phrases; as

building stone, precious stone, gall-stone, etc. Moreover, the methods of

definition are baffled for want of sufficient community to ground upon. There

is no quality uniformly present in the cases where it is applied, and uniformly

absent where it is not applied; hence the definer would have to employ

largely the license of striking off existing applications, and taking in new

ones.” — BAIN, Logic , ii., 172.

        14
               Before quitting the subject of connotative names, it is proper to

observe, that the first writer who, in our times, has adopted from the

schoolmen the word to connote , Mr. James Mill, in his Analysis of the

Phenomena of the Human Mind , employs it in a signification different from

that in which it is here used. He uses the word in a sense co-extensive with its

etymology, applying it to every case in which a name, while pointing directly

to one thing (which is consequently termed its signification), includes also a

tacit reference to some other thing. In the case considered in the text, that of

concrete general names, his language and mine are the converse of one

another. Considering (very justly) the signification of the name to lie in the

attribute, he speaks of the word as noting the attribute, and connoting the

things possessing the attribute. And he describes abstract names as being

properly concrete names with their connotation dropped; whereas, in my

view, it is the de notation which would be said to be dropped, what was

previously connoted becoming the whole signification.

              In adopting a phraseology at variance with that which so high an

authority, and one which I am less likely than any other person to undervalue,

has deliberately sanctioned, I have been influenced by the urgent necessityfor a term exclusively appropriated to express the manner in which a concrete

general name serves to mark the attributes which are involved in its

signification. This necessity can scarcely be felt in its full force by any one

who has not found by experience how vain is the attempt to communicate

clear ideas on the philosophy of language without such a word. It is hardly an

exaggeration to say, that some of the most prevalent of the errors with which

logic has been infected, and a large part of the cloudiness and confusion of

ideas which have enveloped it, would, in all probability, have been avoided,

if a term had been in common use to express exactly what I have signified by

the term to connote. And the schoolmen, to whom we are indebted for the

greater part of our logical language, gave us this also, and in this very sense.

For though some of their general expressions countenance the use of the

word in the more extensive and vague acceptation in which it is taken by Mr.

Mill, yet when they had to define it specifically as a technical term, and to fix

its meaning as such, with that admirable precision which always characterizes

their definitions, they clearly explained that nothing was said to be connoted

except forms , which word may generally, in their writings, be understood as

synonymous with attributes .

              Now, if the word to connote , so well suited to the purpose to which

they applied it, be diverted from that purpose by being taken to fulfill

another, for which it does not seem to me to be at all required; I am unable to

find any expression to replace it, but such as are commonly employed in a

sense so much more general, that it would be useless attempting to associate

them peculiarly with this precise idea. Such are the words, to involve, to

imply, etc. By employing these, I should fail of attaining the object for which

alone the name is needed, namely, to distinguish this particular kind of

involving and implying from all other kinds, and to assure to it the degree of

habitual attention which its importance demands.

        15
               Professor Bain (Logic , i., 56) thinks that negative names are not

names of all things whatever except those denoted by the correlative positive

name, but only for all things of some particular class: not-white , for instance,

he deems not to be a name for every thing in nature except white things, but

only for every colored thing other than white. In this case, however, as in all

others, the test of what a name denotes is what it can be predicated of: and we

can certainly predicate of a sound, or a smell, that it is not white. The

affirmation and the negation of the same attribute can not but divide thewhole field of predication between them.

        16
               Or rather, all objects except itself and the percipient mind; for, as

we shall see hereafter, to ascribe any attribute to an object, necessarily

implies a mind to perceive it.

              The simple and clear explanation given in the text, of relation and

relative names, a subject so long the opprobrium of metaphysics, was given

(as far as I know) for the first time, by Mr. James Mill, in his Analysis of the

Phenomena of the Human Mind.

        17
               On the preceding passage Professor Bain remarks (Logic, i., 265):

“The Categories do not seem to have been intended as a classification of

Namable Things, in the sense of ‘an enumeration of all kinds of Things

which are capable of being made predicates, or of having any thing

predicated of them.’ They seem to have been rather intended as a

generalization of predicates; an analysis of the final import of predication.

Viewed in this light, they are not open to the objections offered by Mr. Mill.

The proper question to ask is not — In what Category are we to place

sensations or other feelings or states of mind? but, Under what Categories can

we predicate regarding states of mind? Take, for example, Hope. When we

say that it is a state of mind, we predicate Substance: we may also describe

how great it is (Quantity), what is the quality of it, pleasurable or painful

(Quality), what it has reference to (Relation). Aristotle seems to have framed

the Categories on the plan — Here is an individual; what is the final analysis

of all that we can predicate about him?”

              This is doubtless a true statement of the leading idea in the

classification. The Category Οὐσία was certainly understood by Aristotle to

be a general name for all possible answers to the question Quid sit? when

asked respecting a concrete individual; as the other Categories are names

comprehending all possible answers to the questions Quantum sit? Quale sit?

etc. In Aristotle’s conception, therefore, the Categories may not have been a

classification of Things; but they were soon converted into one by his

Scholastic followers, who certainly regarded and treated them as a

classification of Things, and carried them out as such, dividing down the

Category Substance as a naturalist might do, into the different classes of

physical or metaphysical objects as distinguished from attributes, and the

other Categories into the principal varieties of quantity, quality, relation, etc.It is, therefore, a just subject of complaint against them, that they had no

Category of Feeling. Feeling is assuredly predicable as a summum genus, of

every particular kind of feeling, for instance, as in Mr. Bain’s example, of

Hope: but it can not be brought within any of the Categories as interpreted

either by Aristotle or by his followers.

        18
               Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences , vol. i., p. 40.

        19
               Discussions on Philosophy , etc. Appendix I., pp. 643, 644.

        20
               It is to be regretted that Sir William Hamilton, though he often

strenuously insists on this doctrine, and though, in the passage quoted, he

states it with a comprehensiveness and force which leave nothing to be

desired, did not consistently adhere to his own doctrine, but maintained along

with it opinions with which it is utterly irreconcilable. See the third and other

chapters of An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy .

        21
               “Nous savons qu’il existe quelque chose hors de nous, parceque

nous ne pouvons expliquer nos perceptions sans les rattacher à des causes

distinctes de nous mêmes; nous savons de plus que ces causes, dont nous ne

connaissons pas d’ailleurs l’essence, produisent les effets les plus variables,

les plus divers, et même les plus contraires, selon qu’elles rencontrent telle

nature ou telle disposition du sujet. Mais savons-nous quelque chose de plus?

et même, vu le caractère indéterminé des causes que nous concevons dans les

corps, y a-t-il quelque chose de plus à savoir? Y a-t-il lieu de nous enquérir si

nous percevons les choses telles qu’elles sont? Non évidemment.... Je ne dis

pas que le problème est insoluble, je dis qu’il est absurde et enferme une

contradiction . Nous ne savons pas ce que ces causes sont en elles-mêmes , et

la raison nous défend de chercher à le connaître: mais il est bien évident à

priori , qu’elles ne sont pas en elles-mêmes ce qu’elles sont par rapport à

nous , puisque la présence du sujet modifie nécessairement leur action.

Supprimez tout sujet sentant, il est certain que ces causes agiraient encore

puisqu’elles continueraient d’exister; mais elles agiraient autrement; elles

seraient encore des qualités et des propriétés, mais qui ne ressembleraient à

rien de ce que nous connaissons. Le feu ne manifesterait plus aucune des

propriétés que nous lui connaissons: que serait-il? C’est ce que nous ne

saurons jamais. C’est d’ailleurs peut-être un problème qui ne répugne pas

seulement à la nature de notre esprit, mais à l’essence même des choses.

Quand même en effet on supprimerait par le pensée tous les sujets sentants, ilfaudrait encore admettre que nul corps ne manifesterait ses propriétés

autrement qu’en relation avec un sujet quelconque, et dans ce cas ses

propriétés ne seraient encore que relatives : en sorte qu’il me paraît fort

raisonnable d’admettre que les propriétés déterminées des corps n’existent

pas indépendamment d’un sujet quelconque, et que quand on demande si les

propriétés de la matiere sont telles que nous les percevons, il faudrait voir

auparavant si elles sont en tant que déterminées, et dans quel sens il est vrai

de dire qu’elles sont.” — Cours d’Histoire de la Philosophie Morale au 18me

siècle , 8me leçon.

        22
               An attempt, indeed, has been made by Reid and others, to establish

that although some of the properties we ascribe to objects exist only in our

sensations, others exist in the things themselves, being such as can not

possibly be copies of any impression upon the senses; and they ask, from

what sensations our notions of extension and figure have been derived? The

gauntlet thrown down by Reid was taken up by Brown, who, applying greater

powers of analysis than had previously been applied to the notions of

extension and figure, pointed out that the sensations from which those

notions are derived, are sensations of touch, combined with sensations of a

class previously too little adverted to by metaphysicians, those which have

their seat in our muscular frame. His analysis, which was adopted and

followed up by James Mill, has been further and greatly improved upon in

Professor Bain’s profound work, The Senses and the Intellect , and in the

chapters on “Perception” of a work of eminent analytic power, Mr. Herbert

Spencer’s Principles of Psychology .

              On this point M. Cousin may again be cited in favor of the better

doctrine. M. Cousin recognizes, in opposition to Reid, the essential

subjectivity of our conceptions of what are called the primary qualities of

matter, as extension, solidity, etc., equally with those of color, heat, and the

remainder of the so-called secondary qualities. — Cours , ut supra, 9me

leçon.

        23
               This doctrine, which is the most complete form of the

philosophical theory known as the Relativity of Human Knowledge, has,

since the recent revival in this country of an active interest in metaphysical

speculation, been the subject of a greatly increased amount of discussion and

controversy; and dissentients have manifested themselves in considerably

greater number than I had any knowledge of when the passage in the text waswritten. The doctrine has been attacked from two sides. Some thinkers,

among whom are the late Professor Ferrier, in his Institutes of Metaphysic ,

and Professor John Grote, in his Exploratio Philosophica , appear to deny

altogether the reality of Noumena, or Things in themselves — of an

unknowable substratum or support for the sensations which we experience,

and which, according to the theory, constitute all our knowledge of an

external world. It seems to me, however, that in Professor Grote’s case at

least, the denial of Noumena is only apparent, and that he does not essentially

differ from the other class of objectors, including Mr. Bailey in his valuable

Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind , and (in spite of the striking

passage quoted in the text) also Sir William Hamilton, who contend for a

direct knowledge by the human mind of more than the sensations — of

certain attributes or properties as they exist not in us, but in the Things

themselves.

              With the first of these opinions, that which denies Noumena, I have,

as a metaphysician, no quarrel; but, whether it be true or false, it is irrelevant

to Logic. And since all the forms of language are in contradiction to it,

nothing but confusion could result from its unnecessary introduction into a

treatise, every essential doctrine of which could stand equally well with the

opposite and accredited opinion. The other and rival doctrine, that of a direct

perception or intuitive knowledge of the outward object as it is in itself,

considered as distinct from the sensations we receive from it, is of far greater

practical moment. But even this question, depending on the nature and laws

of Intuitive Knowledge, is not within the province of Logic. For the grounds

of my own opinion concerning it, I must content myself with referring to a

work already mentioned — An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s

Philosophy ; several chapters of which are devoted to a full discussion of the

questions and theories relating to the supposed direct perception of external

objects.

        24
               Professor Bain (Logic , i., 49) defines attributes as “points of

community among classes.” This definition expresses well one point of view,

but is liable to the objection that it applies only to the attributes of classes;

though an object, unique in its kind, may be said to have attributes.

Moreover, the definition is not ultimate, since the points of community

themselves admit of, and require, further analysis; and Mr. Bain does analyze

them into resemblances in the sensations, or other states of consciousnessexcited by the object.

        25
               Analysis of the Human Mind , i., 126 et seq.

        26
               Logic , i., 85.

        27
               Instead of Universal and Particular as applied to propositions,

Professor Bain proposes (Logic , i., 81) the terms Total and Partial; reserving

the former pair of terms for their inductive meaning, “the contrast between a

general proposition and the particulars or individuals that we derive it from.”

This change in nomenclature would be attended with the further advantage,

that Singular propositions, which in the Syllogism follow the same rules as

Universal, would be included along with them in the same class, that of Total

predications. It is not the Subject’s denoting many things or only one, that is

of importance in reasoning, it is that the assertion is made of the whole or a

part only of what the Subject denotes. The words Universal and Particular,

however, are so familiar and so well understood in both the senses mentioned

by Mr. Bain, that the double meaning does not produce any material

inconvenience.

        28
               It may, however, be considered as equivalent to a universal

proposition with a different predicate, viz.: “All wine is good quâ wine,” or

“is good in respect of the qualities which constitute it wine.”

        29
               Logic , i., 82.

        30
               Dr. Whewell (Philosophy of Discovery , p. 242) questions this

statement, and asks, “Are we to say that a mole can not dig the ground,

except he has an idea of the ground, and of the snout and paws with which he

digs it?” I do not know what passes in a mole’s mind, nor what amount of

mental apprehension may or may not accompany his instinctive actions. But

a human being does not use a spade by instinct; and he certainly could not

use it unless he had knowledge of a spade, and of the earth which he uses it

upon.

        31
               Professor Bain remarks, in qualification of the statement in the text

(Logic , i., 50), that the word Class has two meanings; “the class definite, and

the class indefinite. The class definite is an enumeration of actual individuals,

as the Peers of the Realm, the oceans of the globe, the known planets.... The

class indefinite is unenumerated. Such classes are stars, planets, gold-bearing

rocks, men, poets, virtuous.... In this last acceptation of the word, class nameand general name are identical. The class name denotes an indefinite number

of individuals, and connotes the points of community or likeness.”

              The theory controverted in the text, tacitly supposes all classes to be

definite . I have assumed them to be indefinite; because, for the purposes of

Logic, definite classes, as such, are almost useless; though often serviceable

as means of abridged expression. (Vide infra, book iii., chap. ii.)

        32
               “From hence also this may be deduced, that the first truths were

arbitrarily made by those that first of all imposed names upon things, or

received them from the imposition of others. For it is true (for example) that

man is a living creature , but it is for this reason, that it pleased men to

impose both these names on the same thing.” — Computation or Logic ,

chap. iii., sect. 8.

        33
               “Men are subject to err not only in affirming and denying, but also

in perception, and in silent cogitation.... Tacit errors, or the errors of sense

and cogitation, are made by passing from one imagination to the imagination

of another different thing; or by feigning that to be past, or future, which

never was, nor ever shall be; as when by seeing the image of the sun in water,

we imagine the sun itself to be there; or by seeing swords, that there has been,

or shall be, fighting, because it used to be so for the most part; or when from

promises we feign the mind of the promiser to be such and such; or, lastly,

when from any sign we vainly imagine something to be signified which is

not. And errors of this sort are common to all things that have sense.” —

Computation or Logic , chap. v., sect. 1.

        34
               Chap. iii., sect 3.

        35
               To the preceding statement it has been objected, that “we naturally

construe the subject of a proposition in its extension, and the predicate (which

therefore may be an adjective) in its intension (connotation): and that

consequently co-existence of attributes does not, any more than the opposite

theory of equation of groups, correspond with the living processes of thought

and language.” I acknowledge the distinction here drawn, which, indeed, I

had myself laid down and exemplified a few pages back (p. 77). But though it

is true that we naturally “construe the subject of a proposition in its

extension,” this extension, or in other words, the extent of the class denoted

by the name, is not apprehended or indicated directly. It is both apprehended

and indicated solely through the attributes. In the “living processes of thoughtand language” the extension, though in this case really thought of (which in

the case of the predicate it is not), is thought of only through the medium of

what my acute and courteous critic terms the “intension.”

              For further illustrations of this subject, see Examination of Sir

William Hamilton’s Philosophy , chap. xxii.

        36
               Professor Bain, in his Logic (i., 256), excludes Existence from the

list, considering it as a mere name. All propositions, he says, which predicate

mere existence “are more or less abbreviated, or elliptical: when fully

expressed they fall under either co-existence or succession. When we say

there exists a conspiracy for a particular purpose, we mean that at the present

time a body of men have formed themselves into a society for a particular

object; which is a complex affirmation, resolvable into propositions of co-

existence and succession (as causation). The assertion that the dodo does not

exist, points to the fact that this animal, once known in a certain place, has

disappeared or become extinct; is no longer associated with the locality: all

which may be better stated without the use of the verb ‘exist.’ There is a

debated question — Does an ether exist? but the concrete form would be this

— ‘Are heat and light and other radiant influences propagated by an ethereal

medium diffused in space;’ which is a proposition of causation. In like

manner the question of the Existence of a Deity can not be discussed in that

form. It is properly a question as to the First Cause of the Universe, and as to

the continued exertion of that Cause in providential superintendence.” (i.,

407.)

              Mr. Bain thinks it “fictitious and unmeaning language” to carry up

the classification of Nature to one summum genus , Being, or that which

Exists; since nothing can be perceived or apprehended but by way of contrast

with something else (of which important truth, under the name of Law of

Relativity, he has been in our time the principal expounder and champion),

and we have no other class to oppose to Being, or fact to contrast with

Existence.

              I accept fully Mr. Bain’s Law of Relativity, but I do not understand

by it that to enable us to apprehend or be conscious of any fact, it is necessary

that we should contrast it with some other positive fact. The antithesis

necessary to consciousness need not, I conceive, be an antithesis between two

positives; it may be between one positive and its negative. Hobbes wasundoubtedly right when he said that a single sensation indefinitely prolonged

would cease to be felt at all; but simple intermission, without other change,

would restore it to consciousness. In order to be conscious of heat, it is not

necessary that we should pass to it from cold; it suffices that we should pass

to it from a state of no sensation, or from a sensation of some other kind. The

relative opposite of Being, considered as a summum genus, is Nonentity, or

Nothing; and we have, now and then, occasion to consider and discuss things

merely in contrast with Nonentity.

              I grant that the decision of questions of Existence usually if not

always depends on a previous question of either Causation or Co-existence.

But Existence is nevertheless a different thing from Causation or Co-

existence, and can be predicated apart from them. The meaning of the

abstract name Existence, and the connotation of the concrete name Being,

consist, like the meaning of all other names, in sensations or states of

consciousness: their peculiarity is that to exist, is to excite, or be capable of

exciting, any sensations or states of consciousness: no matter what, but it is

indispensable that there should be some. It was from overlooking this that

Hegel, finding that Being is an abstraction reached by thinking away all

particular attributes, arrived at the self-contradictory proposition on which he

founded all his philosophy, that Being is the same as Nothing. It is really the

name of Something, taken in the most comprehensive sense of the word.

        37
               Book iv., chap. vii.

        38
               Logic , i., 103–105.

        39
               The doctrines which prevented the real meaning of Essences from

being understood, had not assumed so settled a shape in the time of Aristotle

and his immediate followers, as was afterward given to them by the Realists

of the Middle Ages. Aristotle himself (in his Treatise on the Categories)

expressly denies that the δεύτεραι οὔσιαι, or Substantiæ Secundæ, inhere in a

subject. They are only, he says, predicated of it.

        40
               The always acute and often profound author of An Outline of

Sematology (Mr. B. H. Smart) justly says, “Locke will be much more

intelligible, if, in the majority of places, we substitute ‘the knowledge of’ for

what he calls ‘the Idea of’ ” (p. 10). Among the many criticisms on Locke’s

use of the word Idea, this is the one which, as it appears to me, most nearly

hits the mark; and I quote it for the additional reason that it preciselyexpresses the point of difference respecting the import of Propositions,

between my view and what I have spoken of as the Conceptualist view of

them. Where a Conceptualist says that a name or a proposition expresses our

Idea of a thing, I should generally say (instead of our Idea) our Knowledge,

or Belief, concerning the thing itself.

        41
               This distinction corresponds to that which is drawn by Kant and

other metaphysicians between what they term analytic and synthetic ,

judgments; the former being those which can be evolved from the meaning of

the terms used.

        42
               If we allow a differentia to what is not really a species. For the

distinction of Kinds, in the sense explained by us, not being in any way

applicable to attributes, it of course follows that although attributes may be

put into classes, those classes can be admitted to be genera or species only by

courtesy.

        43
               Professor Bain, in his Logic, takes a peculiar view of Definition.

He holds (i., 71) with the present work, that “the definition in its full import,

is the sum of all the properties connoted by the name; it exhausts the meaning

of a word.” But he regards the meaning of a general name as including, not

indeed all the common properties of the class named, but all of them that are

ultimate properties, not resolvable into one another. “The enumeration of the

attributes of oxygen, of gold, of man, should be an enumeration of the final

(so far as can be made out), the underivable, powers or functions of each,”

and nothing less than this is a complete Definition (i., 75). An independent

property, not derivable from other properties, even if previously unknown,

yet as soon as discovered becomes, according to him, part of the meaning of

the term, and should be included in the definition. “When we are told that

diamond, which we know to be a transparent, glittering, hard, and high-priced

substance, is composed of carbon, and is combustible, we must put these

additional properties on the same level as the rest; to us they are henceforth

connoted by the name” (i., 73). Consequently the propositions that diamond

is composed of carbon, and that it is combustible, are regarded by Mr. Bain

as merely verbal propositions. He carries this doctrine so far as to say that

unless mortality can be shown to be a consequence of the ultimate laws of

animal organization, mortality is connoted by man, and “Man is Mortal” is a

merely verbal proposition. And one of the peculiarities (I think a

disadvantageous peculiarity) of his able and valuable treatise, is the largenumber of propositions requiring proof, and learned by experience, which, in

conformity with this doctrine, he considers as not real, but verbal,

propositions.

              The objection I have to this language is that it confounds, or at least

confuses, a much more important distinction than that which it draws. The

only reason for dividing Propositions into real and verbal, is in order to

discriminate propositions which convey information about facts, from those

which do not. A proposition which affirms that an object has a given

attribute, while designating the object by a name which already signifies the

attribute, adds no information to that which was already possessed by all who

understood the name. But when this is said, it is implied that, by the

signification of a name, is meant the signification attached to it in the

common usage of life. I can not think we ought to say that the meaning of a

word includes matters of fact which are unknown to every person who uses

the word unless he has learned them by special study of a particular

department of Nature; or that because a few persons are aware of these

matters of fact, the affirmation of them is a proposition conveying no

information. I hold that (special scientific connotation apart) a name means,

or connotes, only the properties which it is a mark of in the general mind; and

that in the case of any additional properties, however uniformly found to

accompany these, it remains possible that a thing which did not possess the

properties might still be thought entitled to the name. Ruminant, according to

Mr. Bain’s use of language, connotes cloven-hoofed, since the two properties

are always found together, and no connection has ever been discovered

between them: but ruminant does not mean cloven-hoofed; and were an

animal to be discovered which chews the cud, but has its feet undivided, I

venture to say that it would still be called ruminant.

        44
               In the fuller discussion which Archbishop Whately has given to

this subject in his later editions, he almost ceases to regard the definitions of

names and those of things as, in any important sense, distinct. He seems (9th

ed., p. 145) to limit the notion of a Real Definition to one which “explains

any thing more of the nature of the thing than is implied in the name;”

(including under the word “implied,” not only what the name connotes, but

every thing which can be deduced by reasoning from the attributes connoted).

Even this, as he adds, is usually called not a Definition, but a Description;

and (as it seems to me) rightly so called. A Description, I conceive, can onlybe ranked among Definitions, when taken (as in the case of the zoological

definition of man) to fulfill the true office of a Definition, by declaring the

connotation given to a word in some special use, as a term of science or art:

which special connotation of course would not be expressed by the proper

definition of the word in its ordinary employment.

              Mr. De Morgan, exactly reversing the doctrine of Archbishop

Whately, understands by a Real Definition one which contains less than the

Nominal Definition, provided only that what it contains is sufficient for

distinction. “By real definition I mean such an explanation of the word, be it

the whole of the meaning or only part, as will be sufficient to separate the

things contained under that word from all others. Thus the following, I

believe, is a complete definition of an elephant: An animal which naturally

drinks by drawing the water into its nose, and then spurting it into its mouth.”

— Formal Logic , p. 36. Mr. De Morgan’s general proposition and his

example are at variance; for the peculiar mode of drinking of the elephant

certainly forms no part of the meaning of the word elephant. It could not be

said, because a person happened to be ignorant of this property, that he did

not know what an elephant means.

        45
               In the only attempt which, so far as I know, has been made to

refute the preceding argumentation, it is maintained that in the first form of

the syllogism,

              A dragon is a thing which breathes flame, A dragon is a serpent,

Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame,

              “there is just as much truth in the conclusion as there is in the

premises, or rather, no more in the latter than in the former. If the general

name serpent includes both real and imaginary serpents, there is no falsity in

the conclusion; if not, there is falsity in the minor premise.”

              Let us, then, try to set out the syllogism on the hypothesis that the

name serpent includes imaginary serpents. We shall find that it is now

necessary to alter the predicates; for it can not be asserted that an imaginary

creature breathes flame; in predicating of it such a fact, we assert by the most

positive implication that it is real, and not imaginary. The conclusion must

run thus, “Some serpent or serpents either do or are imagined to breathe

flame.” And to prove this conclusion by the instance of dragons, the premises

must be, A dragon is imagined as breathing flame. A dragon is a (real orimaginary) serpent: from which it undoubtedly follows, that there are

serpents which are imagined to breathe flame; but the major premise is not a

definition, nor part of a definition; which is all that I am concerned to prove.

              Let us now examine the other assertion — that if the word serpent

stands for none but real serpents, the minor premise (a dragon is a serpent) is

false. This is exactly what I have myself said of the premise, considered as a

statement of fact: but it is not false as part of the definition of a dragon; and

since the premises, or one of them, must be false (the conclusion being so),

the real premise can not be the definition, which is true, but the statement of

fact, which is false.

        46
               “Few people” (I have said in another place) “have reflected how

great a knowledge of Things is required to enable a man to affirm that any

given argument turns wholly upon words. There is, perhaps, not one of the

leading terms of philosophy which is not used in almost innumerable shades

of meaning, to express ideas more or less widely different from one another.

Between two of these ideas a sagacious and penetrating mind will discern, as

it were intuitively, an unobvious link of connection, upon which, though

perhaps unable to give a logical account of it, he will found a perfectly valid

argument, which his critic, not having so keen an insight into the Things, will

mistake for a fallacy turning on the double meaning of a term. And the

greater the genius of him who thus safely leaps over the chasm, the greater

will probably be the crowing and vainglory of the mere logician, who,

hobbling after him, evinces his own superior wisdom by pausing on its brink,

and giving up as desperate his proper business of bridging it over.”

        47
               The different cases of Equipollency, or “Equivalent Propositional

Forms,” are set forth with some fullness in Professor Bain’s Logic . One of

the commonest of these changes of expression, that from affirming a

proposition to denying its negative, or vicè versa , Mr. Bain designates, very

happily, by the name Obversion.

        48
               As Sir William Hamilton has pointed out, “Some A is not B” may

also be converted in the following form: “No B is some A.” Some men are

not negroes; therefore, No negroes are some men (e.g. , Europeans).

        49
               Contraries: All A is B No A is B

              Subtraries: Some A is B Some A is not B              Contradictories: All A is B Some A is not B

              Also contradictories: No A is B Some A is B

              Respectively subalternate: All A is B and No A is B Some A is B

and Some A is not B

        50
               Professor Bain denies the claim of Singular Propositions to be

classed, for the purposes of ratiocination, with Universal; though they come

within the designation which he himself proposes as an equivalent for

Universal, that of Total. He would even, to use his own expression, banish

them entirely from the syllogism. He takes as an example,

              Socrates is wise, Socrates is poor, therefore Some poor men are

wise,

              or more properly (as he observes) “one poor man is wise.” “Now, if

wise, poor, and a man, are attributes belonging to the meaning of the word

Socrates, there is then no march of reasoning at all. We have given in

Socrates, inter alia , the facts wise, poor, and a man, and we merely repeat

the concurrence which is selected from the whole aggregate of properties

making up the whole, Socrates. The case is one under the head ‘Greater and

Less Connotation’ in Equivalent Propositional Forms, or Immediate

Inference.

              “But the example in this form does not do justice to the syllogism of

singulars. We must suppose both propositions to be real, the predicates being

in no way involved in the subject. Thus

              Socrates was the master of Plato, Socrates fought at Delium, The

master of Plato fought at Delium.

              “It may fairly be doubted whether the transitions, in this instance, are

any thing more than equivalent forms. For the proposition ‘Socrates was the

master of Plato and fought at Delium,’ compounded out of the two premises,

is obviously nothing more than a grammatical abbreviation. No one can say

that there is here any change of meaning, or any thing beyond a verbal

modification of the original form. The next step is, ‘The master of Plato

fought at Delium,’ which is the previous statement cut down by the omission

of Socrates. It contents itself with reproducing a part of the meaning, or

saying less than had been previously said. The full equivalent of the

affirmation is, ‘The master of Plato fought at Delium, and the master of Platowas Socrates:’ the new form omits the last piece of information, and gives

only the first. Now, we never consider that we have made a real inference, a

step in advance, when we repeat less than we are entitled to say, or drop from

a complex statement some portion not desired at the moment. Such an

operation keeps strictly within the domain of equivalence, or Immediate

Inference. In no way, therefore, can a syllogism with two singular premises

be viewed as a genuine syllogistic or deductive inference.” (Logic , i., 159.)

              The first argument, as will have been seen, rests upon the

supposition that the name Socrates has a meaning; that man, wise, and poor,

are parts of this meaning; and that by predicating them of Socrates we convey

no information; a view of the signification of names which, for reasons

already given (Note to § 4 of the chapter on Definition, supra , pp. 110, 111.),

I can not admit, and which, as applied to the class of names which Socrates

belongs to, is at war with Mr. Bain’s own definition of a Proper Name (i.,

148), “a single meaningless mark or designation appropriated to the thing.”

Such names, Mr. Bain proceeded to say, do not necessarily indicate even

human beings: much less then does the name Socrates include the meaning of

wise or poor. Otherwise it would follow that if Socrates had grown rich, or

had lost his mental faculties by illness, he would no longer have been called

Socrates.

              The second part of Mr. Bain’s argument, in which he contends that

even when the premises convey real information, the conclusion is merely the

premises with a part left out, is applicable, if at all, as much to universal

propositions as to singular. In every syllogism the conclusion contains less

than is asserted in the two premises taken together. Suppose the syllogism to

be

              All bees are intelligent, All bees are insects, therefore Some insects

are intelligent:

              one might use the same liberty taken by Mr. Bain, of joining

together the two premises as if they were one — “All bees are insects and

intelligent” — and might say that in omitting the middle term bees we make

no real inference, but merely reproduce part of what had been previously

said. Mr. Bain’s is really an objection to the syllogism itself, or at all events

to the third figure: it has no special applicability to singular propositions.

        51
               His conclusions are, “The first figure is suited to the discovery orproof of the properties of a thing; the second to the discovery or proof of the

distinctions between things; the third to the discovery or proof of instances

and exceptions; the fourth to the discovery, or exclusion, of the different

species of a genus.” The reference of syllogisms in the last three figures to

the dictum de omni et nullo is, in Lambert’s opinion, strained and unnatural:

to each of the three belongs, according to him, a separate axiom, co-ordinate

and of equal authority with that dictum , and to which he gives the names of

dictum de diverso for the second figure, dictum de exemplo for the third, and

dictum de reciproco for the fourth. See part i., or Dianoiologie , chap, iv., §

229 et seqq. Mr. Bailey (Theory of Reasoning , 2d ed., pp. 70–74) takes a

similar view of the subject.

        52
               Since this chapter was written, two treatises have appeared (or

rather a treatise and a fragment of a treatise), which aim at a further

improvement in the theory of the forms of ratiocination: Mr. De Morgan’s

“Formal Logic; or, the Calculus of Inference, Necessary and Probable;” and

the “New Analytic of Logical Forms,” attached as an Appendix to Sir

William Hamilton’s Discussions on Philosophy , and at greater length, to his

posthumous Lectures on Logic .

              In Mr. De Morgan’s volume — abounding, in its more popular parts,

with valuable observations felicitously expressed — the principal feature of

originality is an attempt to bring within strict technical rules the cases in

which a conclusion can be drawn from premises of a form usually classed as

particular. Mr. De Morgan observes, very justly, that from the premises most

Bs are Cs, most Bs are As, it may be concluded with certainty that some As

are Cs, since two portions of the class B, each of them comprising more than

half, must necessarily in part consist of the same individuals. Following out

this line of thought, it is equally evident that if we knew exactly what

proportion the “most” in each of the premises bear to the entire class B, we

could increase in a corresponding degree the definiteness of the conclusion.

Thus if 60 per cent. of B are included in C, and 70 per cent. in A, 30 per cent.

at least must be common to both; in other words, the number of As which are

Cs, and of Cs which are As, must be at least equal to 30 per cent. of the class

B. Proceeding on this conception of “numerically definite propositions,” and

extending it to such forms as these:— “45 Xs (or more) are each of them one

of 70 Ys,” or “45 Xs (or more) are no one of them to be found among 70 Ys,”

and examining what inferences admit of being drawn from the variouscombinations which may be made of premises of this description, Mr. De

Morgan establishes universal formulæ for such inferences; creating for that

purpose not only a new technical language, but a formidable array of symbols

analogous to those of algebra.

              Since it is undeniable that inferences, in the cases examined by Mr.

De Morgan, can legitimately be drawn, and that the ordinary theory takes no

account of them, I will not say that it was not worth while to show in detail

how these also could be reduced to formulæ as rigorous as those of Aristotle.

What Mr. De Morgan has done was worth doing once (perhaps more than

once, as a school exercise); but I question if its results are worth studying and

mastering for any practical purpose. The practical use of technical forms of

reasoning is to bar out fallacies: but the fallacies which require to be guarded

against in ratiocination properly so called, arise from the incautious use of the

common forms of language; and the logician must track the fallacy into that

territory, instead of waiting for it on a territory of his own. While he remains

among propositions which have acquired the numerical precision of the

Calculus of Probabilities, the enemy is left in possession of the only ground

on which he can be formidable. And since the propositions (short of

universal) on which a thinker has to depend, either for purposes of

speculation or of practice, do not, except in a few peculiar cases, admit of any

numerical precision; common reasoning can not be translated into Mr. De

Morgan’s forms, which therefore can not serve any purpose as a test of it.

              Sir William Hamilton’s theory of the “quantification of the

predicate” may be described as follows:

              “Logically” (I quote his words) “we ought to take into account the

quantity, always understood in thought, but usually, for manifest reasons,

elided in its expression, not only of the subject, but also of the predicate of a

judgment.” All A is B, is equivalent to all A is some B. No A is B, to No A is

any B. Some A is B, is tantamount to some A is some B. Some A is not B, to

Some A is not any B. As in these forms of assertion the predicate is exactly

co-extensive with the subject, they all admit of simple conversion; and by this

we obtain two additional forms — Some B is all A, and No B is some A. We

may also make the assertion All A is all B, which will be true if the classes A

and B are exactly co-extensive. The last three forms, though conveying real

assertions, have no place in the ordinary classification of Propositions. All

propositions, then, being supposed to be translated into this language, andwritten each in that one of the preceding forms which answers to its

signification, there emerges a new set of syllogistic rules, materially different

from the common ones. A general view of the points of difference may be

given in the words of Sir W. Hamilton (Discussions , 2d ed., p. 651):

              “The revocation of the two terms of a Proposition to their true

relation; a proposition being always an equation of its subject and its

predicate.

              “The consequent reduction of the Conversion of Propositions from

three species to one — that of Simple Conversion.

              “The reduction of all the General Laws of Categorical Syllogisms to

a single Canon.

              “The evolution from that one canon of all the Species and varieties

of Syllogisms.

              “The abrogation of all the Special Laws of Syllogism.

              “A demonstration of the exclusive possibility of Three Syllogistic

Figures; and (on new grounds) the scientific and final abolition of the Fourth.

              “A manifestation that Figure is an unessential variation in syllogistic

form; and the consequent absurdity of Reducing the syllogisms of the other

figures to the first.

              “An enouncement of one Organic Principle for each Figure.

              “A determination of the true number of the Legitimate Moods; with

              “Their amplification in number (thirty-six);

              “Their numerical equality under all the figures; and

              “Their relative equivalence, or virtual identity, throughout every

schematic difference.

              “That, in the second and third figures, the extremes holding both the

same relation to the middle term, there is not, as in the first, an opposition

and subordination between a term major and a term minor, mutually

containing and contained, in the counter wholes of Extension and

Comprehension.

              “Consequently, in the second and third figures, there is nodeterminate major and minor premises, and there are two indifferent

conclusions: whereas in the first the premises are determinate, and there is a

single proximate conclusion.”

              This doctrine, like that of Mr. De Morgan previously noticed, is a

real addition to the syllogistic theory; and has moreover this advantage over

Mr. De Morgan’s “numerically definite Syllogism,” that the forms it supplies

are really available as a test of the correctness of ratiocination; since

propositions in the common form may always have their predicates

quantified, and so be made amenable to Sir W. Hamilton’s rules. Considered,

however, as a contribution to the Science of Logic, that is, to the analysis of

the mental processes concerned in reasoning, the new doctrine appears to me,

I confess, not merely superfluous, but erroneous; since the form in which it

clothes propositions does not, like the ordinary form, express what is in the

mind of the speaker when he enunciates the proposition. I can not think Sir

William Hamilton right in maintaining that the quantity of the predicate is

“always understood in thought.” It is implied, but is not present to the mind

of the person who asserts the proposition. The quantification of the predicate,

instead of being a means of bringing out more clearly the meaning of the

proposition, actually leads the mind out of the proposition, into another order

of ideas. For when we say, All men are mortal, we simply mean to affirm the

attribute mortality of all men; without thinking at all of the class mortal in the

concrete, or troubling ourselves about whether it contains any other beings or

not. It is only for some artificial purpose that we ever look at the proposition

in the aspect in which the predicate also is thought of as a class-name, either

including the subject only, or the subject and something more. (See above, p.

77, 78.)

              For a fuller discussion of this subject, see the twenty-second chapter

of a work already referred to, “An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s

Philosophy.”

        53
               Mr. Herbert Spencer (Principles of Psychology , pp. 125–7),

though his theory of the syllogism coincides with all that is essential of mine,

thinks it a logical fallacy to present the two axioms in the text, as the

regulating principles of syllogism. He charges me with falling into the error

pointed out by Archbishop Whately and myself, of confounding exact

likeness with literal identity; and maintains, that we ought not to say that

Socrates possesses the same attributes which are connoted by the word Man,but only that he possesses attributes exactly like them: according to which

phraseology, Socrates, and the attribute mortality, are not two things co-

existing with the same thing, as the axiom asserts, but two things coexisting

with two different things.

              The question between Mr. Spencer and me is merely one of

language; for neither of us (if I understand Mr. Spencer’s opinions rightly)

believes an attribute to be a real thing, possessed of objective existence; we

believe it to be a particular mode of naming our sensations, or our

expectations of sensation, when looked at in their relation to an external

object which excites them. The question raised by Mr. Spencer does not,

therefore, concern the properties of any really existing thing, but the

comparative appropriateness, for philosophical purposes, of two different

modes of using a name. Considered in this point of view, the phraseology I

have employed, which is that commonly used by philosophers, seems to me

to be the best. Mr. Spencer is of opinion that because Socrates and Alcibiades

are not the same man, the attribute which constitutes them men should not be

called the same attribute; that because the humanity of one man and that of

another express themselves to our senses not by the same individual

sensations but by sensations exactly alike, humanity ought to be regarded as a

different attribute in every different man. But on this showing, the humanity

even of any one man should be considered as different attributes now and

half an hour hence; for the sensations by which it will then manifest itself to

my organs will not be a continuation of my present sensations, but a

repetition of them; fresh sensations, not identical with, but only exactly like

the present. If every general conception, instead of being “the One in the

Many,” were considered to be as many different conceptions as there are

things to which it is applicable, there would be no such thing as general

language. A name would have no general meaning if man connoted one thing

when predicated of John, and another, though closely resembling, thing when

predicated of William. Accordingly a recent pamphlet asserts the

impossibility of general knowledge on this precise ground.

              The meaning of any general name is some outward or inward

phenomenon, consisting, in the last resort, of feelings; and these feelings, if

their continuity is for an instant broken, are no longer the same feelings, in

the sense of individual identity. What, then, is the common something which

gives a meaning to the general name? Mr. Spencer can only say, it is thesimilarity of the feelings; and I rejoin, the attribute is precisely that similarity.

The names of attributes are in their ultimate analysis names for the

resemblances of our sensations (or other feelings). Every general name,

whether abstract or concrete, denotes or connotes one or more of those

resemblances. It will not, probably, be denied, that if a hundred sensations are

undistinguishably alike, their resemblance ought to be spoken of as one

resemblance, and not a hundred resemblances which merely resemble one

another. The things compared are many, but the something common to all of

them must be conceived as one, just as the name is conceived as one, though

corresponding to numerically different sensations of sound each time it is

pronounced. The general term man does not connote the sensations derived

once from one man, which, once gone, can no more occur again than the

same flash of lightning. It connotes the general type of the sensations derived

always from all men, and the power (always thought of as one) of producing

sensations of that type. And the axiom might be thus worded: Two types of

sensation each of which co-exists with a third type, co-exist with another; or

Two powers each of which co-exists with a third power co-exist with one

another.

              Mr. Spencer has misunderstood me in another particular. He

supposes that the co-existence spoken of in the axiom, of two things with the

same third thing, means simultaneousness in time. The co-existence meant is

that of being jointly attributes of the same subject. The attribute of being born

without teeth, and the attribute of having thirty-two teeth in mature age, are in

this sense co-existent, both being attributes of man, though ex vi termini

never of the same man at the same time.

        54
               Supra, p. 93.

        55
               Professor Bain (Logic , i., 157) considers the axiom (or rather

axioms) here proposed as a substitute for the dictum de omni , to possess

certain advantages, but to be “unworkable as a basis of the syllogism. The

fatal defect consists in this, that it is ill-adapted to bring out the difference

between total and partial coincidence of terms, the observation of which is

the essential precaution in syllogizing correctly. If all the terms were co-

extensive, the axiom would flow on admirably; A carries B, all B and none

but B; B carries C in the same manner; at once A carries C, without limitation

or reserve. But in point of fact, we know that while A carries B, other things

carry B also; whence a process of limitation is required, in transferring A to Cthrough B. A (in common with other things) carries B; B (in common with

other things) carries C; whence A (in common with other things) carries C.

The axiom provides no means of making this limitation; if we were to follow

A literally, we should be led to suppose A and C co-extensive: for such is the

only obvious meaning of ‘the attribute A coincides with the attribute C.’ ”

              It is certainly possible that a careless learner here and there may

suppose that if A carries B, it follows that B carries A. But if any one is so

incautious as to commit this mistake, the very earliest lesson in the logic of

inference, the Conversion of propositions, will correct it. The first of the two

forms in which I have stated the axiom, is in some degree open to Mr. Bain’s

criticism: when B is said to co-exist with A (it must be by a lapsus calami

that Mr. Bain uses the word coincide ), it is possible, in the absence of

warning, to suppose the meaning to be that the two things are only found

together. But this misinterpretation is excluded by the other, or practical,

form of the maxim; Nota notœ est nota rei ipsius. No one would be in any

danger of inferring that because a is a mark of b, b can never exist without a ;

that because being in a confirmed consumption is a mark of being about to

die, no one dies who is not in a consumption; that because being coal is a

mark of having come out of the earth, nothing can come out of the earth

except coal. Ordinary knowledge of English seems a sufficient protection

against these mistakes, since in speaking of a mark of any thing we are never

understood as implying reciprocity.

              A more fundamental objection is stated by Mr. Bain in a subsequent

passage (p. 158). “The axiom does not accommodate itself to the type of

Deductive Reasoning as contrasted with Induction — the application of a

general principle to a special case. Any thing that fails to make prominent this

circumstance is not adapted as a foundation for the syllogism.” But though it

may be proper to limit the term Deduction to the application of a general

principle to a special case, it has never been held that Ratiocination or

Syllogism is subject to the same limitation; and the adoption of it would

exclude a great amount of valid and conclusive syllogistic reasoning.

Moreover, if the dictum de omni makes prominent the fact of the application

of a general principle to a particular case, the axiom I propose makes

prominent the condition which alone makes that application a real inference.

              I conclude, therefore, that both forms have their value, and their

place in Logic. The dictum de omni should be retained as the fundamentalaxiom of the logic of mere consistency, often called Formal Logic; nor have I

ever quarreled with the use of it in that character, nor proposed to banish it

from treatises on Formal Logic. But the other is the proper axiom for the

logic of the pursuit of truth by way of Deduction; and the recognition of it

can alone show how it is possible that deductive reasoning can be a road to

truth.

        56
               Logic , p. 239 (9th ed.).

        57
               It is hardly necessary to say, that I am not contending for any such

absurdity as that we actually “ought to have known” and considered the case

of every individual man, past, present, and future, before affirming that all

men are mortal: although this interpretation has been, strangely enough, put

upon the preceding observations. There is no difference between me and

Archbishop Whately, or any other defender of the syllogism, on the practical

part of the matter; I am only pointing out an inconsistency in the logical

theory of it, as conceived by almost all writers. I do not say that a person who

affirmed, before the Duke of Wellington was born, that all men are mortal,

knew that the Duke of Wellington was mortal; but I do say that he asserted it;

and I ask for an explanation of the apparent logical fallacy, of adducing in

proof of the Duke of Wellington’s mortality, a general statement which

presupposes it. Finding no sufficient resolution of this difficulty in any of the

writers on Logic, I have attempted to supply one.

        58
               The language of ratiocination would, I think, be brought into

closer agreement with the real nature of the process, if the general

propositions employed in reasoning, instead of being in the form All men are

mortal, or Every man is mortal, were expressed in the form Any man is

mortal. This mode of expression, exhibiting as the type of all reasoning from

experience “The men A, B, C, etc., are so and so, therefore any man is so and

so,” would much better manifest the true idea — that inductive reasoning is

always, at bottom, inference from particulars to particulars, and that the

whole function of general propositions in reasoning, is to vouch for the

legitimacy of such inferences.

        59
               Review of Quetelet on Probabilities, Essays , p. 367.

        60
               Philosophy of Discovery , p. 289.

        61
               Theory of Reasoning , chap. iv., to which I may refer for an ablestatement and enforcement of the grounds of the doctrine.

        62
               On a recent careful reperusal of Berkeley’s whole works, I have

been unable to find this doctrine in them. Sir John Herschel probably meant

that it is implied in Berkeley’s argument against abstract ideas. But I can not

find that Berkeley saw the implication, or had ever asked himself what

bearing his argument had on the theory of the syllogism. Still less can I admit

that the doctrine is (as has been affirmed by one of my ablest and most candid

critics) “among the standing marks of what is called the empirical

philosophy.”

        63
               Logic , book iv., chap. i., sect. 1.

        64
               See the important chapter on Belief, in Professor Bain’s great

treatise, The Emotions and the Will , pp. 581–4.

        65
               A writer in the “British Quarterly Review” (August, 1846), in a

review of this treatise, endeavors to show that there is no petitio principii in

the syllogism, by denying that the proposition, All men are mortal, asserts or

assumes that Socrates is mortal. In support of this denial, he argues that we

may, and in fact do, admit the general proposition that all men are mortal,

without having particularly examined the case of Socrates, and even without

knowing whether the individual so named is a man or something else. But

this of course was never denied. That we can and do draw conclusions

concerning cases specifically unknown to us, is the datum from which all

who discuss this subject must set out. The question is, in what terms the

evidence, or ground, on which we draw these conclusions, may best be

designated — whether it is most correct to say, that the unknown case is

proved by known cases, or that it is proved by a general proposition including

both sets of cases, the unknown and the known? I contend for the former

mode of expression. I hold it an abuse of language to say, that the proof that

Socrates is mortal, is that all men are mortal. Turn it in what way we will, this

seems to me to be asserting that a thing is the proof of itself. Whoever

pronounces the words, All men are mortal, has affirmed that Socrates is

mortal, though he may never have heard of Socrates; for since Socrates,

whether known to be so or not, really is a man, he is included in the words,

All men, and in every assertion of which they are the subject. If the reviewer

does not see that there is a difficulty here, I can only advise him to reconsider

the subject until he does: after which he will be a better judge of the successor failure of an attempt to remove the difficulty. That he had reflected very

little on the point when he wrote his remarks, is shown by his oversight

respecting the dictum de omni et nullo . He acknowledges that this maxim as

commonly expressed — “Whatever is true of a class, is true of every thing

included in the class,” is a mere identical proposition, since the class is

nothing but the things included in it. But he thinks this defect would be cured

by wording the maxim thus — “Whatever is true of a class, is true of every

thing which can be shown to be a member of the class:” as if a thing could

“be shown” to be a member of the class without being one. If a class means

the sum of all the things included in the class, the things which can “be

shown” to be included in it are part of the sum, and the dictum is as much an

identical proposition with respect to them as to the rest. One would almost

imagine that, in the reviewer’s opinion, things are not members of a class

until they are called up publicly to take their place in it — that so long, in

fact, as Socrates is not known to be a man, he is not a man, and any assertion

which can be made concerning men does not at all regard him, nor is affected

as to its truth or falsity by any thing in which he is concerned.

              The difference between the reviewer’s theory and mine may be thus

stated. Both admit that when we say, All men are mortal, we make an

assertion reaching beyond the sphere of our knowledge of individual cases;

and that when a new individual, Socrates, is brought within the field of our

knowledge by means of the minor premise, we learn that we have already

made an assertion respecting Socrates without knowing it: our own general

formula being, to that extent, for the first time interpreted to us. But

according to the reviewer’s theory, the smaller assertion is proved by the

larger: while I contend, that both assertions are proved together, by the same

evidence, namely, the grounds of experience on which the general assertion

was made, and by which it must be justified.

              The reviewer says, that if the major premise included the conclusion,

“we should be able to affirm the conclusion without the intervention of the

minor premise; but every one sees that that is impossible.” A similar

argument is urged by Mr. De Morgan (Formal Logic , p. 259): “The whole

objection tacitly assumes the superfluity of the minor; that is, tacitly assumes

we know Socrates (Mr. De Morgan says ‘Plato,’ but to prevent confusion I

have kept to my own exemplum .) to be a man as soon as we know him to be

Socrates.” The objection would be well grounded if the assertion that themajor premise includes the conclusion, meant that it individually specifies all

it includes. As, however, the only indication it gives is a description by

marks, we have still to compare any new individual with the marks; and to

show that this comparison has been made, is the office of the minor. But

since, by supposition, the new individual has the marks, whether we have

ascertained him to have them or not; if we have affirmed the major premise,

we have asserted him to be mortal. Now my position is that this assertion can

not be a necessary part of the argument. It can not be a necessary condition of

reasoning that we should begin by making an assertion, which is afterward to

be employed in proving a part of itself. I can conceive only one way out of

this difficulty, viz., that what really forms the proof is the other part of the

assertion: the portion of it, the truth of which has been ascertained previously:

and that the unproved part is bound up in one formula with the proved part in

mere anticipation, and as a memorandum of the nature of the conclusions

which we are prepared to prove.

              With respect to the minor premise in its formal shape, the minor as it

stands in the syllogism, predicating of Socrates a definite class name, I

readily admit that it is no more a necessary part of reasoning than the major.

When there is a major, doing its work by means of a class name, minors are

needed to interpret it: but reasoning can be carried on without either the one

or the other. They are not the conditions of reasoning, but a precaution

against erroneous reasoning. The only minor premise necessary to reasoning

in the example under consideration, is, Socrates is like A, B, C, and the other

individuals who are known to have died. And this is the only universal type

of that step in the reasoning process which is represented by the minor.

Experience, however, of the uncertainty of this loose mode of inference,

teaches the expediency of determining beforehand what kind of likeness to

the cases observed, is necessary to bring an unobserved case within the same

predicate; and the answer to this question is the major. The minor then

identifies the precise kind of likeness possessed by Socrates, as being the

kind required by the formula. Thus the syllogistic major and the syllogistic

minor start into existence together, and are called forth by the same exigency.

When we conclude from personal experience without referring to any record

— to any general theorems, either written, or traditional, or mentally

registered by ourselves as conclusions of our own drawing — we do not use,

in our thoughts, either a major or a minor, such as the syllogism puts into

words. When, however, we revise this rough inference from particulars toparticulars, and substitute a careful one, the revision consists in selecting two

syllogistic premises. But this neither alters nor adds to the evidence we had

before; it only puts us in a better position for judging whether our inference

from particulars to particulars is well grounded.

        66
               Infra, book iii., chap. ii.

        67
               Infra, book iii., ch. iv., § 3, and elsewhere.

        68
               It is justly remarked by Professor Bain (Logic , ii., 134) that the

word Hypothesis is here used in a somewhat peculiar sense. An hypothesis,

in science, usually means a supposition not proved to be true, but surmised to

be so, because if true it would account for certain known facts; and the final

result of the speculation may be to prove its truth. The hypotheses spoken of

in the text are of a different character; they are known not to be literally true,

while as much of them as is true is not hypothetical, but certain. The two

cases, however, resemble in the circumstance that in both we reason, not

from a truth, but from an assumption, and the truth therefore of the

conclusions is conditional, not categorical. This suffices to justify, in point of

logical propriety, Stewart’s use of the term. It is of course needful to bear in

mind that the hypothetical element in the definitions of geometry is the

assumption that what is very nearly true is exactly so. This unreal exactitude

might be called a fiction, as properly as an hypothesis; but that appellation,

still more than the other, would fail to point out the close relation which

exists between the fictitious point or line and the points and lines of which we

have experience.

        69
               Mechanical Euclid , pp. 149 et seqq.

        70
               We might, it is true, insert this property into the definition of

parallel lines, framing the definition so as to require, both that when produced

indefinitely they shall never meet, and also that any straight line which

intersects one of them shall, if prolonged, meet the other. But by doing this

we by no means get rid of the assumption; we are still obliged to take for

granted the geometrical truth, that all straight lines in the same plane, which

have the former of these properties, have also the latter. For if it were

possible that they should not, that is, if any straight lines in the same plane,

other than those which are parallel according to the definition, had the

property of never meeting although indefinitely produced, the demonstrations

of the subsequent portions of the theory of parallels could not be maintained.        71
               Some persons find themselves prevented from believing that the

axiom, Two straight lines can not inclose a space, could ever become known

to us through experience, by a difficulty which may be stated as follows: If

the straight lines spoken of are those contemplated in the definition — lines

absolutely without breadth and absolutely straight — that such are incapable

of inclosing a space is not proved by experience, for lines such as these do

not present themselves in our experience. If, on the other hand, the lines

meant are such straight lines as we do meet with in experience, lines straight

enough for practical purposes, but in reality slightly zigzag, and with some,

however trifling, breadth; as applied to these lines the axiom is not true, for

two of them may, and sometimes do, inclose a small portion of space. In

neither case, therefore, does experience prove the axiom.

              Those who employ this argument to show that geometrical axioms

can not be proved by induction, show themselves unfamiliar with a common

and perfectly valid mode of inductive proof; proof by approximation. Though

experience furnishes us with no lines so unimpeachably straight that two of

them are incapable of inclosing the smallest space, it presents us with

gradations of lines possessing less and less either of breadth or of flexure, of

which series the straight line of the definition is the ideal limit. And

observation shows that just as much, and as nearly, as the straight lines of

experience approximate to having no breadth or flexure, so much and so

nearly does the space-inclosing power of any two of them approach to zero.

The inference that if they had no breadth or flexure at all, they would inclose

no space at all, is a correct inductive inference from these facts, conformable

to one of the four Inductive Methods hereinafter characterized, the Method of

Concomitant Variations; of which the mathematical Doctrine of Limits

presents the extreme case.

        72
               Whewell’s History of Scientific Ideas , i., 140.

        73
               Dr. Whewell (Philosophy of Discovery , p. 289) thinks it

unreasonable to contend that we know by experience, that our idea of a line

exactly resembles a real line. “It does not appear,” he says, “how we can

compare our ideas with the realities, since we know the realities only by our

ideas.” We know the realities by our sensations. Dr. Whewell surely does not

hold the “doctrine of perception by means of ideas,” which Reid gave himself

so much trouble to refute. If Dr. Whewell doubts whether we compare our

ideas with the corresponding sensations, and assume that they resemble, letme ask on what evidence do we judge that a portrait of a person not present is

like the original. Surely because it is like our idea, or mental image of the

person, and because our idea is like the man himself.

              Dr. Whewell also says, that it does not appear why this resemblance

of ideas to the sensations of which they are copies, should be spoken of as if

it were a peculiarity of one class of ideas, those of space. My reply is, that I

do not so speak of it. The peculiarity I contend for is only one of degree. All

our ideas of sensation of course resemble the corresponding sensations, but

they do so with very different degrees of exactness and of reliability. No one,

I presume, can recall in imagination a color or an odor with the same

distinctness and accuracy with which almost every one can mentally

reproduce an image of a straight line or a triangle. To the extent, however, of

their capabilities of accuracy, our recollections of colors or of odors may

serve as subjects of experimentation, as well as those of lines and spaces, and

may yield conclusions which will be true of their external prototypes. A

person in whom, either from natural gift or from cultivation, the impressions

of color were peculiarly vivid and distinct, if asked which of two blue flowers

was of the darkest tinge, though he might never have compared the two, or

even looked at them together, might be able to give a confident answer on the

faith of his distinct recollection of the colors; that is, he might examine his

mental pictures, and find there a property of the outward objects. But in

hardly any case except that of simple geometrical forms, could this be done

by mankind generally, with a degree of assurance equal to that which is given

by a contemplation of the objects themselves. Persons differ most widely in

the precision of their recollection, even of forms: one person, when he has

looked any one in the face for half a minute, can draw an accurate likeness of

him from memory; another may have seen him every day for six months, and

hardly know whether his nose is long or short. But every body has a perfectly

distinct mental image of a straight line, a circle, or a rectangle. And every one

concludes confidently from these mental images to the corresponding

outward things. The truth is, that we may, and continually do, study nature in

our recollections, when the objects themselves are absent; and in the case of

geometrical forms we can perfectly, but in most other cases only imperfectly,

trust our recollections.

        74
               Logic , i., 222.

        75
               Ibid., 226.        76
               History of Scientific Ideas , i., 65–67.

        77
               Ibid., i., 60.

        78
               Ibid., 58, 59.

        79
               “If all mankind had spoken one language, we can not doubt that

there would have been a powerful, perhaps a universal, school of

philosophers, who would have believed in the inherent connection between

names and things, who would have taken the sound man to be the mode of

agitating the air which is essentially communicative of the ideas of reason,

cookery, bipedality, etc.” — De Morgan, Formal Logic , p. 246.

        80
               It would be difficult to name a man more remarkable at once for

the greatness and the wide range of his mental accomplishments, than

Leibnitz. Yet this eminent man gave as a reason for rejecting Newton’s

scheme of the solar system, that God could not make a body revolve round a

distant centre, unless either by some impelling mechanism, or by miracle:

“Tout ce qui n’est pas explicable,” says he in a letter to the Abbé Conti, “par

la nature des créatures, est miraculeux. Il ne suffit pas de dire: Dieu a fait une

telle loi de nature; donc la chose est naturelle. Il faut que la loi soit exécutable

par les natures des créatures. Si Dien donnait cette loi, par exemple, à un

corps libre, de tourner à l’entour d’un certain centre, il faudrait ou qu’il y

joignît d’autres corps qui par leur impulsion l’obligeassent de rester toujours

dans son orbite circulaire, ou qu’il mît un ange à ses trousses, ou enfin il

faudrait qu’il y concourût extraordinairement ; car naturellement il s’écartera

par la tangente.” — Works of Leibnitz , ed. Dutens, iii., 446.

        81
               Novum Organum Renovatum , pp. 32, 33.

        82
               History of Scientific Ideas , i., 264.

        83
               Ibid., i., 263.

        84
               Ibid., 240.

        85
               Hist. Scientific Ideas , ii., 25, 26.

        86
               Phil. of Disc. , p. 339.

        87
               Phil. of Disc. , p. 338.

        88
               Ibid., p. 463.        89
               Phil. of Disc. , pp. 472, 473.

        90
               The Quarterly Review for June, 1841, contained an article of great

ability on Dr. Whewell’s two great works (since acknowledged and reprinted

in Sir John Herschel’s Essays) which maintains, on the subject of axioms, the

doctrine advanced in the text, that they are generalizations from experience,

and supports that opinion by a line of argument strikingly coinciding with

mine. When I state that the whole of the present chapter (except the last four

pages, added in the fifth edition) was written before I had seen the article (the

greater part, indeed, before it was published), it is not my object to occupy

the reader’s attention with a matter so unimportant as the degree of originality

which may or may not belong to any portion of my own speculations, but to

obtain for an opinion which is opposed to reigning doctrines, the

recommendation derived from a striking concurrence of sentiment between

two inquirers entirely independent of one another. I embrace the opportunity

of citing from a writer of the extensive acquirements in physical and

metaphysical knowledge and the capacity of systematic thought which the

article evinces, passages so remarkably in unison with my own views as the

following:

              “The truths of geometry are summed up and embodied in its

definitions and axioms.... Let us turn to the axioms, and what do we find? A

string of propositions concerning magnitude in the abstract, which are equally

true of space, time, force, number, and every other magnitude susceptible of

aggregation and subdivision. Such propositions, where they are not mere

definitions, as some of them are, carry their inductive origin on the face of

their enunciation.... Those which declare that two straight lines can not

inclose a space, and that two straight lines which cut one another can not both

be parallel to a third, are in reality the only ones which express characteristic

properties of space, and these it will be worth while to consider more nearly.

Now the only clear notion we can form of straightness is uniformity of

direction, for space in its ultimate analysis is nothing but an assemblage of

distances and directions. And (not to dwell on the notion of continued

contemplation, i.e. , mental experience, as included in the very idea of

uniformity; nor on that of transfer of the contemplating being from point to

point, and of experience, during such transfer, of the homogeneity of the

interval passed over) we can not even propose the proposition in an

intelligible form to any one whose experience ever since he was born has notassured him of the fact. The unity of direction, or that we can not march from

a given point by more than one path direct to the same object, is matter of

practical experience long before it can by possibility become matter of

abstract thought. We can not attempt mentally to exemplify the conditions of

the assertion in an imaginary case opposed to it, without violating our

habitual recollection of this experience, and defacing our mental picture of

space as grounded on it. What but experience, we may ask, can possibly

assure us of the homogeneity of the parts of distance, time, force, and

measurable aggregates in general, on which the truth of the other axioms

depends? As regards the latter axiom, after what has been said it must be

clear that the very same course of remarks equally applies to its case, and that

its truth is quite as much forced on the mind as that of the former by daily and

hourly experience, ... including always, be it observed, in our notion of

experience, that which is gained by contemplation of the inward picture

which the mind forms to itself in any proposed case, or which it arbitrarily

selects as an example — such picture, in virtue of the extreme simplicity of

these primary relations, being called up by the imagination with as much

vividness and clearness as could be done by any external impression, which

is the only meaning we can attach to the word intuition, as applied to such

relations .”

              And again, of the axioms of mechanics: “As we admit no such

propositions, other than as truths inductively collected from observation, even

in geometry itself, it can hardly be expected that, in a science of obviously

contingent relations, we should acquiesce in a contrary view. Let us take one

of these axioms and examine its evidence: for instance, that equal forces

perpendicularly applied at the opposite ends of equal arms of a straight lever

will balance each other. What but experience, we may ask, in the first place,

can possibly inform us that a force so applied will have any tendency to turn

the lever on its centre at all? or that force can be so transmitted along a rigid

line perpendicular to its direction, as to act elsewhere in space than along its

own line of action? Surely this is so far from being self-evident that it has

even a paradoxical appearance, which is only to be removed by giving our

lever thickness, material composition, and molecular powers. Again, we

conclude, that the two forces, being equal and applied under precisely similar

circumstances, must, if they exert any effort at all to turn the lever, exert

equal and opposite efforts: but what a priori reasoning can possibly assure us

that they do act under precisely similar circumstances? that points whichdiffer in place are similarly circumstanced as regards the exertion of force?

that universal space may not have relations to universal force — or, at all

events, that the organization of the material universe may not be such as to

place that portion of space occupied by it in such relations to the forces

exerted in it, as may invalidate the absolute similarity of circumstances

assumed? Or we may argue, what have we to do with the notion of angular

movement in the lever at all? The case is one of rest, and of quiescent

destruction of force by force. Now how is this destruction effected?

Assuredly by the counter-pressure which supports the fulcrum. But would not

this destruction equally arise, and by the same amount of counteracting force,

if each force simply pressed its own half of the lever against the fulcrum?

And what can assure us that it is not so, except removal of one or other force,

and consequent tilting of the lever? The other fundamental axiom of statics,

that the pressure on the point of support is the sum of the weights ... is merely

a scientific transformation and more refined mode of stating a coarse and

obvious result of universal experience, viz., that the weight of a rigid body is

the same, handle it or suspend it in what position or by what point we will,

and that whatever sustains it sustains its total weight. Assuredly, as Mr.

Whewell justly remarks, ‘No one probably ever made a trial for the purpose

of showing that the pressure on the support is equal to the sum of the

weights.’ ... But it is precisely because in every action of his life from earliest

infancy he has been continually making the trial, and seeing it made by every

other living being about him, that he never dreams of staking its result on one

additional attempt made with scientific accuracy. This would be as if a man

should resolve to decide by experiment whether his eyes were useful for the

purpose of seeing, by hermetically sealing himself up for half an hour in a

metal case.”

              On the “paradox of universal propositions obtained by experience,”

the same writer says: “If there be necessary and universal truths expressible

in propositions of axiomatic simplicity and obviousness, and having for their

subject-matter the elements of all our experience and all our knowledge,

surely these are the truths which, if experience suggest to us any truths at all,

it ought to suggest most readily, clearly, and unceasingly. If it were a truth,

universal and necessary, that a net is spread over the whole surface of every

planetary globe, we should not travel far on our own without getting

entangled in its meshes, and making the necessity of some means of

extrication an axiom of locomotion.... There is, therefore, nothingparadoxical, but the reverse, in our being led by observation to a recognition

of such truths, as general propositions, co-extensive at least with all human

experience. That they pervade all the objects of experience, must insure their

continual suggestion by experience; that they are true, must insure that

consistency of suggestion, that iteration of uncontradicted assertion, which

commands implicit assent, and removes all occasion of exception; that they

are simple, and admit of no misunderstanding, must secure their admission by

every mind.”

              “A truth, necessary and universal, relative to any object of our

knowledge, must verify itself in every instance where that object is before our

contemplation, and if at the same time it be simple and intelligible, its

verification must be obvious. The sentiment of such a truth can not, therefore,

but be present to our minds whenever that object is contemplated, and must

therefore make a part of the mental picture or idea of that object which we

may on any occasion summon before our imagination.... All propositions,

therefore, become not only untrue but inconceivable , if ... axioms be violated

in their enunciation.”

              Another eminent mathematician had previously sanctioned by his

authority the doctrine of the origin of geometrical axioms in experience.

“Geometry is thus founded likewise on observation; but of a kind so familiar

and obvious, that the primary notions which it furnishes might seem

intuitive.” — Sir John Leslie , quoted by Sir William Hamilton, Discourses ,

etc., p. 272.

        91
               Principles of Psychology.

        92
               Mr. Spencer is mistaken in supposing me to claim any peculiar

“necessity” for this axiom as compared with others. I have corrected the

expressions which led him into that misapprehension of my meaning.

        93
               Mr. Spencer, in recently returning to the subject (Principles of

Psychology, new edition, chap. xii.: “The Test of Relative Validity”), makes

two answers to the preceding remarks. One is:

              “Were an argument formed by repeating the same proposition over

and over again, it would be true that any intrinsic fallibility of the postulate

would not make the conclusion more untrustworthy than the first step. But an

argument consists of unlike propositions. Now, since Mr. Mill’s criticism onthe Universal Postulate is that in some cases, which he names, it has proved

to be an untrustworthy test; it follows that in any argument consisting of

heterogeneous propositions, there is a risk, increasing as the number of

propositions increases, that some one of them belongs to this class of cases,

and is wrongly accepted because of the inconceivableness of its negation.”

              No doubt: but this supposes new premises to be taken in. The point

we are discussing is the fallibility not of the premises, but of the reasoning, as

distinguished from the premises. Now the validity of the reasoning depends

always upon the same axiom, repeated (in thought) “over and over again,”

viz., that whatever has a mark, has what it is a mark of. Even, therefore, on

the assumption that this axiom rests ultimately on the Universal Postulate,

and that, the Postulate not being wholly trustworthy, the axiom may be one of

the cases of its failure; all the risk there is of this is incurred at the very first

step of the reasoning, and is not added to, however long may be the series of

subsequent steps.

              I am here arguing, of course, from Mr. Spencer’s point of view.

From my own the case is still clearer; for, in my view, the truth that whatever

has a mark has what it is a mark of, is wholly trustworthy, and derives none

of its evidence from so very untrustworthy a test as the inconceivability of the

negative.

              Mr. Spencer’s second answer is valid up to a certain point; it is, that

every prolongation of the process involves additional chances of casual error,

from carelessness in the reasoning operation. This is an important

consideration in the private speculations of an individual reasoner; and even

with respect to mankind at large, it must be admitted that, though mere

oversights in the syllogistic process, like errors of addition in an account, are

special to the individual, and seldom escape detection, confusion of thought

produced (for example) by ambiguous terms has led whole nations or ages to

accept fallacious reasoning as valid. But this very fact points to causes of

error so much more dangerous than the mere length of the process, as quite to

vitiate the doctrine that the “test of the relative validities of conflicting

conclusions” is the number of times the fundamental postulate is involved.

On the contrary, the subjects on which the trains of reasoning are longest, and

the assumption, therefore, oftenest repeated, are in general those which are

best fortified against the really formidable causes of fallacy; as in the

example already given of mathematics.        94
               Mr. Spencer makes a distinction between conceiving myself

looking into darkness, and conceiving that I am then and there looking into

darkness. To me it seems that this change of the expression to the form I am ,

just marks the transition from conception to belief, and that the phrase “to

conceive that I am ,” or “that any thing is ,” is not consistent with using the

word conceive in its rigorous sense.

        95
               I have myself accepted the contest, and fought it out on this battle-

ground, in the eleventh chapter of An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s

Philosophy.

        96
               Chap. xi.

        97
               In one of the three cases, Mr. Spencer, to my no small surprise,

thinks that the belief of mankind “can not be rightly said to have undergone”

the change I allege. Mr. Spencer himself still thinks we are unable to

conceive gravitation acting through empty space. “If an astronomer avowed

that he could conceive gravitative force as exercised through space absolutely

void, my private opinion would be that he mistook the nature of conception.

Conception implies representation. Here the elements of the representation

are the two bodies and an agency by which either affects the other. To

conceive this agency is to represent it in some terms derived from our

experiences — that is, from our sensations. As this agency gives us no

sensations, we are obliged (if we try to conceive it) to use symbols idealized

from our sensations — imponderable units forming a medium.”

              If Mr. Spencer means that the action of gravitation gives us no

sensations, the assertion is one than which I have not seen, in the writings of

philosophers, many more startling. What other sensation do we need than the

sensation of one body moving toward another? “The elements of the

representation” are not two bodies and an “agency,” but two bodies and an

effect; viz., the fact of their approaching one another. If we are able to

conceive a vacuum, is there any difficulty in conceiving a body falling to the

earth through it?

        98
               Discussions , etc., 2d ed., p. 624.

        99
               Professor Bain (Logic , i., 16) identifies the Principle of

Contradiction with his Law of Relativity, viz., that “every thing that can be

thought of, every affirmation that can be made, has an opposite or counternotion or affirmation;” a proposition which is one of the general results of the

whole body of human experience. For further considerations respecting the

axioms of Contradiction and Excluded Middle, see the twenty-first chapter of

An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy .

        100
               Dr. Whewell thinks it improper to apply the term Induction to any

operation not terminating in the establishment of a general truth. Induction,

he says (Philosophy of Discovery , p. 245), “is not the same thing as

experience and observation. Induction is experience or observation

consciously looked at in a general form. This consciousness and generality

are necessary parts of that knowledge which is science.” And he objects (p.

241) to the mode in which the word Induction is employed in this work, as an

undue extension of that term “not only to the cases in which the general

induction is consciously applied to a particular instance, but to the cases in

which the particular instance is dealt with by means of experience in that rude

sense in which experience can be asserted of brutes, and in which of course

we can in no way imagine that the law is possessed or understood as a

general proposition.” This use of the term he deems a “confusion of

knowledge with practical tendencies.”

              I disclaim, as strongly as Dr. Whewell can do, the application of

such terms as induction, inference, or reasoning, to operations performed by

mere instinct, that is, from an animal impulse, without the exertion of any

intelligence. But I perceive no ground for confining the use of those terms to

cases in which the inference is drawn in the forms and with the precautions

required by scientific propriety. To the idea of Science, an express

recognition and distinct apprehension of general laws as such, is essential:

but nine-tenths of the conclusions drawn from experience in the course of

practical life, are drawn without any such recognition: they are direct

inferences from known cases, to a case supposed to be similar. I have

endeavored to show that this is not only as legitimate an operation, but

substantially the same operation, as that of ascending from known cases to a

general proposition; except that the latter process has one great security for

correctness which the former does not possess. In science, the inference must

necessarily pass through the intermediate stage of a general proposition,

because Science wants its conclusions for record, and not for instantaneous

use. But the inferences drawn for the guidance of practical affairs, by persons

who would often be quite incapable of expressing in unexceptionable termsthe corresponding generalizations, may and frequently do exhibit intellectual

powers quite equal to any which have ever been displayed in science; and if

these inferences are not inductive, what are they? The limitation imposed on

the term by Dr. Whewell seems perfectly arbitrary; neither justified by any

fundamental distinction between what he includes and what he desires to

exclude, nor sanctioned by usage, at least from the time of Reid and Stewart,

the principal legislators (as far as the English language is concerned) of

modern metaphysical terminology.

        101
               Supra, p. 145.

        102
               Novum Organum Renovatum , pp. 72, 73.

        103
               Novum Organum Renovatum , p. 32.

        104
               Cours de Philosophie Positive , vol. ii., p. 202.

        105
               Dr. Whewell, in his reply, contests the distinction here drawn, and

maintains, that not only different descriptions, but different explanations of a

phenomenon, may all be true. Of the three theories respecting the motions of

the heavenly bodies, he says (Philosophy of Discovery , p. 231):

“Undoubtedly all these explanations may be true and consistent with each

other, and would be so if each had been followed out so as to show in what

manner it could be made consistent with the facts. And this was, in reality, in

a great measure done. The doctrine that the heavenly bodies were moved by

vortices was successfully modified, so that it came to coincide in its results

with the doctrine of an inverse-quadratic centripetal force.... When this point

was reached, the vortex was merely a machinery, well or ill devised, for

producing such a centripetal force, and therefore did not contradict the

doctrine of a centripetal force. Newton himself does not appear to have been

averse to explaining gravity by impulse. So little is it true that if one theory

be true the other must be false. The attempt to explain gravity by the impulse

of streams of particles flowing through the universe in all directions, which I

have mentioned in the Philosophy , is so far from being inconsistent with the

Newtonian theory, that it is founded entirely upon it. And even with regard to

the doctrine, that the heavenly bodies move by an inherent virtue; if this

doctrine had been maintained in any such way that it was brought to agree

with the facts, the inherent virtue must have had its laws determined; and

then it would have been found that the virtue had a reference to the central

body; and so, the ‘inherent virtue’ must have coincided in its effect with theNewtonian force; and then, the two explanations would agree, except so far

as the word ‘inherent’ was concerned. And if such a part of an earlier theory

as this word inherent indicates, is found to be untenable, it is of course

rejected in the transition to later and more exact theories, in Inductions of this

kind, as well as in what Mr. Mill calls Descriptions. There is, therefore, still

no validity discoverable in the distinction which Mr. Mill attempts to draw

between descriptions like Kepler’s law of elliptical orbits, and other examples

of induction.”

              If the doctrine of vortices had meant, not that vortices existed, but

only that the planets moved in the same manner as if they had been whirled

by vortices; if the hypothesis had been merely a mode of representing the

facts, not an attempt to account for them; if, in short, it had been only a

Description; it would, no doubt, have been reconcilable with the Newtonian

theory. The vortices, however, were not a mere aid to conceiving the motions

of the planets, but a supposed physical agent, actively impelling them; a

material fact, which might be true or not true, but could not be both true and

not true. According to Descartes’s theory it was true, according to Newton’s

it was not true. Dr. Whewell probably means that since the phrases,

centripetal and projectile force, do not declare the nature but only the

direction of the forces, the Newtonian theory does not absolutely contradict

any hypothesis which may be framed respecting the mode of their

production. The Newtonian theory, regarded as a mere description of the

planetary motions, does not; but the Newtonian theory as an explanation of

them does. For in what does the explanation consist? In ascribing those

motions to a general law which obtains between all particles of matter, and in

identifying this with the law by which bodies fall to the ground. If the planets

are kept in their orbits by a force which draws the particles composing them

toward every other particle of matter in the solar system, they are not kept in

those orbits by the impulsive force of certain streams of matter which whirl

them round. The one explanation absolutely excludes the other. Either the

planets are not moved by vortices, or they do not move by a law common to

all matter. It is impossible that both opinions can be true. As well might it be

said that there is no contradiction between the assertions, that a man died

because somebody killed him, and that he died a natural death.

              So, again, the theory that the planets move by a virtue inherent in

their celestial nature, is incompatible with either of the two others: either thatof their being moved by vortices, or that which regards them as moving by a

property which they have in common with the earth and all terrestrial bodies.

Dr. Whewell says that the theory of an inherent virtue agrees with Newton’s

when the word inherent is left out, which of course it would be (he says) if

“found to be untenable.” But leave that out, and where is the theory? The

word inherent is the theory. When that is omitted, there remains nothing

except that the heavenly bodies move “by a virtue,” i.e. , by a power of some

sort; or by virtue of their celestial nature, which directly contradicts the

doctrine that terrestrial bodies fall by the same law.

              If Dr. Whewell is not yet satisfied, any other subject will serve

equally well to test his doctrine. He will hardly say that there is no

contradiction between the emission theory and the undulatory theory of light;

or that there can be both one and two electricities; or that the hypothesis of

the production of the higher organic forms by development from the lower,

and the supposition of separate and successive acts of creation, are quite

reconcilable; or that the theory that volcanoes are fed from a central fire, and

the doctrines which ascribe them to chemical action at a comparatively small

depth below the earth’s surface, are consistent with one another, and all true

as far as they go.

              If different explanations of the same fact can not both be true, still

less, surely, can different predictions. Dr. Whewell quarrels (on what ground

it is not necessary here to consider) with the example I had chosen on this

point, and thinks an objection to an illustration a sufficient answer to a

theory. Examples not liable to his objection are easily found, if the

proposition that conflicting predictions can not both be true, can be made

clearer by many examples. Suppose the phenomenon to be a newly-

discovered comet, and that one astronomer predicts its return once in every

300 years — another once in every 400: can they both be right? When

Columbus predicted that by sailing constantly westward he should in time

return to the point from which he set out, while others asserted that he could

never do so except by turning back, were both he and his opponents true

prophets? Were the predictions which foretold the wonders of railways and

steamships, and those which averred that the Atlantic could never be crossed

by steam navigation, nor a railway train propelled ten miles an hour, both (in

Dr. Whewell’s words) “true, and consistent with one another?”

              Dr. Whewell sees no distinction between holding contradictoryopinions on a question of fact, and merely employing different analogies to

facilitate the conception of the same fact. The case of different Inductions

belongs to the former class, that of different Descriptions to the latter.

        106
               Phil. of Discov. , p. 256.

        107
               Essays on the Pursuit of Truth.

        108
               In the first edition a note was appended at this place, containing

some criticism on Archbishop Whately’s mode of conceiving the relation

between Syllogism and Induction. In a subsequent issue of his Logic , the

Archbishop made a reply to the criticism, which induced me to cancel part of

the note, incorporating the remainder in the text. In a still later edition, the

Archbishop observes in a tone of something like disapprobation, that the

objections, “doubtless from their being fully answered and found untenable,

were silently suppressed,” and that hence he might appear to some of his

readers to be combating a shadow. On this latter point, the Archbishop need

give himself no uneasiness. His readers, I make bold to say, will fully credit

his mere affirmation that the objections have actually been made.

              But as he seems to think that what he terms the suppression of the

objections ought not to have been made “silently,” I now break that silence,

and state exactly what it is that I suppressed, and why. I suppressed that alone

which might be regarded as personal criticism on the Archbishop. I had

imputed to him the having omitted to ask himself a particular question. I

found that he had asked himself the question, and could give it an answer

consistent with his own theory. I had also, within the compass of a

parenthesis, hazarded some remarks on certain general characteristics of

Archbishop Whately as a philosopher. These remarks, though their tone, I

hope, was neither disrespectful nor arrogant, I felt, on reconsideration, that I

was hardly entitled to make; least of all, when the instance which I had

regarded as an illustration of them, failed, as I now saw, to bear them out.

The real matter at the bottom of the whole dispute, the different view we take

of the function of the major premise, remains exactly where it was; and so far

was I from thinking that my opinion had been fully “answered” and was

“untenable,” that in the same edition in which I canceled the note, I not only

enforced the opinion by further arguments, but answered (though without

naming him) those of the Archbishop.

              For not having made this statement before, I do not think it needfulto apologize. It would be attaching very great importance to one’s smallest

sayings, to think a formal retractation requisite every time that one falls into

an error. Nor is Archbishop Whately’s well-earned fame of so tender a

quality as to require that in withdrawing a slight criticism on him I should

have been bound to offer a public amende for having made it.

        109
               But though it is a condition of the validity of every induction that

there be uniformity in the course of nature, it is not a necessary condition that

the uniformity should pervade all nature. It is enough that it pervades the

particular class of phenomena to which the induction relates. An induction

concerning the motions of the planets, or the properties of the magnet, would

not be vitiated though we were to suppose that wind and weather are the sport

of chance, provided it be assumed that astronomical and magnetic

phenomena are under the dominion of general laws. Otherwise the early

experience of mankind would have rested on a very weak foundation; for in

the infancy of science it could not be known that all phenomena are regular

in their course.

              Neither would it be correct to say that every induction by which we

infer any truth, implies the general fact of uniformity as foreknown , even in

reference to the kind of phenomena concerned. It implies, either that this

general fact is already known, or that we may now know it: as the

conclusion, the Duke of Wellington is mortal, drawn from the instances A, B,

and C, implies either that we have already concluded all men to be mortal, or

that we are now entitled to do so from the same evidence. A vast amount of

confusion and paralogism respecting the grounds of Induction would be

dispelled by keeping in view these simple considerations.

        110
               Infra, chap. xxi.

        111
               Infra, chap. xxi., xxii.

        112
               In strictness, wherever the present constitution of space exists;

which we have ample reason to believe that it does in the region of the fixed

stars.

        113
               Dr. Whewell (Phil. of Discov. , p. 246) will not allow these and

similar erroneous judgments to be called inductions; inasmuch as such

superstitious fancies “were not collected from the facts by seeking a law of

their occurrence, but were suggested by an imagination of the anger ofsuperior powers, shown by such deviations from the ordinary course of

nature.” I conceive the question to be, not in what manner these notions were

at first suggested, but by what evidence they have, from time to time, been

supposed to be substantiated. If the believers in these erroneous opinions had

been put on their defense, they would have referred to experience: to the

comet which preceded the assassination of Julius Cæsar, or to oracles and

other prophecies known to have been fulfilled. It is by such appeals to facts

that all analogous superstitions, even in our day, attempt to justify

themselves; the supposed evidence of experience is necessary to their hold on

the mind. I quite admit that the influence of such coincidences would not be

what it is, if strength were not lent to it by an antecedent presumption; but

this is not peculiar to such cases; preconceived notions of probability form

part of the explanation of many other cases of belief on insufficient evidence.

The a priori prejudice does not prevent the erroneous opinion from being

sincerely regarded as a legitimate conclusion from experience; though it

improperly predisposes the mind to that interpretation of experience.

              Thus much in defense of the sort of examples objected to. But it

would be easy to produce instances, equally adapted to the purpose, and in

which no antecedent prejudice is at all concerned. “For many ages,” says

Archbishop Whately, “all farmers and gardeners were firmly convinced —

and convinced of their knowing it by experience — that the crops would

never turn out good unless the seed were sown during the increase of the

moon.” This was induction, but bad induction; just as a vicious syllogism is

reasoning, but bad reasoning.

        114
               The assertion, that any and every one of the conditions of a

phenomenon may be and is, on some occasions and for some purposes,

spoken of as the cause, has been disputed by an intelligent reviewer of this

work in the Prospective Review (the predecessor of the justly esteemed

National Review ), who maintains that “we always apply the word cause

rather to that element in the antecedents which exercises force , and which

would tend at all times to produce the same or a similar effect to that which,

under certain conditions, it would actually produce.” And he says, that “every

one would feel” the expression, that the cause of a surprise was the sentinel’s

being off his post, to be incorrect; but that the “allurement or force which

drew him off his post, might be so called, because in doing so it removed a

resisting power which would have prevented the surprise.” I can not thinkthat it would be wrong to say, that the event took place because the sentinel

was absent, and yet right to say that it took place because he was bribed to be

absent. Since the only direct effect of the bribe was his absence, the bribe

could be called the remote cause of the surprise, only on the supposition that

the absence was the proximate cause; nor does it seem to me that any one

(who had not a theory to support) would use the one expression and reject the

other.

              The reviewer observes, that when a person dies of poison, his

possession of bodily organs is a necessary condition, but that no one would

ever speak of it as the cause. I admit the fact; but I believe the reason to be,

that the occasion could never arise for so speaking of it; for when in the

inaccuracy of common discourse we are led to speak of some one condition

of a phenomenon as its cause, the condition so spoken of is always one which

it is at least possible that the hearer may require to be informed of. The

possession of bodily organs is a known condition, and to give that as the

answer, when asked the cause of a person’s death, would not supply the

information sought. Once conceive that a doubt could exist as to his having

bodily organs, or that he were to be compared with some being who had them

not, and cases may be imagined in which it might be said that his possession

of them was the cause of his death. If Faust and Mephistopheles together took

poison, it might be said that Faust died because he was a human being, and

had a body, while Mephistopheles survived because he was a spirit.

              It is for the same reason that no one (as the reviewer remarks) “calls

the cause of a leap, the muscles or sinews of the body, though they are

necessary conditions; nor the cause of a self-sacrifice, the knowledge which

was necessary for it; nor the cause of writing a book, that a man has time for

it, which is a necessary condition.” These conditions (besides that they are

antecedent states , and not proximate antecedent events , and are therefore

never the conditions in closest apparent proximity to the effect) are all of

them so obviously implied, that it is hardly possible there should exist that

necessity for insisting on them, which alone gives occasion for speaking of a

single condition as if it were the cause. Wherever this necessity exists in

regard to some one condition, and does not exist in regard to any other, I

conceive that it is consistent with usage, when scientific accuracy is not

aimed at, to apply the name cause to that one condition. If the only condition

which can be supposed to be unknown is a negative condition, the negativecondition may be spoken of as the cause. It might be said that a person died

for want of medical advice: though this would not be likely to be said, unless

the person was already understood to be ill, and in order to indicate that this

negative circumstance was what made the illness fatal, and not the weakness

of his constitution, or the original virulence of the disease. It might be said

that a person was drowned because he could not swim; the positive condition,

namely, that he fell into the water, being already implied in the word

drowned. And here let me remark, that his falling into the water is in this case

the only positive condition: all the conditions not expressly or virtually

included in this (as that he could not swim, that nobody helped him, and so

forth) are negative. Yet, if it were simply said that the cause of a man’s death

was falling into the water, there would be quite as great a sense of

impropriety in the expression, as there would be if it were said that the cause

was his inability to swim; because, though the one condition is positive and

the other negative, it would be felt that neither of them was sufficient,

without the other, to produce death.

              With regard to the assertion that nothing is termed the cause, except

the element which exerts active force; I waive the question as to the meaning

of active force, and accepting the phrase in its popular sense, I revert to a

former example, and I ask, would it be more agreeable to custom to say that a

man fell because his foot slipped in climbing a ladder, or that he fell because

of his weight? for his weight, and not the motion of his foot, was the active

force which determined his fall. If a person walking out in a frosty day,

stumbled and fell, it might be said that he stumbled because the ground was

slippery, or because he was not sufficiently careful: but few people, I

suppose, would say, that he stumbled because he walked. Yet the only active

force concerned was that which he exerted in walking: the others were mere

negative conditions; but they happened to be the only ones which there could

be any necessity to state; for he walked, most likely, in exactly his usual

manner, and the negative conditions made all the difference. Again, if a

person were asked why the army of Xerxes defeated that of Leonidas, he

would probably say, because they were a thousand times the number; but I do

not think he would say, it was because they fought, though that was the

element of active force. To borrow another example, used by Mr. Grove and

by Mr. Baden Powell, the opening of flood-gates is said to be the cause of the

flow of water; yet the active force is exerted by the water itself, and opening

the flood-gates merely supplies a negative condition. The reviewer adds,“There are some conditions absolutely passive, and yet absolutely necessary

to physical phenomena, viz., the relations of space and time; and to these no

one ever applies the word cause without being immediately arrested by those

who hear him.” Even from this statement I am compelled to dissent. Few

persons would feel it incongruous to say (for example) that a secret became

known because it was spoken of when A. B. was within hearing; which is a

condition of space: or that the cause why one of two particular trees is taller

than the other, is that it has been longer planted; which is a condition of time.

        115
               There are a few exceptions; for there are some properties of

objects which seem to be purely preventive; as the property of opaque bodies,

by which they intercept the passage of light. This, as far as we are able to

understand it, appears an instance not of one cause counteracting another by

the same law whereby it produces its own effects, but of an agency which

manifests itself in no other way than in defeating the effects of another

agency. If we knew on what other relations to light, or on what peculiarities

of structure, opacity depends, we might find that this is only an apparent, not

a real, exception to the general proposition in the text. In any case it needs not

affect the practical application. The formula which includes all the negative

conditions of an effect in the single one of the absence of counteracting

causes, is not violated by such cases as this; though, if all counteracting

agencies were of this description, there would be no purpose served by

employing the formula.

        116
               I mean by this expression, the ultimate laws of nature (whatever

they may be) as distinguished from the derivative laws and from the

collocations. The diurnal revolution of the earth (for example) is not a part of

the constitution of things, because nothing can be so called which might

possibly be terminated or altered by natural causes.

        117
               I use the words “straight line” for brevity and simplicity. In reality

the line in question is not exactly straight, for, from the effect of refraction,

we actually see the sun for a short interval during which the opaque mass of

the earth is interposed in a direct line between the sun and our eyes; thus

realizing, though but to a limited extent, the coveted desideratum of seeing

round a corner.

        118
               Second Burnett Prize Essay , by Principal Tulloch, p. 25.

        119
               Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind , First Series, p.219.

        120
               Essays , pp. 206–208.

        121
               To the universality which mankind are agreed in ascribing to the

Law of Causation, there is one claim of exception, one disputed case, that of

the Human Will; the determinations of which, a large class of metaphysicians

are not willing to regard as following the causes called motives, according to

as strict laws as those which they suppose to exist in the world of mere

matter. This controverted point will undergo a special examination when we

come to treat particularly of the Logic of the Moral Sciences (Book vi., chap.

2). In the mean time, I may remark that these metaphysicians, who, it must be

observed, ground the main part of their objection on the supposed repugnance

of the doctrine in question to our consciousness, seem to me to mistake the

fact which consciousness testifies against. What is really in contradiction to

consciousness, they would, I think, on strict self-examination, find to be, the

application to human actions and volitions of the ideas involved in the

common use of the term Necessity; which I agree with them in objecting to.

But if they would consider that by saying that a person’s actions necessarily

follow from his character, all that is really meant (for no more is meant in any

case whatever of causation) is that he invariably does act in conformity to his

character, and that any one who thoroughly knew his character could

certainly predict how he would act in any supposable case; they probably

would not find this doctrine either contrary to their experience or revolting to

their feelings. And no more than this is contended for by any one but an

Asiatic fatalist.

        122
               I believe, however, the accredited authorities do suppose that

molecular motion, equivalent in amount to that which will be manifested in

the combustion of the coal, is actually taking place during the whole of the

long interval, if not in the coal, yet in the oxygen which will then combine

with it. But how purely hypothetical this supposition is, need hardly be

remarked; I venture to say, unnecessarily and extravagantly hypothetical.

        123
               Lectures on Metaphysics , vol. ii., Lect. xxxix., pp. 391–2.

              I regret that I can not invoke the authority of Sir William Hamilton

in favor of my own opinions on Causation, as I can against the particular

theory which I am now combating. But that acute thinker has a theory of

Causation peculiar to himself, which has never yet, as far as I know, beenanalytically examined, but which, I venture to think, admits of as complete

refutation as any one of the false or insufficient psychological theories which

strew the ground in such numbers under his potent metaphysical scythe.

(Since examined and controverted in the sixteenth chapter of An Examination

of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy .)

        124
               Unless we are to consider as such the following statement, by one

of the writers quoted in the text: “In the case of mental exertion, the result to

be accomplished is preconsidered or meditated, and is therefore known a

priori , or before experience.” — (Bowen’s Lowell Lectures on the

Application of Metaphysical and Ethical Science to the Evidence of Religion .

Boston, 1849.) This is merely saying that when we will a thing we have an

idea of it. But to have an idea of what we wish to happen, does not imply a

prophetic knowledge that it will happen. Perhaps it will be said that the first

time we exerted our will, when we had of course no experience of any of the

powers residing in us, we nevertheless must already have known that we

possessed them, since we can not will that which we do not believe to be in

our power. But the impossibility is perhaps in the words only, and not in the

facts; for we may desire what we do not know to be in our power; and

finding by experience that our bodies move according to our desire , we may

then, and only then, pass into the more complicated mental state which is

termed will.

              After all, even if we had an instinctive knowledge that our actions

would follow our will, this, as Brown remarks, would prove nothing as to the

nature of Causation. Our knowing, previous to experience, that an antecedent

will be followed by a certain consequent, would not prove the relation

between them to be any thing more than antecedence and consequence.

        125
               Reid’s Essays on the Active Powers , Essay iv., chap. 3.

        126
               Prospective Review for February, 1850.

        127
               Vide supra, p. 178, note.

        128
               Westminster Review for October, 1855.

        129
               See the whole doctrine in Aristotle de Ánimâ , where the θρεπτικὴ

ψυχὴ is treated as exactly equivalent to θρεπτικὴ δύναμις.

        130
               It deserves notice that the parts of nature which Aristotle regards

as representing evidence of design, are the Uniformities: the phenomena in sofar as reducible to law. Τύχη and τὸ αὐτομάτον satisfy him as explanations of

the variable element in phenomena, but their occurring according to a fixed

rule can only, to his conceptions, be accounted for by an Intelligent Will. The

common, or what may be called the instinctive, religious interpretation of

nature, is the reverse of this. The events in which men spontaneously see the

hand of a supernatural being, are those which can not, as they think, be

reduced to a physical law. What they can distinctly connect with physical

causes, and especially what they can predict, though of course ascribed to an

Author of Nature, if they already recognize such an author, might be

conceived, they think, to arise from a blind fatality, and in any case do not

appear to them to bear so obviously the mark of a divine will. And this

distinction has been countenanced by eminent writers on Natural Theology,

in particular by Dr. Chalmers, who thinks that though design is present

everywhere, the irresistible evidence of it is to be found not in the laws of

nature but in the collocations, i.e. , in the part of nature in which it is

impossible to trace any law. A few properties of dead matter might, he thinks,

conceivably account for the regular and invariable succession of effects and

causes; but that the different kinds of matter have been so placed as to

promote beneficent ends, is what he regards as the proof of a Divine

Providence. Mr. Baden Powell, in his Essay entitled “Philosophy of

Creation,” has returned to the point of view of Aristotle and the ancients, and

vigorously re-asserts the doctrine that the indication of design in the universe

is not special adaptations, but Uniformity and Law, these being the evidences

of mind, and not what appears to us to be a provision for our uses. While I

decline to express any opinion here on this vexata quæstio , I ought not to

mention Mr. Powell’s volume without the acknowledgment due to the

philosophic spirit which pervades generally the three Essays composing it,

forming in the case of one of them (the “Unity of Worlds”) an honorable

contrast with the other dissertations, so far as they have come under my

notice, which have appeared on either side of that controversy.

        131
               In the words of Fontenelle, another celebrated Cartesian, “les

philosophes aussi bien que le peuple avaient cru que l’âme et le corps

agissaient réellement et physiquement l’un sur l’autre. Descartes vint, qui

prouva que leur nature ne permettait point cette sorte de communication

véritable, et qu’ils n’en pouvaient avoir qu’une apparente, dont Dieu était le

Médiateur.” — (Œuvres de Fontenelle , ed. 1767, tom. v., p. 534.)        132
               I omit, for simplicity, to take into account the effect, in this latter

case, of the diminution of pressure, in diminishing the flow of water through

the drain; which evidently in no way affects the truth or applicability of the

principle, since when the two causes act simultaneously the conditions of that

diminution of pressure do not arise.

        133
               Professor Bain adds several other well-established chemical

generalizations: “The laws that simple substances exhibit the strongest

affinities; that compounds are more fusible than their elements; that

combination tends to a lower state of matter from gas down to solid;” and

some general propositions concerning the circumstances which facilitate or

resist chemical combination. (Logic, ii., 254.)

        134
               Professor Bain (Logic, ii., 39) points out a class of cases, other

than that spoken of in the text, which he thinks must be regarded as an

exception to the Composition of Causes. “Causes that merely make good the

collocation for bringing a prime mover into action, or that release a potential

force, do not follow any such rule. One man may direct a gun upon a fort as

well as three: two sparks are not more effectual than one in exploding a barrel

of gunpowder. In medicine there is a certain dose that answers the end; and

adding to it does no more good.”

              I am not sure that these cases are really exceptions. The law of

Composition of Causes, I think, is really fulfilled, and the appearance to the

contrary is produced by attending to the remote instead of the immediate

effect of the causes. In the cases mentioned, the immediate effect of the

causes in action is a collocation, and the duplication of the cause does double

the quantity of collocation. Two men could raise the gun to the required angle

twice as quickly as one, though one is enough. Two sparks put two sets of

particles of the gunpowder into the state of intestine motion which makes

them explode, though one is sufficient. It is the collocation itself that does

not, by being doubled, always double the effect; because in many cases a

certain collocation, once obtained, is all that is required for the production of

the whole amount of effect which can be produced at all at the given time and

place. Doubling the collocation with difference of time and place, as by

pointing two guns, or exploding a second barrel after the first, does double

the effect. This remark applies still more to Mr. Bain’s third example, that of

a double dose of medicine; for a double dose of an aperient does purge more

violently, and a double dose of laudanum does produce longer and soundersleep. But a double purging, or a double amount of narcotism, may have

remote effects different in kind from the effect of the smaller amount,

reducing the case to that of heteropathic laws, discussed in the text.

        135
               Unless, indeed, the consequent was generated, not by the

antecedent, but by the means employed to produce the antecedent. As,

however, these means are under our power, there is so far a probability that

they are also sufficiently within our knowledge to enable us to judge whether

that could be the case or not.

        136
               Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy , p. 179.

        137
               For this speculation, as for many other of my scientific

illustrations, I am indebted to Professor Bain, whose subsequent treatise on

Logic abounds with apt illustrations of all the inductive methods.

        138
               This view of the necessary co-existence of opposite excitements

involves a great extension of the original doctrine of two electricities. The

early theorists assumed that, when amber was rubbed, the amber was made

positive and the rubber negative to the same degree; but it never occurred to

them to suppose that the existence of the amber charge was dependent on an

opposite charge in the bodies with which the amber was contiguous, while

the existence of the negative charge on the rubber was equally dependent on a

contrary state of the surfaces that might accidentally be confronted with it;

that, in fact, in a case of electrical excitement by friction, four charges were

the minimum that could exist. But this double electrical action is essentially

implied in the explanation now universally adopted in regard to the

phenomena of the common electric machine.

        139
               Pp. 110, 111.

        140
               Infra, book iv., chap. ii., On Abstraction.

        141
               I must, however, remark, that this example, which seems to

militate against the assertion we made of the comparative inapplicability of

the Method of Difference to cases of pure observation, is really one of those

exceptions which, according to a proverbial expression, prove the general

rule. For in this case, in which Nature, in her experiment, seems to have

imitated the type of the experiments made by man, she has only succeeded in

producing the likeness of man’s most imperfect experiments; namely, those

in which, though he succeeds in producing the phenomenon, he does so byemploying complex means, which he is unable perfectly to analyze, and can

form, therefore, no sufficient judgment what portion of the effects may be

due, not to the supposed cause, but to some unknown agency of the means by

which that cause was produced. In the natural experiment which we are

speaking of, the means used was the clearing off a canopy of clouds; and we

certainly do not know sufficiently in what this process consists, or on what it

depends, to be certain a priori that it might not operate upon the deposition of

dew independently of any thermometric effect at the earth’s surface. Even,

therefore, in a case so favorable as this to Nature’s experimental talents, her

experiment is of little value except in corroboration of a conclusion already

attained through other means.

        142
               In his subsequent work, Outlines of Astronomy (§ 570), Sir John

Herschel suggests another possible explanation of the acceleration of the

revolution of a comet.

        143
               Discourse, pp. 156–8, and 171.

        144
               Outlines of Astronomy, § 856.

        145
               Philosophy of Discovery , pp. 263, 264.

        146
               See, on this point, the second chapter of the present book.

        147
               Ante, chap. vii., § 1.

        148
               It seems hardly necessary to say that the word impinge , as a

general term to express collision of forces, is here used by a figure of speech,

and not as expressive of any theory respecting the nature of force.

        149
               Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy , Essay

V.

        150
               It is justly remarked by Professor Bain, that though the Methods

of Agreement and Difference are not applicable to these cases, they are not

wholly inaccessible to the Method of Concomitant Variations. “If a cause

happens to vary alone, the effect will also vary alone: a cause and effect may

be thus singled out under the greatest complications. Thus, when the appetite

for food increases with the cold, we have a strong evidence of connection

between these two facts, although other circumstances may operate in the

same direction. The assigning of the respective parts of the sun and moon in

the action of the tides may be effected, to a certain degree of exactness, bythe variations of the amount according to the positions of the two attractive

bodies. By a series of experiments of Concomitant Variations, directed to

ascertain the elimination of nitrogen from the human body under varieties of

muscular exercise, Dr. Parkes obtained the remarkable conclusion, that a

muscle grows during exercise, and loses bulk during the subsequent rest.”

(Logic , ii., 83.)

              It is, no doubt, often possible to single out the influencing causes

from among a great number of mere concomitants, by noting what are the

antecedents, a variation in which is followed by a variation in the effect. But

when there are many influencing causes, no one of them greatly

predominating over the rest, and especially when some of these are

continually changing, it is scarcely ever possible to trace such a relation

between the variations of the effect and those of any one cause as would

enable us to assign to that cause its real share in the production of the effect.

        151
               Bain’s Logic , ii., 360.

        152
               What is said in the text on the applicability of the experimental

methods to resolve particular questions of medical treatment, does not detract

from their efficacy in ascertaining the general laws of the animal or human

system. The functions, for example, of the different classes of nerves have

been discovered, and probably could only have been discovered, by

experiments on living animals. Observation and experiment are the ultimate

basis of all knowledge: from them we obtain the elementary laws of life, as

we obtain all other elementary truths. It is in dealing with the complex

combinations that the experimental methods are for the most part illusory,

and the deductive mode of investigation must be invoked to disentangle the

complexity.

        153
               Professor Bain, though concurring generally in the views

expressed in this chapter, seems to estimate more highly than I do the scope

for specific experimental evidence in politics. (Logic , ii., 333–337.) There

are, it is true, as he remarks (p. 336), some cases “when an agent suddenly

introduced is almost instantaneously followed by some other changes, as

when the announcement of a diplomatic rupture between two nations is

followed the same day by a derangement of the money-market.” But this

experiment would be quite inconclusive merely as an experiment. It can only

serve, as any experiment may, to verify the conclusion of a deduction. Unlesswe already knew by our knowledge of the motives which act on business

men, that the prospect of war tends to derange the money-market, we should

never have been able to prove a connection between the two facts, unless

after having ascertained historically that the one followed the other in too

great a number of instances to be consistent with their having been recorded

with due precautions. Whoever has carefully examined any of the attempts

continually made to prove economic doctrines by such a recital of instances,

knows well how futile they are. It always turns out that the circumstances of

scarcely any of the cases have been fully stated; and that cases, in equal or

greater numbers, have been omitted which would have tended to an opposite

conclusion.

        154
               Vide Memoir by Thomas Graham, F.R.S., Master of the Mint,

“On Liquid Diffusion applied to Analysis,” in the Philosophical Transactions

for 1862, reprinted in the Journal of the Chemical Society , and also

separately as a pamphlet.

        155
               It was an old generalization in surgery, that tight bandaging had a

tendency to prevent or dissipate local inflammation. This sequence, being, in

the progress of physiological knowledge, resolved into more general laws,

led to the important surgical invention made by Dr. Arnott, the treatment of

local inflammation and tumors by means of an equable pressure, produced by

a bladder partially filled with air. The pressure, by keeping back the blood

from the part, prevents the inflammation, or the tumor, from being nourished:

in the case of inflammation, it removes the stimulus, which the organ is unfit

to receive; in the case of tumors, by keeping back the nutritive fluid, it causes

the absorption of matter to exceed the supply, and the diseased mass is

gradually absorbed and disappears.

        156
               Since acknowledged and reprinted in Mr. Martineau’s

Miscellanies .

        157
               Dissertations and Discussions , vol. i., fourth paper.

        158
               Written before the rise of the new views respecting the relation of

heat to mechanical force; but confirmed rather than contradicted by them.

        159
               As is well remarked by Professor Bain, in the very valuable

chapter of his Logic which treats of this subject (ii., 121), “scientific

explanation and inductive generalization being the same thing, the limits ofExplanation are the limits of Induction,” and “the limits to inductive

generalization are the limits to the agreement or community of facts.

Induction supposes similarity among phenomena; and when such similarity is

discovered, it reduces the phenomena under a common statement. The

similarity of terrestrial gravity to celestial attraction enables the two to be

expressed as one phenomenon. The similarity between capillary attraction,

solution, the operation of cements, etc., leads to their being regarded not as a

plurality, but as a unity, a single causative link, the operation of a single

agency.... If it be asked whether we can merge gravity itself in some still

higher law, the answer must depend upon the facts. Are there any other

forces, at present held distinct from gravity, that we may hope to make

fraternize with it, so as to join in constituting a higher unity? Gravity is an

attractive force; and another great attractive force is cohesion, or the force

that binds together the atoms of solid matter. Might we, then, join these two

in a still higher unity, expressed under a more comprehensive law? Certainly

we might, but not to any advantage. The two kinds of force agree in the one

point, attraction, but they agree in no other; indeed, in the manner of the

attraction, they differ widely; so widely that we should have to state totally

distinct laws for each. Gravity is common to all matter, and equal in amount

in equal masses of matter, whatever be the kind; it follows the law of the

diffusion of space from a point (the inverse square of the distance); it extends

to distances unlimited; it is indestructible and invariable. Cohesion is special

for each separate substance; it decreases according to distance much more

rapidly than the inverse square, vanishing entirely at very small distances.

Two such forces have not sufficient kindred to be generalized into one force;

the generalization is only illusory; the statement of the difference would still

make two forces; while the consideration of one would not in any way

simplify the phenomena of the other, as happened in the generalization of

gravity itself.”

              To the impassable limit of the explanation of laws of nature, set forth

in the text, must therefore be added a further limitation. Although, when the

phenomena to be explained are not, in their own nature, generically distinct,

the attempt to refer them to the same cause is scientifically legitimate; yet to

the success of the attempt it is indispensable that the cause should be shown

to be capable of producing them according to the same law. Otherwise the

unity of cause is a mere guess, and the generalization only a nominal one,

which, even if admitted, would not diminish the number of ultimate laws ofnature.

        160
               Cours de Philosophie Positive , ii., 656.

        161
               Vide supra, book iii., chap. xi.

        162
               Philosophy of Discovery , p. 185 et seq.

        163
               Comte, Philosophie Positive , ii., 434–437.

        164
               As an example of legitimate hypothesis according to the test here

laid down, has been justly cited that of Broussais, who, proceeding on the

very rational principle that every disease must originate in some definite part

or other of the organism, boldly assumed that certain fevers, which not being

known to be local were called constitutional, had their origin in the mucous

membrane of the alimentary canal. The supposition was, indeed, as is now

generally admitted, erroneous; but he was justified in making it, since by

deducing the consequences of the supposition, and comparing them with the

facts of those maladies, he might be certain of disproving his hypothesis if it

was ill founded, and might expect that the comparison would materially aid

him in framing another more conformable to the phenomena.

              The doctrine now universally received that the earth is a natural

magnet, was originally an hypothesis of the celebrated Gilbert.

              Another hypothesis, to the legitimacy of which no objection can lie,

and which is well calculated to light the path of scientific inquiry, is that

suggested by several recent writers, that the brain is a voltaic pile, and that

each of its pulsations is a discharge of electricity through the system. It has

been remarked that the sensation felt by the hand from the beating of a brain,

bears a strong resemblance to a voltaic shock. And the hypothesis, if

followed to its consequences, might afford a plausible explanation of many

physiological facts, while there is nothing to discourage the hope that we may

in time sufficiently understand the conditions of voltaic phenomena to render

the truth of the hypothesis amenable to observation and experiment.

              The attempt to localize, in different regions of the brain, the physical

organs of our different mental faculties and propensities, was, on the part of

its original author, a legitimate example of a scientific hypothesis; and we

ought not, therefore, to blame him for the extremely slight grounds on which

he often proceeded, in an operation which could only be tentative, though we

may regret that materials barely sufficient for a first rude hypothesis shouldhave been hastily worked up into the vain semblance of a science. If there be

really a connection between the scale of mental endowments and the various

degrees of complication in the cerebral system, the nature of that connection

was in no other way so likely to be brought to light as by framing, in the first

instance, an hypothesis similar to that of Gall. But the verification of any

such hypothesis is attended, from the peculiar nature of the phenomena, with

difficulties which phrenologists have not shown themselves even competent

to appreciate, much less to overcome.

              Mr. Darwin’s remarkable speculation on the Origin of Species is

another unimpeachable example of a legitimate hypothesis. What he terms

“natural selection” is not only a vera causa , but one proved to be capable of

producing effects of the same kind with those which the hypothesis ascribes

to it; the question of possibility is entirely one of degree. It is unreasonable to

accuse Mr. Darwin (as has been done) of violating the rules of Induction. The

rules of Induction are concerned with the conditions of Proof. Mr. Darwin

has never pretended that his doctrine was proved. He was not bound by the

rules of Induction, but by those of Hypothesis. And these last have seldom

been more completely fulfilled. He has opened a path of inquiry full of

promise, the results of which none can foresee. And is it not a wonderful feat

of scientific knowledge and ingenuity to have rendered so bold a suggestion,

which the first impulse of every one was to reject at once, admissible and

discussible, even as a conjecture?

        165
               Whewell’s Phil. of Discovery , pp. 275, 276.

        166
               What has most contributed to accredit the hypothesis of a physical

medium for the conveyance of light, is the certain fact that light travels

(which can not be proved of gravitation); that its communication is not

instantaneous, but requires time; and that it is intercepted (which gravitation

is not) by intervening objects. These are analogies between its phenomena

and those of the mechanical motion of a solid or fluid substance. But we are

not entitled to assume that mechanical motion is the only power in nature

capable of exhibiting those attributes.

        167
               Phil. of Discovery , p. 274.

        168
               P. 271.

        169
               P. 251 and the whole of Appendix G.        170
               In Dr. Whewell’s latest version of his theory (Philosophy of

Discovery , p. 331) he makes a concession respecting the medium of the

transmission of light, which, taken in conjunction with the rest of his doctrine

on the subject, is not, I confess, very intelligible to me, but which goes far

toward removing, if it does not actually remove, the whole of the difference

between us. He is contending, against Sir William Hamilton, that all matter

has weight. Sir William, in proof of the contrary, cited the luminiferous ether,

and the calorific and electric fluids, “which,” he said, “we can neither denude

of their character of substance, nor clothe with the attribute of weight.” “To

which,” continues Dr. Whewell, “my reply is, that precisely because I can not

clothe these agents with the attribute of Weight, I do denude them of the

character of Substance. They are not substances, but agencies. These

Imponderable Agents are not properly called Imponderable Fluids. This I

conceive that I have proved.” Nothing can be more philosophical. But if the

luminiferous ether is not matter, and fluid matter, too, what is the meaning of

its undulations? Can an agency undulate? Can there be alternate motion

forward and backward of the particles of an agency? And does not the whole

mathematical theory of the undulations imply them to be material? Is it not a

series of deductions from the known properties of elastic fluids? This opinion

of Dr. Whewell reduces the undulations to a figure of speech, and the

undulatory theory to the proposition which all must admit, that the

transmission of light takes place according to laws which present a very

striking and remarkable agreement with those of undulations. If Dr. Whewell

is prepared to stand by this doctrine, I have no difference with him on the

subject.

        171
               Thus water, of which eight-ninths in weight are oxygen, dissolves

most bodies which contain a high proportion of oxygen, such as all the

nitrates (which have more oxygen than any others of the common salts), most

of the sulphates, many of the carbonates, etc. Again, bodies largely composed

of combustible elements, like hydrogen and carbon, are soluble in bodies of

similar composition; resin, for instance, will dissolve in alcohol, tar in oil of

turpentine. This empirical generalization is far from being universally true;

no doubt because it is a remote, and therefore easily defeated, result of

general laws too deep for us at present to penetrate; but it will probably in

time suggest processes of inquiry, leading to the discovery of those laws.

        172
               Or, according to Laplace’s theory, the sun and the sun’s rotation.        173
               Supra, book iii., chap. v., § 7.

        174
               Supra, book iii., chap. x., § 2

        175
               In the preceding discussion, the mean is spoken of as if it were

exactly the same thing with the average . But the mean, for purposes of

inductive inquiry, is not the average, or arithmetical mean, though in a

familiar illustration of the theory the difference may be disregarded. If the

deviations on one side of the average are much more numerous than those on

the other (these last being fewer but greater), the effect due to the invariable

cause, as distinct from the variable ones, will not coincide with the average,

but will be either below or above the average, the deviation being toward the

side on which the greatest number of the instances are found. This follows

from a truth, ascertained both inductively and deductively, that small

deviations from the true central point are greatly more frequent than large

ones. The mathematical law is, “that the most probable determination of one

or more invariable elements from observation is that in which the sum of the

squares of the individual aberrations,” or deviations, “shall be the least

possible .” See this principle stated, and its grounds popularly explained, by

Sir John Herschel, in his review of Quetelet on Probabilities, Essays , p. 395

et seq.

        176
               Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités , fifth Paris edition, p. 7.

        177
               It even appears to me that the calculation of chances, where there

are no data grounded either on special experience or on special inference,

must, in an immense majority of cases, break down, from sheer impossibility

of assigning any principle by which to be guided in setting out the list of

possibilities. In the case of the colored balls we have no difficulty in making

the enumeration, because we ourselves determine what the possibilities shall

be. But suppose a case more analogous to those which occur in nature:

instead of three colors, let there be in the box all possible colors, we being

supposed ignorant of the comparative frequency with which different colors

occur in nature, or in the productions of art. How is the list of cases to be

made out? Is every distinct shade to count as a color? If so, is the test to be a

common eye, or an educated eye — a painter’s, for instance? On the answer

to these questions would depend whether the chances against some particular

color would be estimated at ten, twenty, or perhaps five hundred to one.

While if we knew from experience that the particular color occurs on anaverage a certain number of times in every hundred or thousand, we should

not require to know any thing either of the frequency or of the number of the

other possibilities.

        178
               Prospective Review for February, 1850.

        179
               “If this be not so, why do we feel so much more probability added

by the first instance than by any single subsequent instance? Why, except that

the first instance gives us its possibility (a cause adequate to it), while every

other only gives us the frequency of its conditions? If no reference to a cause

be supposed, possibility would have no meaning; yet it is clear that,

antecedent to its happening, we might have supposed the event impossible,

i.e. , have believed that there was no physical energy really existing in the

world equal to producing it.... After the first time of happening, which is,

then, more important to the whole probability than any other single instance

(because proving the possibility), the number of times becomes important as

an index to the intensity or extent of the cause, and its independence of any

particular time. If we took the case of a tremendous leap, for instance, and

wished to form an estimate of the probability of its succeeding a certain

number of times; the first instance, by showing its possibility (before

doubtful) is of the most importance; but every succeeding leap shows the

power to be more perfectly under control, greater and more invariable, and so

increases the probability; and no one would think of reasoning in this case

straight from one instance to the next, without referring to the physical

energy which each leap indicated. Is it not, then, clear that we do not ever”

(let us rather say, that we do not in an advanced state of our knowledge)

“conclude directly from the happening of an event to the probability of its

happening again; but that we refer to the cause, regarding the past cases as an

index to the cause, and the cause as our guide to the future?” — Ibid.

        180
               The writer last quoted says that the valuation of chances by

comparing the number of cases in which the event occurs with the number in

which it does not occur, “would generally be wholly erroneous,” and “is not

the true theory of probability.” It is at least that which forms the foundation

of insurance, and of all those calculations of chances in the business of life

which experience so abundantly verifies. The reason which the reviewer

gives for rejecting the theory is, that it “would regard an event as certain

which had hitherto never failed; which is exceedingly far from the truth, even

for a very large number of constant successes.” This is not a defect in aparticular theory, but in any theory of chances. No principle of evaluation can

provide for such a case as that which the reviewer supposes. If an event has

never once failed, in a number of trials sufficient to eliminate chance, it really

has all the certainty which can be given by an empirical law; it is certain

during the continuance of the same collocation of causes which existed

during the observations. If it ever fails, it is in consequence of some change

in that collocation. Now, no theory of chances will enable us to infer the

future probability of an event from the past, if the causes in operation,

capable of influencing the event, have intermediately undergone a change.

        181
               Pp. 18, 19. The theorem is not stated by Laplace in the exact

terms in which I have stated it; but the identity of import of the two modes of

expression is easily demonstrable.

        182
               For a fuller treatment of the many interesting questions raised by

the theory of probabilities, I may now refer to a recent work by Mr. Venn,

Fellow of Caius College, Cambridge, “The Logic of Chance;” one of the

most thoughtful and philosophical treatises on any subject connected with

Logic and Evidence which have been produced, to my knowledge, for many

years. Some criticisms contained in it have been very useful to me in revising

the corresponding chapters of the present work. In several of Mr. Venn’s

opinions, however, I do not agree. What these are will be obvious to any

reader of Mr. Venn’s work who is also a reader of this.

        183
               Hartley’s Observations on Man , vol. i., p. 16. The passage is not

in Priestley’s curtailed edition.

        184
               I am happy to be able to quote the following excellent passage

from Mr. Baden Powell’s Essay on the Inductive Philosophy , in

confirmation, both in regard to history and to doctrine, of the statement made

in the text. Speaking of the “conviction of the universal and permanent

uniformity of nature,” Mr. Powell says (pp. 98–100):

              “We may remark that this idea, in its proper extent, is by no means

one of popular acceptance or natural growth. Just so far as the daily

experience of every one goes, so far indeed he comes to embrace a certain

persuasion of this kind, but merely to this limited extent, that what is going

on around him at present, in his own narrow sphere of observation, will go on

in like manner in future. The peasant believes that the sun which rose to-day

will rise again to-morrow; that the seed put into the ground will be followedin due time by the harvest this year as it was last year, and the like; but has no

notion of such inferences in subjects beyond his immediate observation. And

it should be observed that each class of persons, in admitting this belief

within the limited range of his own experience, though he doubt or deny it in

every thing beyond, is, in fact, bearing unconscious testimony to its universal

truth. Nor, again, is it only among the most ignorant that this limitation is put

upon the truth. There is a very general propensity to believe that every thing

beyond common experience, or especially ascertained laws of nature, is left

to the dominion of chance or fate or arbitrary intervention; and even to object

to any attempted explanation by physical causes, if conjecturally thrown out

for an apparently unaccountable phenomenon.

              “The precise doctrine of the generalization of this idea of the

uniformity of nature, so far from being obvious, natural, or intuitive, is utterly

beyond the attainment of the many. In all the extent of its universality it is

characteristic of the philosopher. It is clearly the result of philosophic

cultivation and training, and by no means the spontaneous offspring of any

primary principle naturally inherent in the mind, as some seem to believe. It

is no mere vague persuasion taken up without examination, as a common

prepossession to which we are always accustomed; on the contrary, all

common prejudices and associations are against it. It is pre-eminently an

acquired idea . It is not attained without deep study and reflection. The best

informed philosopher is the man who most firmly believes it, even in

opposition to received notions; its acceptance depends on the extent and

profoundness of his inductive studies.”

        185
               Supra, book iii., chap. iii., § 1

        186
               It deserves remark, that these early generalizations did not, like

scientific inductions, presuppose causation. What they did presuppose, was

uniformity in physical facts. But the observers were as ready to presume

uniformity in the co-existence of facts as in the sequences. On the other hand,

they never thought of assuming that this uniformity was a principle pervading

all nature: their generalizations did not imply that there was uniformity in

every thing, but only that as much uniformity as existed within their

observation, existed also beyond it. The induction, fire burns, does not

require for its validity that all nature should observe uniform laws, but only

that there should be uniformity in one particular class of natural phenomena;

the effects of fire on the senses and on combustible substances. Anduniformity to this extent was not assumed, anterior to the experience, but

proved by the experience. The same observed instances which proved the

narrower truth, proved as much of the wider one as corresponded to it. It is

from losing sight of this fact, and considering the law of causation in its full

extent as necessarily presupposed in the very earliest generalizations, that

persons have been led into the belief that the law of causation is known a

priori , and is not itself a conclusion from experience.

        187
               Book ii., chap. iii.

        188
               One of the most rising thinkers of the new generation in France,

M. Taine (who has given, in the Revue des Deux Mondes , the most masterly

analysis, at least in one point of view, ever made of the present work), though

he rejects, on this and similar points of psychology, the intuition theory in its

ordinary form, nevertheless assigns to the law of causation, and to some other

of the most universal laws, that certainty beyond the bounds of human

experience, which I have not been able to accord to them. He does this on the

faith of our faculty of abstraction, in which he seems to recognize an

independent source of evidence, not indeed disclosing truths not contained in

our experience, but affording an assurance which experience can not give, of

the universality of those which it does contain. By abstraction M. Taine

seems to think that we are able, not merely to analyze that part of nature

which we see, and exhibit apart the elements which pervade it, but to

distinguish such of them as are elements of the system of nature considered

as a whole, not incidents belonging to our limited terrestrial experience. I am

not sure that I fully enter into M. Taine’s meaning; but I confess I do not see

how any mere abstract conception, elicited by our minds from our

experience, can be evidence of an objective fact in universal Nature, beyond

what the experience itself bears witness of; or how, in the process of

interpreting in general language the testimony of experience, the limitations

of the testimony itself can be cast off.

              Dr. Ward, in an able article in the Dublin Review for October, 1871,

contends that the uniformity of nature can not be proved from experience, but

from “transcendental considerations” only, and that, consequently, all

physical science would be deprived of its basis, if such transcendental proof

were impossible.

              When physical science is said to depend on the assumption that thecourse of nature is invariable, all that is meant is that the conclusions of

physical science are not known as absolute truths: the truth of them is

conditional on the uniformity of the course of nature; and all that the most

conclusive observations and experiments can prove, is that the result arrived

at will be true if, and as long as, the present laws of nature are valid. But this

is all the assurance we require for the guidance of our conduct. Dr. Ward

himself does not think that his transcendental proofs make it practically

greater; for he believes, as a Catholic, that the course of nature not only has

been, but frequently and even daily is, suspended by supernatural

intervention.

              But though this conditional conclusiveness of the evidence of

experience, which is sufficient for the purposes of life, is all that I was

necessarily concerned to prove, I have given reasons for thinking that the

uniformity, as itself a part of experience, is sufficiently proved to justify

undoubting reliance on it. This Dr. Ward contests, for the following reasons:

              First (p. 315), supposing it true that there has hitherto been no well

authenticated case of a breach in the uniformity of nature; “the number of

natural agents constantly at work is incalculably large; and the observed cases

of uniformity in their action must be immeasurably fewer than one

thousandth of the whole. Scientific men, we assume for the moment, have

discovered that in a certain proportion of instances — immeasurably fewer

than one thousandth of the whole — a certain fact has prevailed; the fact of

uniformity; and they have not found a single instance in which that fact does

not prevail. Are they justified, we ask, in inferring from these premises that

the fact is universal? Surely the question answers itself. Let us make a very

grotesque supposition, in which, however, the conclusion would really be

tried according to the arguments adduced. In some desert of Africa there is an

enormous connected edifice, surrounding some vast space, in which dwell

certain reasonable beings, who are unable to leave the inclosure. In this

edifice are more than a thousand chambers, which some years ago were

entirely locked up, and the keys no one knew where. By constant diligence

twenty-five keys have been found, out of the whole number; and the

corresponding chambers, situated promiscuously throughout the edifice, have

been opened. Each chamber, when examined, is found to be in the precise

shape of a dodecahedron. Are the inhabitants justified on that account in

holding with certitude that the remaining 975 chambers are built on the sameplan?”

              Not with perfect certitude, but (if the chambers to which the keys

have been found are really “situated promiscuously”) with so high a degree

of probability that they would be justified in acting upon the presumption

until an exception appeared.

              Dr. Ward’s argument, however, does not touch mine as it stands in

the text. My argument is grounded on the fact that the uniformity of the

course of nature as a whole, is constituted by the uniform sequences of

special effects from special natural agencies; that the number of these natural

agencies in the part of the universe known to us is not incalculable, nor even

extremely great; that we have now reason to think that at least the far greater

number of them, if not separately, at least in some of the combinations into

which they enter, have been made sufficiently amenable to observation, to

have enabled us actually to ascertain some of their fixed laws; and that this

amount of experience justifies the same degree of assurance that the course of

nature is uniform throughout, which we previously had of the uniformity of

sequence among the phenomena best known to us. This view of the subject, if

correct, destroys the force of Dr. Ward’s first argument.

              His second argument is, that many or most persons, both scientific

and unscientific, believe that there are well authenticated cases of breach in

the uniformity of nature, namely, miracles. Neither does this consideration

touch what I have said in the text. I admit no other uniformity in the events of

nature than the law of Causation; and (as I have explained in the chapter of

this volume which treats of the Grounds of Disbelief) a miracle is no

exception to that law. In every case of alleged miracle, a new antecedent is

affirmed to exist; a counteracting cause , namely, the volition of a

supernatural being. To all, therefore, to whom beings with superhuman power

over nature are a vera causa , a miracle is a case of the Law of Universal

Causation, not a deviation from it.

              Dr. Ward’s last, and as he says, strongest argument, is the familiar

one of Reid, Stewart, and their followers — that whatever knowledge

experience gives us of the past and present, it gives us none of the future. I

confess that I see no force whatever in this argument. Wherein does a future

fact differ from a present or a past fact, except in their merely momentary

relation to the human beings at present in existence? The answer made byPriestley, in his Examination of Reid , seems to me sufficient, viz., that

though we have had no experience of what is future, we have had abundant

experience of what was future. The “leap in the dark” (as Professor Bain calls

it) from the past to the future, is exactly as much in the dark and no more, as

the leap from a past which we have personally observed, to a past which we

have not. I agree with Mr. Bain in the opinion that the resemblance of what

we have not experienced to what we have, is, by a law of our nature,

presumed through the mere energy of the idea, before experience has proved

it. This psychological truth, however, is not, as Dr. Ward when criticising Mr.

Bain appears to think, inconsistent with the logical truth that experience does

prove it. The proof comes after the presumption, and consists in its invariable

verification by experience when the experience arrives. The fact which while

it was future could not be observed, having as yet no existence, is always,

when it becomes present and can be observed, found conformable to the past.

              Dr. M’Cosh maintains (Examination of Mr. J. S. Mill’s Philosophy ,

p. 257) that the uniformity of the course of nature is a different thing from the

law of causation; and while he allows that the former is only proved by a long

continuance of experience, and that it is not inconceivable nor necessarily

incredible that there may be worlds in which it does not prevail, he considers

the law of causation to be known intuitively. There is, however, no other

uniformity in the events of nature than that which arises from the law of

causation: so long therefore as there remained any doubt that the course of

nature was uniform throughout, at least when not modified by the

intervention of a new (supernatural) cause, a doubt was necessarily implied,

not indeed of the reality of causation, but of its universality. If the uniformity

of the course of nature has any exceptions — if any events succeed one

another without fixed laws — to that extent the law of causation fails; there

are events which do not depend on causes.

        189
               Book i., chap. vii.

        190
               In some cases, a Kind is sufficiently identified by some one

remarkable property: but most commonly several are required; each property

considered singly, being a joint property of that and of other Kinds. The color

and brightness of the diamond are common to it with the paste from which

false diamonds are made; its octohedral form is common to it with alum, and

magnetic iron ore; but the color and brightness and the form together, identify

its Kind: that is, are a mark to us that it is combustible; that when burned itproduces carbonic acid; that it can not be cut with any known substance;

together with many other ascertained properties, and the fact that there exist

an indefinite number still unascertained.

        191
               This doctrine of course assumes that the allotropic forms of what

is chemically the same substance are so many different Kinds; and such, in

the sense in which the word Kind is used in this treatise, they really are.

        192
               Professor Bain (Logic, ii., 13) mentions two empirical laws,

which he considers to be, with the exception of the law connecting Gravity

with Resistance to motion, “the two most widely operating laws as yet

discovered whereby two distinct properties are conjoined throughout

substances generally.” The first is, “a law connecting Atomic Weight and

Specific Heat by an inverse proportion. For equal weights of the simple

bodies, the atomic weight multiplied by a number expressing the specific

heat, gives a nearly uniform product. The products, for all the elements, are

near the constant number 6.” The other is a law which obtains “between the

specific gravity of substances in the gaseous state, and the atomic weights.

The relationship of the two numbers is in some instances equality; in other

instances the one is a multiple of the other.”

              Neither of these generalizations has the smallest appearance of being

an ultimate law. They point unmistakably to higher laws. Since the heat

necessary to raise to a given temperature the same weight of different

substances (called their specific heat) is inversely as their atomic weight, that

is, directly as the number of atoms in a given weight of the substance, it

follows that a single atom of every substance requires the same amount of

heat to raise it to a given temperature; a most interesting and important law,

but a law of causation. The other law mentioned by Mr. Bain points to the

conclusion, that in the gaseous state all substances contain, in the same space,

the same number of atoms; which, as the gaseous state suspends all cohesive

force, might naturally be expected, though it could not have been positively

assumed. This law may also be a result of the mode of action of causes,

namely, of molecular motions. The cases in which one of the numbers is not

identical with the other, but a multiple of it, may be explained on the nowise

unlikely supposition, that in our present estimate of the atomic weights of

some substances, we mistake two, or three, atoms for one, or one for several.

        193
               Dr. M’Cosh (p. 324 of his book) considers the laws of thechemical composition of bodies as not coming under the principle of

Causation; and thinks it an omission in this work not to have provided special

canons for their investigation and proof. But every case of chemical

composition is, as I have explained, a case of causation. When it is said that

water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen, the affirmation is that hydrogen

and oxygen, by the action on one another which they exert under certain

conditions, generate the properties of water. The Canons of Induction,

therefore, as laid down in this treatise, are applicable to the case. Such special

adaptations as the Inductive methods may require in their application to

chemistry, or any other science, are a proper subject for any one who treats of

the logic of the special sciences, as Professor Bain has done in the latter part

of his work; but they do not appertain to General Logic.

              Dr. M’Cosh also complains (p. 325) that I have given no canons for

those sciences in which “the end sought is not the discovery of Causes or of

Composition, but of Classes; that is, Natural Classes.” Such canons could be

no other than the principles and rules of Natural Classification, which I

certainly thought that I had expounded at considerable length. But this is far

from the only instance in which Dr. M’Cosh does not appear to be aware of

the contents of the books he is criticising.

        194
               Mr. De Morgan, in his Formal Logic , makes the just remark, that

from two such premises as Most A are B, and Most A are C, we may infer

with certainty that some B are C. But this is the utmost limit of the

conclusions which can be drawn from two approximate generalizations, when

the precise degree of their approximation to universality is unknown or

undefined.

        195
               Rationale of Judicial Evidence , vol. iii., p. 224.

        196
               The evaluation of the chances in this statement has been objected

to by a mathematical friend. The correct mode, in his opinion, of setting out

the possibilities is as follows. If the thing (let us call it T) which is both an A

and a C, is a B, something is true which is only true twice in every thrice, and

something else which is only true thrice in every four times. The first fact

being true eight times in twelve, and the second being true six times in every

eight, and consequently six times in those eight; both facts will be true only

six times in twelve. On the other hand, if T, although it is both an A and a C,

is not a B, something is true which is only true once in every thrice, andsomething else which is only true once in every four times. The former being

true four times out of twelve, and the latter once in every four, and therefore

once in those four; both are only true in one case out of twelve. So that T is a

B six times in twelve, and T is not a B, only once: making the comparative

probabilities, not eleven to one, as I had previously made them, but six to

one.

              In the last edition I accepted this reasoning as conclusive. More

attentive consideration, however, has convinced me that it contains a fallacy.

              The objector argues, that the fact of A’s being a B is true eight times

in twelve, and the fact of C’s being a B six times in eight, and consequently

six times in those eight; both facts, therefore, are true only six times in every

twelve. That is, he concludes that because among As taken indiscriminately

only eight out of twelve are Bs and the remaining four are not, it must equally

hold that four out of twelve are not Bs when the twelve are taken from the

select portion of As which are also Cs. And by this assumption he arrives at

the strange result, that there are fewer Bs among things which are both As

and Cs than there are among either As or Cs taken indiscriminately; so that a

thing which has both chances of being a B, is less likely to be so than if it had

only the one chance or only the other.

              The objector (as has been acutely remarked by another

correspondent) applies to the problem under consideration, a mode of

calculation only suited to the reverse problem. Had the question been — If

two of every three Bs are As and three out of every four Bs are Cs, how many

Bs will be both As and Cs, his reasoning would have been correct. For the Bs

that are both As and Cs must be fewer than either the Bs that are As or the Bs

that are Cs, and to find their number we must abate either of these numbers in

the ratio due to the other. But when the problem is to find, not how many Bs

are both As and Cs, but how many things that are both As and Cs are Bs, it is

evident that among these the proportion of Bs must be not less, but greater,

than among things which are only A, or among things which are only B.

              The true theory of the chances is best found by going back to the

scientific grounds on which the proportions rest. The degree of frequency of a

coincidence depends on, and is a measure of, the frequency, combined with

the efficacy, of the causes in operation that are favorable to it. If out of every

twelve As taken indiscriminately eight are Bs and four are not, it is impliedthat there are causes operating on A which tend to make it a B, and that these

causes are sufficiently constant and sufficiently powerful to succeed in eight

out of twelve cases, but fail in the remaining four. So if of twelve Cs, nine are

Bs and three are not, there must be causes of the same tendency operating on

C, which succeed in nine cases and fail in three. Now suppose twelve cases

which are both As and Cs. The whole twelve are now under the operation of

both sets of causes. One set is sufficient to prevail in eight of the twelve

cases, the other in nine. The analysis of the cases shows that six of the twelve

will be Bs through the operation of both sets of causes; two more in virtue of

the causes operating on A; and three more through those operating on C, and

that there will be only one case in which all the causes will be inoperative.

The total number, therefore, which are Bs will be eleven in twelve, and the

evaluation in the text is correct.

        197
               Supra, book i., chap. v.

        198
               Supra, book i., chap. v., § 1, and book ii., chap, v., § 5.

        199
               The axiom, “Equals subtracted from equals leave equal

differences,” may be demonstrated from the two axioms in the text. If A = a

and B = b , A-B = a-b . For if not, let A-B = a-b+c . Then since B = b ,

adding equals to equals, A = a+c . But A = a . Therefore a = a+c , which is

impossible.

              This proposition having been demonstrated, we may, by means of it,

demonstrate the following: “If equals be added to unequals, the sums are

unequal.” If A = a and B not = b , A+B is not = a+b . For suppose it to be so.

Then, since A = a and A+B = a+b , subtracting equals from equals, B = b ;

which is contrary to the hypothesis.

              So again, it may be proved that two things, one of which is equal and

the other unequal to a third thing, are unequal to one another. If A = a and A

not = B, neither is a = B. For suppose it to be equal. Then since A = a and a =

B, and since things equal to the same thing are equal to one another A = B;

which is contrary to the hypothesis.

        200
               Geometers have usually preferred to define parallel lines by the

property of being in the same plane and never meeting. This, however, has

rendered it necessary for them to assume, as an additional axiom, some other

property of parallel lines; and the unsatisfactory manner in which propertiesfor that purpose have been selected by Euclid and others has always been

deemed the opprobrium of elementary geometry. Even as a verbal definition,

equidistance is a fitter property to characterize parallels by, since it is the

attribute really involved in the signification of the name. If to be in the same

plane and never to meet were all that is meant by being parallel, we should

feel no incongruity in speaking of a curve as parallel to its asymptote. The

meaning of parallel lines is, lines which pursue exactly the same direction,

and which, therefore, neither draw nearer nor go farther from one another; a

conception suggested at once by the contemplation of nature. That the lines

will never meet is of course included in the more comprehensive proposition

that they are everywhere equally distant. And that any straight lines which are

in the same plane and not equidistant will certainly meet, may be

demonstrated in the most rigorous manner from the fundamental property of

straight lines assumed in the text, viz., that if they set out from the same

point, they diverge more and more without limit.

        201
               Philosophie Positive , iii., 414–416.

        202
               See the two remarkable notes (A) and (F), appended to his Inquiry

into the Relation of Cause and Effect .

        203
               Supra, p. 413.

        204
               A writer to whom I have several times referred, gives as the

definition of an impossibility, that which there exists in the world no cause

adequate to produce. This definition does not take in such impossibilities as

these — that two and two should make five; that two straight lines should

inclose a space; or that any thing should begin to exist without a cause. I can

think of no definition of impossibility comprehensive enough to include all

its varieties, except the one which I have given: viz., An impossibility is that,

the truth of which would conflict with a complete induction, that is, with the

most conclusive evidence which we possess of universal truth.

              As to the reputed impossibilities which rest on no other grounds than

our ignorance of any cause capable of producing the supposed effects; very

few of them are certainly impossible, or permanently incredible. The facts of

traveling seventy miles an hour, painless surgical operations, and conversing

by instantaneous signals between London and New York, held a high place,

not many years ago, among such impossibilities.        205
               Not, however, as might at first sight appear, 999 times as much. A

complete analysis of the cases shows that (always assuming the veracity of

the witness to be 9/10) in 10,000 drawings, the drawing of No. 79 will occur

nine times, and be announced incorrectly once; the credibility, therefore, of

the announcement of No. 79 is 9/10; while the drawing of a white ball will

occur nine times, and be announced incorrectly 999 times. The credibility,

therefore, of the announcement of white is 9/1008, and the ratio of the two

1008:10; the one announcement being thus only about a hundred times more

credible than the other, instead of 999 times.

        206
               Supra, book iii., chap. ii., § 3, 4, 5.

        207
               Mr. Bailey has given the best statement of this theory. “The

general name,” he says, “raises up the image sometimes of one individual of

the class formerly seen, sometimes of another, not unfrequently of many

individuals in succession; and it sometimes suggests an image made up of

elements from several different objects, by a latent process of which I am not

conscious.” (Letters on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, 1st series, letter

22.) But Mr. Bailey must allow that we carry on inductions and ratiocinations

respecting the class, by means of this idea or conception of some one

individual in it. This is all I require. The name of a class calls up some idea,

through which we can, to all intents and purposes, think of the class as such,

and not solely of an individual member of it.

        208
               I have entered rather fully into this question in chap. xvii. of An

Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy , headed “The Doctrine of

Concepts or General Notions,” which contains my last views on the subject.

        209
               Other examples of inappropriate conceptions are given by Dr.

Whewell (Phil. Ind. Sc. ii., 185) as follows: “Aristotle and his followers

endeavored in vain to account for the mechanical relation of forces in the

lever, by applying the inappropriate geometrical conceptions of the

properties of the circle: they failed in explaining the form of the luminous

spot made by the sun shining through a hole, because they applied the

inappropriate conception of a circular quality in the sun’s light: they

speculated to no purpose about the elementary composition of bodies,

because they assumed the inappropriate conception of likeness between the

elements and the compound, instead of the genuine notion of elements

merely determining the qualities of the compound.” But in these cases thereis more than an inappropriate conception; there is a false conception; one

which has no prototype in nature, nothing corresponding to it in facts. This is

evident in the last two examples, and is equally true in the first; the

“properties of the circle” which were referred to, being purely fantastical.

There is, therefore, an error beyond the wrong choice of a principle of

generalization; there is a false assumption of matters of fact. The attempt is

made to resolve certain laws of nature into a more general law, that law not

being one which, though real, is inappropriate, but one wholly imaginary.

        210
               Professor Bain.

        211
               This sentence having been erroneously understood as if I had

meant to assert that belief is nothing but an irresistible association, I think it

necessary to observe that I express no theory respecting the ultimate analysis

either of reasoning or of belief, two of the most obscure points in analytical

psychology. I am speaking not of the powers themselves, but of the previous

conditions necessary to enable those powers to exert themselves: of which

conditions I am contending that language is not one, senses and association

being sufficient without it. The irresistible association theory of belief, and

the difficulties connected with the subject, have been discussed at length in

the notes to the new edition of Mr. James Mill’s Analysis of the Phenomena

of the Human Mind .

        212
               Mr. Bailey agrees with me in thinking that whenever “from

something actually present to my senses, conjoined with past experience, I

feel satisfied that something has happened, or will happen, or is happening,

beyond the sphere of my personal observation,” I may with strict propriety be

said to reason: and of course to reason inductively, for demonstrative

reasoning is excluded by the circumstances of the case. (The Theory of

Reasoning , 2d ed., p. 27.)

        213
               Novum Organum Renovatum , pp. 35–37.

        214
               Novum Organum Renovatum , pp. 39, 40.

        215
               P. 217, 4to edition.

        216
               “E, ex, extra, extraneus, étranger, stranger.”

              Another etymological example sometimes cited is the derivation of

the English uncle from the Latin avus . It is scarcely possible for two words

to bear fewer outward marks of relationship, yet there is but one step betweenthem, avus , avunculus , uncle . So pilgrim , from ager : per agrum ,

peragrinus , peregrinus , pellegrino , pilgrim . Professor Bain gives some apt

examples of these transitions of meaning. “The word ‘damp’ primarily

signified moist, humid, wet. But the property is often accompanied with the

feeling of cold or chilliness, and hence the idea of cold is strongly suggested

by the word. This is not all. Proceeding upon the superadded meaning, we

speak of damping a man’s ardor, a metaphor where the cooling is the only

circumstance concerned; we go on still further to designate the iron slide that

shuts off the draft of a stove, ‘the damper,’ the primary meaning being now

entirely dropped. ‘Dry,’ in like manner, through signifying the absence of

moisture, water, or liquidity, is applied to sulphuric acid containing water,

although not thereby ceasing to be a moist, wet, or liquid substance.” So in

the phrases, dry sherry, or Champagne.

              “ ‘Street,’ originally a paved way, with or without houses, has been

extended to roads lined with houses, whether paved or unpaved.

‘Impertinent’ signified at first irrelevant, alien to the purpose in hand: through

which it has come to mean, meddling, intrusive, unmannerly, insolent.”

(Logic , ii., 173, 174.)

        217
               Pp. 226, 227.

        218
               Essays , p. 214.

        219
               Essays , p. 215.

        220
               Though no such evil consequences as take place in these instances

are likely to arise from the modern freak of writing sanatory instead of

sanitary, it deserves notice as a charming specimen of pedantry ingrafted

upon ignorance. Those who thus undertake to correct the spelling of the

classical English writers, are not aware that the meaning of sanatory , if there

were such a word in the language, would have reference not to the

preservation of health, but to the cure of disease.

        221
               Historical Introduction , vol. i., pp. 66–68.

        222
               History of Scientific Ideas , ii., 110, 111.

        223
               History of Scientific Ideas , ii., 111–113.

        224
               Nov. Org. Renov. , pp. 286, 287.

        225
               History of Scientific Ideas , ii., 120–122.        226
               Nov. Org. Renov. , p. 274.

        227
               Hist. Sc. Id. , i. 133.

        228
               Dr. Whewell, in his reply (Philosophy of Discovery , p. 270) says

that he “stopped short of, or rather passed by, the doctrine of a series of

organized beings,” because he “thought it bad and narrow philosophy.” If he

did, it was evidently without understanding this form of the doctrine; for he

proceeds to quote a passage from his “History,” in which the doctrine he

condemns is designated as that of “a mere linear progression in nature, which

would place each genus in contact only with the preceding and succeeding

ones.” Now the series treated of in the text agrees with this linear progression

in nothing whatever but in being a progression.

        229
               Supra, p. 137.

        230
               Vulgar Errors , book v., chap. 21.

        231
               Pharmacologia , Historical Introduction, p. 16.

        232
               The author of one of the Bridgewater Treatises has fallen, as it

seems to me, into a similar fallacy when, after arguing in rather a curious way

to prove that matter may exist without any of the known properties of matter,

and may therefore be changeable, he concludes that it can not be eternal,

because “eternal (passive) existence necessarily involves incapability of

change.” I believe it would be difficult to point out any other connection

between the facts of eternity and unchangeableness, than a strong association

between the two ideas. Most of the a priori arguments, both religious and

anti-religious, on the origin of things, are fallacies drawn from the same

source.

        233
               Supra, book ii., chap. v., § 6, and chap. vii., § 1, 2, 3, 4. See also

Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy , chap. vi. and elsewhere.

        234
               It seems that this doctrine was, before the time I have mentioned,

disputed by some thinkers. Dr. Ward mentions Scotus, Vasquez, Biel, Francis

Lugo, and Valentia.

        235
               I quote this passage from Playfair’s celebrated Dissertation on the

Progress of Mathematical and Physical Science .

        236
               This statement I must now correct, as too unqualified. The maxim

in question was maintained with full conviction by no less an authority thanSir William Hamilton. See my Examination , chap. xxiv.

        237
               Nouveaux Essais sur l’Entendement Humain — Avant-propos.

(Œuvres, Paris ed., 1842, vol. i., p. 19.)

        238
               This doctrine also was accepted as true, and conclusions were

grounded on it, by Sir William Hamilton. See Examination , chap. xxiv.

        239
               Not that of Leibnitz, but the principle commonly appealed to

under that name by mathematicians.

        240
               Dissertation , p. 27.

        241
               Hist. Ind. Sc. , Book i., chap. i.

        242
               Novum Organum , Aph. 75.

        243
               Supra, book iii., chap. vii., § 4.

        244
               It is hardly needful to remark that nothing is here intended to be

said against the possibility at some future period of making gold — by first

discovering it to be a compound, and putting together its different elements or

ingredients. But this is a totally different idea from that of the seekers of the

grand arcanum.

        245
               Pharmacologia , pp. 43–45.

        246
               Vol. i., chap. 8.

        247
               Nov. Org. , Aph. 46.

        248
               Playfair’s Dissertation , sect. 4.

        249
               Nov. Org. Renov. , p. 61.

        250
               Pharmacologia , p. 21.

        251
               Pharmacologia , pp. 23, 24.

        252
               Ibid., p. 28.

        253
               Ibid., p. 62.

        254
               Ibid., pp. 61, 62.

        255
               Supra , p. 450.

        256
               Elements of the Philosophy of the Mind , vol. ii., chap. 4, sect. 5.        257
               “Thus Fourcroy,” says Dr. Paris, “explained the operation of

mercury by its specific gravity, and the advocates of this doctrine favored the

general introduction of the preparations of iron, especially in scirrhus of the

spleen or liver, upon the same hypothetical principle; for, say they, whatever

is most forcible in removing the obstruction must be the most proper

instrument of cure: such is steel, which, besides the attenuating power with

which it is furnished, has still a greater force in this case from the gravity of

its particles, which, being seven times specifically heavier than any

vegetable, acts in proportion with a stronger impulse, and therefore is a more

powerful deobstruent. This may be taken as a specimen of the style in which

these mechanical physicians reasoned and practiced.” — Pharmacologia , pp.

38, 39.

        258
               Pharmacologia , pp. 39, 40.

        259
               I quote from Dr. Whewell’s Hist. Ind. Sc. , 3d ed., i., 129.

        260
               Hist. Ind. Sc. , i., 52.

        261
               Nov. Org. , Aph. 60.

        262
               “An advocate,” says Mr. De Morgan (Formal Logic , p. 270), “is

sometimes guilty of the argument à dicto secundum quid ad dictum

simpliciter : it is his business to do for his client all that his client might

honestly do for himself. Is not the word in italics frequently omitted? Might

any man honestly try to do for himself all that counsel frequently try to do for

him? We are often reminded of the two men who stole the leg of mutton; one

could swear he had not got it, the other that he had not taken it. The counsel

is doing his duty by his client, the client has left the matter to his counsel.

Between the unexecuted intention of the client, and the unintended execution

of the counsel, there may be a wrong done, and, if we are to believe the usual

maxims, no wrong-doer.”

              The same writer justly remarks (p. 251) that there is a converse

fallacy, à dicto simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid , called by the scholastic

logicians fallacia accidentis ; and another which may be called à dicto

secundum quid ad dictum secundum alterum quid (p. 265). For apt instances

of both, I must refer the reader to Mr. De Morgan’s able chapter on Fallacies.

        263
               An example of this fallacy is the popular error that strong drink

must be a cause of strength . There is here fallacy within fallacy; for grantingthat the words “strong” and “strength” were not (as they are) applied in a

totally different sense to fermented liquors and to the human body, there

would still be involved the error of supposing that an effect must be like its

cause; that the conditions of a phenomenon are likely to resemble the

phenomenon itself; which we have already treated of as an a priori fallacy of

the first rank. As well might it be supposed that a strong poison will make the

person who takes it strong.

        264
               In his later editions, Archbishop Whately confines the name of

Petitio Principii “to those cases in which one of the premises either is

manifestly the same in sense with the conclusion, or is actually proved from

it, or is such as the persons you are addressing are not likely to know, or to

admit, except as an inference from the conclusion; as, e.g. , if any one should

infer the authenticity of a certain history, from its recording such and such

facts, the reality of which rests on the evidence of that history.”

        265
               No longer even a probable hypothesis, since the establishment of

the atomic theory; it being now certain that the integral particles of different

substances gravitate unequally. It is true that these particles, though real

minima for the purposes of chemical combination, may not be the ultimate

particles of the substance; and this doubt alone renders the hypothesis

admissible, even as an hypothesis.

        266
               Hist. Ind. Sc. , i., 34.

        267
               “And coxcombs vanquish Berkeley with a grin.”

        268
               Some arguments and explanations, supplementary to those in the

text, will be found in An Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy ,

chap. xxvi.

        269
               Supra , p. 424.

        270
               When this chapter was written, Professor Bain had not yet

published even the first part (“The Senses and the Intellect”) of his profound

Treatise on the Mind. In this the laws of association have been more

comprehensively stated and more largely exemplified than by any previous

writer; and the work, having been completed by the publication of “The

Emotions and the Will,” may now be referred to as incomparably the most

complete analytical exposition of the mental phenomena, on the basis of a

legitimate Induction, which has yet been produced. More recently still, Mr.Bain has joined with me in appending to a new edition of the “Analysis,”

notes intended to bring up the analytic science of Mind to its latest

improvements.

              Many striking applications of the laws of association to the

explanation of complex mental phenomena are also to be found in Mr.

Herbert Spencer’s “Principles of Psychology.”

        271
               In the case of the moral sentiments the place of direct experiment

is to a considerable extent supplied by historical experience, and we are able

to trace with a tolerable approach to certainty the particular associations by

which those sentiments are engendered. This has been attempted, so far as

respects the sentiment of justice, in a little work by the present author,

entitled Utilitarianism .

        272
               The most favorable cases for making such approximate

generalizations are what may be termed collective instances; where we are

fortunately enabled to see the whole class respecting which we are inquiring

in action at once, and, from the qualities displayed by the collective body, are

able to judge what must be the qualities of the majority of the individuals

composing it. Thus the character of a nation is shown in its acts as a nation;

not so much in the acts of its government, for those are much influenced by

other causes; but in the current popular maxims, and other marks of the

general direction of public opinion; in the character of the persons or writings

that are held in permanent esteem or admiration; in laws and institutions, so

far as they are the work of the nation itself, or are acknowledged and

supported by it; and so forth. But even here there is a large margin of doubt

and uncertainty. These things are liable to be influenced by many

circumstances; they are partially determined by the distinctive qualities of

that nation or body of persons, but partly also by external causes which

would influence any other body of persons in the same manner. In order,

therefore, to make the experiment really complete, we ought to be able to try

it without variation upon other nations: to try how Englishmen would act or

feel if placed in the same circumstances in which we have supposed

Frenchmen to be placed; to apply, in short, the Method of Differences as well

as that of Agreement. Now these experiments we can not try, nor even

approximate to.

        273
               “To which,” says Dr. Whewell, “we may add, that it is certain,from the history of the subject, that in that case the hypothesis would never

have been framed at all.”

              Dr. Whewell (Philosophy of Discovery , pp. 277–282) defends

Bacon’s rule against the preceding strictures. But his defense consists only in

asserting and exemplifying a proposition which I had myself stated, viz., that

though the largest generalizations may be the earliest made, they are not at

first seen in their entire generality, but acquire it by degrees, as they are found

to explain one class after another of phenomena. The laws of motion, for

example, were not known to extend to the celestial regions, until the motions

of the celestial bodies had been deduced from them. This, however, does not

in any way affect the fact, that the middle principles of astronomy, the central

force, for example, and the law of the inverse square, could not have been

discovered, if the laws of motion, which are so much more universal, had not

been known first. On Bacon’s system of step-by-step generalization, it would

be impossible in any science to ascend higher than the empirical laws; a

remark which Dr. Whewell’s own Inductive Tables, referred to by him in

support of his argument, amply bear out.

        274
               Supra , page 317 to the end of the chapter.

        275
               Biographia Literaria , i., 214.

        276
               Supra , p. 321.

        277
               Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy , pp.

137–140.

        278
               The quotations in this paragraph are from a paper written by the

author, and published in a periodical in 1834.

        279
               Cours de Philosophie Positive , iv., 325–29.

        280
               Since reprinted entire in Dissertations and Discussions , as the

concluding paper of the first volume.

        281
               Written and first published in 1840.

        282
               This great generalization is often unfavorably criticised (as by Dr.

Whewell, for instance) under a misapprehension of its real import. The

doctrine, that the theological explanation of phenomena belongs only to the

infancy of our knowledge of them, ought not to be construed as if it was

equivalent to the assertion, that mankind, as their knowledge advances, willnecessarily cease to believe in any kind of theology. This was M. Comte’s

opinion; but it is by no means implied in his fundamental theorem. All that is

implied is, that in an advanced state of human knowledge, no other Ruler of

the World will be acknowledged than one who rules by universal laws, and

does not at all, or does not unless in very peculiar cases, produce events by

special interpositions. Originally all natural events were ascribed to such

interpositions. At present every educated person rejects this explanation in

regard to all classes of phenomena of which the laws have been fully

ascertained; though some have not yet reached the point of referring all

phenomena to the idea of Law, but believe that rain and sunshine, famine and

pestilence, victory and defeat, death and life, are issues which the Creator

does not leave to the operation of his general laws, but reserves to be decided

by express acts of volition. M. Comte’s theory is the negation of this

doctrine.

              Dr. Whewell equally misunderstands M. Comte’s doctrine

respecting the second or metaphysical stage of speculation. M. Comte did not

mean that “discussions concerning ideas” are limited to an early stage of

inquiry, and cease when science enters into the positive stage. (Philosophy of

Discovery , pp. 226 et seq.) In all M. Comte’s speculations as much stress is

laid on the process of clearing up our conceptions as on the ascertainment of

facts. When M. Comte speaks of the metaphysical stage of speculation, he

means the stage in which men speak of “Nature” and other abstractions as if

they were active forces, producing effects; when Nature is said to do this, or

forbid that; when Nature’s horror of a vacuum, Nature’s non-admission of a

break, Nature’s vis medicatrix , were offered as explanations of phenomena;

when the qualities of things were mistaken for real entities dwelling in the

things; when the phenomena of living bodies were thought to be accounted

for by being referred to a “vital force;” when, in short, the abstract names of

phenomena were mistaken for the causes of their existence. In this sense of

the word it can not be reasonably denied that the metaphysical explanation of

phenomena, equally with the theological, gives way before the advance of

real science.

              That the final, or positive stage, as conceived by M. Comte, has been

equally misunderstood, and that, notwithstanding some expressions open to

just criticism, M. Comte never dreamed of denying the legitimacy of inquiry

into all causes which are accessible to human investigation, I have pointedout in a former place.

        283
               Buckle’s History of Civilization , i., 30.

        284
               I have been assured by an intimate friend of Mr. Buckle that he

would not have withheld his assent from these remarks, and that he never

intended to affirm or imply that mankind are not progressive in their moral as

well as in their intellectual qualities. “In dealing with his problem, he availed

himself of the artifice resorted to by the Political Economist, who leaves out

of consideration the generous and benevolent sentiments, and founds his

science on the proposition that mankind are actuated by acquisitive

propensities alone,” not because such is the fact, but because it is necessary to

begin by treating the principal influence as if it was the sole one, and make

the due corrections afterward. “He desired to make abstraction of the intellect

as the determining and dynamical element of the progression, eliminating the

more dependent set of conditions, and treating the more active one as if it

were an entirely independent variable.”

              The same friend of Mr. Buckle states that when he used expressions

which seemed to exaggerate the influence of general at the expense of special

causes, and especially at the expense of the influence of individual minds,

Mr. Buckle really intended no more than to affirm emphatically that the

greatest men can not effect great changes in human affairs unless the general

mind has been in some considerable degree prepared for them by the general

circumstances of the age; a truth which, of course, no one thinks of denying.

And there certainly are passages in Mr. Buckle’s writings which speak of the

influence exercised by great individual intellects in as strong terms as could

be desired.

        285
               Essay on Dryden, in Miscellaneous Writings, i., 186.

        286
               In the Cornhill Magazine for June and July, 1861.

        287
               It is almost superfluous to observe, that there is another meaning

of the word Art, in which it may be said to denote the poetical department or

aspect of things in general, in contradistinction to the scientific. In the text,

the word is used in its older, and I hope, not yet obsolete sense.

        288
               Professor Bain and others call the selection from the truths of

science made for the purposes of an art, a Practical Science, and confine the

name Art to the actual rules.        289
               The word Teleology is also, but inconveniently and improperly,

employed by some writers as a name for the attempt to explain the

phenomena of the universe from final causes.

        290
               For an express discussion and vindication of this principle, see the

little volume entitled “Utilitarianism.”

 

 

 

 

 The Principles of Political Economy with some of

          their applications to social philosophy

 

                                     CONTENTS

 

BOOK 1: PRODUCTION
PRELIMINARY REMARKS
CHAPTER 1 – OF THE REQUISITES OF PRODUCTION
CHAPTER 2 – OF LABOUR AS AN AGENT OF PRODUCTION
CHAPTER 3 – OF UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR
CHAPTER 4 – OF CAPITAL
CHAPTER 5 – FUNDAMENTAL PROPOSITIONS RESPECTING CAPITAL
CHAPTER 6 – ON CIRCULATING AND FIXED CAPITAL
CHAPTER 7 – ON WHAT DEPENDS THE DEGREE OF PRODUCTIVENESS OF PRODUCTIVE AGENTS
CHAPTER 8 – OF CO-OPERATION, OR THE COMBINATION OF LABOUR
CHAPTER 9 – OF PRODUCTION ON A LARGE, AND PRODUCTION ON A SMALL SCALE
CHAPTER 10 – OF THE LAW OF THE INCREASE OF LABOUR
CHAPTER 11 – OF THE LAW OF THE INCREASE OF CAPITAL
CHAPTER 12 – OF THE LAW OF THE INCREASE OF PRODUCTION FROM LAND
CHAPTER 13 – CONSEQUENCES OF THE FOREGOING LAWS
BOOK 2: DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER 1 – OF PROPERTY
CHAPTER 2 – THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED
CHAPTER 3 – OF THE CLASSES AMONG WHOM THE PRODUCE IS DISTRIBUTED
CHAPTER 4 – OF COMPETITION, AND CUSTOM
CHAPTER 5 – OF SLAVERY
CHAPTER 6 – OF PEASANT PROPRIETORS
CHAPTER 7 – CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT
CHAPTER 8 – OF METAYERS
CHAPTER 9 – OF COTTIERS
CHAPTER 10 – MEANS OF ABOLISHING COTTIER TENANCY
CHAPTER 11 – OF WAGES
CHAPTER 12 – OF POPULAR REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES
CHAPTER 13 – THE REMEDIES FOR LOW WAGES FURTHER CONSIDERED
CHAPTER 14 – OF THE DIFFERENCES OF WAGES IN DIFFERENT EMPLOYMENTS
CHAPTER 15 – OF PROFITS
CHAPTER 16 – OF RENT
BOOK 3: EXCHANGE
CHAPTER 1 – OF VALUE
CHAPTER 2 – OF DEMAND AND SUPPLY IN THEIR RELATION TO VALUE
CHAPTER 3 – OF COST OF PRODUCTION IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE
CHAPTER 4 – ULTIMATE ANALYSIS OF COST OF PRODUCTION
CHAPTER 5 – OF RENT, IN ITS RELATION TO VALUE
CHAPTER 6 – SUMMARY OF THE THEORY OF VALUE
CHAPTER 7 – OF MONEY
CHAPTER 8 – OF THE VALUE OF MONEY, AS DEPENDENT ON DEMAND AND SUPPLY
CHAPTER 9 – OF THE VALUE OF MONEY, AS DEPENDENT ON COST OF PRODUCTION
CHAPTER 10 – OF A DOUBLE STANDARD, AND SUBSIDIARY COINS
CHAPTER 11 – OF CREDIT, AS A SUBSTITUTE FOR MONEYCHAPTER 12 – INFLUENCE OF CREDIT ON MONEY
CHAPTER 13 – OF AN INCONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY
CHAPTER 14 – OF EXCESS OF SUPPLY
CHAPTER 15 – OF A MEASURE OF VALUE
CHAPTER 16 – OF SOME PECULIAR CASES OF VALUE
CHAPTER 17 – OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
CHAPTER 18 – OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
CHAPTER 19 – OF MONEY, CONSIDERED AS AN IMPORTED COMMODITY
CHAPTER 20 – OF THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES
CHAPTER 21 – OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS THROUGH THE COMMERCIAL WORLD
CHAPTER 22 – INFLUENCE OF THE CURRENCY ON THE EXCHANGES AND ON FOREIGN TRADE
CHAPTER 23 – OF THE RATE OF INTEREST
CHAPTER 24 – OF THE REGULATION OF A CONVERTIBLE PAPER CURRENCY
CHAPTER 25 – OF THE COMPETITION OF DIFFERENT COUNTRIES IN THE SAME MARKET
CHAPTER 26 – OF DISTRIBUTION, AS AFFECTED BY EXCHANGE
BOOK 4: INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY ON PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER 1 – GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF A PROGRESSIVE STATE OF WEALTH
CHAPTER 2 – INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF INDUSTRY AND POPULATION ON VALUES AND PRICES
CHAPTER 3 – INFLUENCE OF THE PROGRESS OF INDUSTRY AND POPULATION ON RENTS, PROFITS, AND WAGES
CHAPTER 4 – OF THE TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM
CHAPTER 5 – CONSEQUENCES OF THE TENDENCY OF PROFITS TO A MINIMUM
CHAPTER 6 – OF THE STATIONARY STATE
CHAPTER 7 – ON THE PROBABLE FUTURITY OF THE LABOURING CLASSES
BOOK 5: ON THE INFLUENCE OF GOVERNMENT
CHAPTER 1 – OF THE FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT IN GENERAL
CHAPTER 2 – ON THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TAXATION
CHAPTER 3 – OF DIRECT TAXES
CHAPTER 4 – OF TAXES ON COMMODITIES
CHAPTER 5 – OF SOME OTHER TAXES
CHAPTER 6 – COMPARISON BETWEEN DIRECT AND INDIRECT TAXES
CHAPTER 7 – OF A NATIONAL DEBT
CHAPTER 8 – OF THE ORDINARY FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT, CONSIDERED AS TO THEIR ECONOMICAL EFFECTS
CHAPTER 9 – THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED
CHAPTER 10 – OF INTERFERENCES OF GOVERNMENT GROUNDED ON ERRONEOUS THEORIES
CHAPTER 11 – OF THE GROUNDS AND LIMITS OF THE LAISSER-FAIRE OR NON-INTERFERENCE PRINCIPLE                              Book 1: Production

 

 

 

                                 Preliminary Remarks

 

 

              In every department of human affairs, Practice long precedes

Science systematic enquiry into the modes of action of the powers of nature,

is the tardy product of a long course of efforts to use those powers for

practical ends. The conception, accordingly, of Political Economy as a branch

of science is extremely modern; but the subject with which its enquiries are

conversant has in all ages necessarily constituted one of the chief practical

interests of mankind, and, in some, a most unduly engrossing one.

              That subject is Wealth. Writers on Political Economy profess to

teach, or to investigate, the nature of Wealth, and the laws of its production

and distribution: including, directly or remotely, the operation of all the

causes by which the condition of mankind, or of any society of human

beings, in respect to this universal object of human desire, is made

prosperous or the reverse. Not that any treatise on Political Economy can

discuss or even enumerate all these causes; but it undertakes to set forth as

much as is known of the laws and principles according to which they operate.

              Every one has a notion, sufficiently correct for common purposes, of

what is meant by wealth. The enquiries which relate to it are in no danger of

being confounded with those relating to any other of the great human

interests. All know that it is one thing to be rich, another thing to be

enlightened, brave, or humane; that the questions how a nation is made

wealthy, and how it is made free, or virtuous, or eminent in literature, in the

fine arts, in arms, or in polity, are totally distinct enquiries. Those things,

indeed, are all indirectly connected, and react upon one another. A people has

sometimes become free, because it had first grown wealthy; or wealthy,

because it had first become free. The creed and laws of a people act

powerfully upon their economical condition; and this again, by its influence

on their mental development and social relations, reacts upon their creed and

laws. But though the subjects are in very close contact, they are essentially

different, and have never been supposed to be otherwise.

              It is no part of the design of this treatise to aim at metaphysical

nicety of definition, where the ideas suggested by a term are already asdeterminate as practical purposes require. But, little as it might be expected

that any mischievous confusion of ideas could take pLace on a subject so

simple as the question, what is to be considered as weaLth, it is matter of

history, that such confusion of ideas has existed-that theorists and practical

poLiticians have been equally and at one period universally, infected by it,

and that for many generations it gave a thoroughly faLse direction to the

policy of Europe. I refer to the set of doctrines designated, since the time of

Adam Smith, by the appellation of the Mercantile System.

              While this system prevailed, it was assumed, either expressly or

tacitly, in the whole policy of nations, that wealth consisted solely of money;

or of the precious metals, which, when not already in the state of money, are

capable of being directly converted into it. According to the doctrines then

prevalent, whatever tended to heap up money or bullion in a country added to

its wealth. Whatever sent the precious metals out of a country impoverished

it. If a country possessed no gold or silver mines, the only industry by which

it could be enriched was foreign trade, being the only one which could bring

in money. Any branch of trade which was supposed to send out more money

than it brought in, however ample and valuable might be the returns in

another shape, was looked upon as a losing trade. Exportation of goods was

favoured and encouraged (even by means extremely onerous to the real

resources of the country), because, the exported goods being stipulated to be

paid for in money, it was hoped that the returns would actually be made in

gold and silver. Importation of anything, other than the precious metals, was

regarded as a loss to the nation of the whole price of the things imported;

unless they were brought in to be re-exported at a profit, or unless, being the

materials or instruments of some industry practised in the country itself, they

gave the power of producing exportable articles at smaller cost, and thereby

effecting a larger exportation. The commerce of the world was looked upon

as a struggle among nations, which could draw to itself the largest share of

the gold and silver in existence; and in this competition no nation could gain

anything, except by making others lose as much, or, at the least, preventing

them from gaining it.

              It often happens that the universal belief of one age of mankind-a

belief from which no one was, nor without an extraordinary effort of genius

and courage, could at that time be free-becomes to a subsequent age so

palpable an absurdity, that the only difficulty then is to imagine how such athing can ever have appeared credible. It has so happened with the doctrine

that money is synonymous with wealth. The conceit seems too preposterous

to be thought of as a serious opinion. It looks like one of the crude fancies of

childhood, instantly corrected by a word from any grown person. But let no

one feel confident that he would have escaped the delusion if he had lived at

the time when it prevailed. All the associations engendered by common life,

and by the ordinary course of business, concurred in promoting it. So Long as

those associations were the only medium through which the subject was

looked at, what we now think so gross an absurdity seemed a truism. Once

questioned, indeed, it was doomed; but no one was likely to think of

questioning it whose mind had not become familiar with certain modes of

stating and of contemplating economical phenomena, which have only found

their way into the general understanding through the influence of Adam

Smith and of his expositors.

              In common discourse, wealth is always expressed in money. If you

ask how rich a person is, you are answered that he has so many thousand

pounds. All income and expenditure, all gains and losses, everything by

which one becomes richer or poorer, are reckoned as the coming in or going

out of so much money. It is true that in the inventory of a person’s fortune are

included, not only the money in his actual possession, or due to him, but all

other articles of value. These, however, enter, not in their own character, but

in virtue of the sums of money which they would sell for; and if they would

sell for less, their owner is reputed less rich, though the things themselves are

precisely the same. It is true, also, that people do not grow rich by keeping

their money unused, and that they must be willing to spend in order to gain.

Those who enrich themselves by commerce, do so by giving money for

goods as well as goods for money; and the first is as necessary a part of the

process as the last. But a person who buys goods for purposes of gain, does

so to sell them again for money, and in the expectation of receiving more

money than he laid out: to get money, therefore, seems even to the person

himself the ultimate end of the whole. It often happens that he is not paid in

money, but in something else; having bought goods to a value equivalent,

which are set off against those he sold. But he accepted these at a money

valuation, and in the belief that they would bring in more money eventually

than the price at which they were made over to him. A dealer doing a large

amount of business, and turning over his capital rapidly, has but a small

portion of it in ready money at any one time. But he only feels it valuable tohim as it is convertible into money: he considers no transaction closed until

the net result is either paid or credited in money.. when he retires from

business it is into money that he converts the whole, and not until then does

he deem himself to have realized his gains: just as if money were the only

wealth, and money’s worth were only the means of attaining it. If it be now

asked for what end money is desirable, unless to supply the wants or

pleasures of oneself or others, the champion of the system would not be at all

embarrassed by the question. True, he would say, these are the uses of

wealth, and very laudable uses while confined to domestic commodities,

because in that case, by exactly the amount which you expend, you enrich

others of your countrymen. Spend your wealth, if you please, in whatever

indulgences you have a taste for. but your wealth is not the indulgences, it is

the sum of money, or the annual money income, with which you purchase

them.

              While there were so many things to render the assumption which is

the basis of the mercantile system plausible, there is also some small

foundation in reason, though a very insufficient one, for the distinction which

that system so emphatically draws between money and every other kind of

valuable possession. We really, and justly, look upon a person as possessing

the advantages of wealth, not in proportion to the useful and agreeable things

of which he is in the actual enjoyment, but to his command over the general

fund of things useful and agreeable; the power he possesses of providing for

any exigency, or obtaining any object of desire. Now, money is itself that

power; while all other things, in a civilized state, seem to confer it only by

their capacity of being exchanged for money. To possess any other article of

wealth, is to possess that particular thing, and nothing else: if you wish for

another thing instead of it, you have first to sell it, or to submit to the

inconvenience and delay (if not the impossibility) of finding some one who

has what you want, and is willing to barter it for what you have. But with

money you are at once able to buy whatever things are for sale: and one

whose fortune is in money, or in things rapidly convertible into it, seems both

to himself and others to possess not any one thing, but all the things which

the money places it at his option to purchase. The greatest part of the utility

of wealth, beyond a very moderate quantity, is not the indulgences it

procures, but the reserved power which its possessor holds in his hands of

attaining purposes generally; and this power no other kind of wealth confers

so immediately or so certainly as money. It is the only form of wealth whichis not merely applicable to some one use, but can be turned at once to any

use. And this distinction was the more likely to make an impression upon

governments, as it is one of considerable importance to them. A civilized

government derives comparatively little advantage from taxes unless it can

collect them in money: and if it has large or sudden payments to make,

especially payments in foreign countries for wars or subsidies, either for the

sake of conquering or of not being conquered (the two chief objects of

national policy until a late period), scarcely any medium of payment except

money will serve the purpose. All these causes conspire to make both

individuals and governments, in estimating their means, attach almost

exclusive importance to money, either in esse or in posse, and look upon all

other things (when viewed as part of their resources) scarcely otherwise than

as the remote means of obtaining that which alone, when obtained, affords

the indefinite, and at the same time instantaneous, command over objects of

desire, which best answers to the idea of wealth.

              An absurdity, however, does not cease to be an absurdity when we

have discovered what were the appearances which made it plausible; and the

Mercantile Theory could not fail to be seen in its true character when men

began, even in an imperfect manner, to explore into the foundations of things,

and seek their premises from elementary facts, and not from the forms and

phrases of common discourse. So soon as they asked themselves what is

really meant by money-what it is in its essential characters, and the precise

nature of the functions it performs-they reflected that money, like other

things, is only a desirable possession on account of its uses; and that these,

instead of being, as they delusively appear, indefinite, are of a strictly defined

and limited description, namely, to facilitate the distribution of the produce of

industry according to the convenience of those among whom it is shared.

Further consideration showed that the uses of money are in no respect

promoted by increasing the quantity which exists and circulates in a country;

the service which it performs being as well rendered by a small as by a large

aggregate amount. Two million quarters of corn will not feed so many

persons as four millions; but two millions of pounds sterling will carry on as

much traffic, will buy and sell as many commodities, as four millions, though

at lower nominal prices. Money, as money, satisfies no want; its worth to any

one, consists in its being a convenient shape in which to receive his

incomings of all sorts, which incomings he afterwards, at the times which suit

him best, converts into the forms in which they can be useful to him. Great asthe difference would be between a country with money, and a country

altogether without it, it would be only one of convenience; a saving of time

and trouble, like grinding by water power instead of by hand, or (to use

Adam Smith’s illustration) like the benefit derived from roads; and to mistake

money for wealth, is the same sort of error as to mistake the highway which

may be the easiest way of getting to your house or lands, for the house and

lands themselves.

              Money, being the instrument of an important public and private

purpose, is rightly regarded as wealth; but everything else which serves any

human purpose, and which nature does not afford gratuitously, is wealth also.

To be wealthy is to have a large stock of useful articles, or the means of

purchasing them. Everything forms therefore a part of wealth, which has a

power of purchasing; for which anything useful or agreeable would be given

in exchange. Things for which nothing could be obtained in exchange,

however useful or necessary they may be, are not wealth in the sense in

which the term is used in Political Economy. Air, for example, though the

most absolute of necessaries, bears no price in the market, because it can be

obtained gratuitously: to accumulate a stock of it would yield no profit or

advantage to any one; and the laws of its production and distribution are the

subject of a very different study from Political Economy. But though air is

not wealth, mankind are much richer by obtaining it gratis, since the time and

labour which would otherwise be required for supplying the most pressing of

all wants, can be devoted to other purposes. It is possible to imagine

circumstances in which air would be a part of wealth. If it became customary

to sojourn long in places where the air does not naturally penetrate, as in

diving-bells sunk in the sea, a supply of air artificially furnished would, like

water conveyed into houses, bear a price: and if from any revolution in nature

the atmosphere became too scanty for the consumption, or could be

monopolized, air might acquire a very high marketable value. In such a case,

the possession of it, beyond his own wants, would be, to its owner, wealth;

and the general wealth of mankind might at first sight appear to be increased,

by what would be so great a calamity to them. The error would lie in not

considering, that however rich the possessor of air might become at the

expense of the rest of the community, all persons else would be poorer by all

that they were compelled to pay for what they had before obtained without

payment.              This leads to an important distinction in the meaning of the word

wealth, as applied to the possessions of an individual, and to those of a

nation, or of mankind. In the wealth of mankind, nothing is included which

does not of itself answer some purpose of utility or pleasure. To an individual

anything is wealth, which, though useless in itself, enables him to claim from

others a part of their stock of things useful or pleasant. Take, for instance, a

mortgage of a thousand pounds on a landed estate. This is wealth to the

person to whom it brings in a revenue, and who could perhaps sell it in the

market for the full amount of the debt. But it is not wealth to the country; if

the engagement were annulled, the country would be neither poorer nor

richer. The mortgagee would have lost a thousand pounds, and the owner of

the land would have gained it. Speaking nationally, the mortgage was not

itself wealth, but merely gave A a claim to a portion of the wealth of B. It

was wealth to A, and wealth which he could transfer to a third person; but

what he so transferred was in fact a joint ownership, to the extent of a

thousand pounds, in the land of which B was nominally the sole proprietor.

The position of fundholders, or owners of the public debt of a country, is

similar. They are mortgagees on the general wealth of the country. The

cancelling of the debt would be no destruction of wealth, but a transfer of it: a

wrongful abstraction of wealth from certain members of the community, for

the profit of the government, or of the tax-payers. Funded property therefore

cannot be counted as part of the national wealth. This is not always borne in

mind by the dealers in statistical calculations. For example, in estimates of

the gross income of the country, founded on the proceeds of the income-tax,

incomes derived from the funds are not always excluded: though the tax-

payers are assessed on their whole nominal income, without being permitted

to deduct from it the portion levied from them in taxation to form the income

of the fundholder. In this calculation, therefore, one portion of the general

income of the country is counted twice over, and the aggregate amount made

to appear greater than it is by almost thirty millions. A country, however,

may include in its wealth all stock held by its citizens in the funds of foreign

countries, and other debts due to them from abroad. But even this is only

wealth to them by being a part ownership in wealth held by others. It forms

no part of the collective wealth of the human race. It is an element in the

distribution, but not in the composition, of the general wealth.

              Another example of a possession which is wealth to the person

holding it, but not wealth to the nation, or to mankind, is slaves. It is by astrange confusion of ideas that slave property (as it is termed) is counted, at

so much per head, in an estimate of the wealth, or of the capital, of the

country which tolerates the existence of such property. If a human being,

considered as an object possessing productive powers, is part of the national

wealth when his powers are owned by another man, he cannot be less a part

of it when they are owned by himself. Whatever he is worth to his master is

so much property abstracted from himself, and its abstraction cannot augment

the possessions of the two together, or of the country to which they both

belong. In propriety of classification, however, the people of a country are

not to be counted in its wealth. They are that for the sake of which its wealth

exists. The term wealth is wanted to denote the desirable objects which they

possess, not inclusive of, but in contradistinction to, their own persons. They

are not wealth to themselves, though they are means of acquiring it.

              It has been proposed to define wealth as signifying “instruments:”

meaning not tools and machinery alone, but the whole accumulation

possessed by individuals or communities, of means for the attainment of their

ends. Thus, a field is an instrument, because it is a means to the attainment of

corn. Corn is an instrument, being a means to the attainment of flour. Flour is

an instrument, being a means to the attainment of bread. Bread is an

instrument, as a means to the satisfaction of hunger and to the support of life.

Here we at last arrive at things which are not instruments, being desired on

their own account, and not as mere means to something beyond. This view of

the subject is philosophically correct; or rather, this mode of expression may

be usefully employed along with others, not as conveying a different view of

the subject from the common one, but as giving more distinctness and reality

to the common view. It departs, however, too widely from the custom of

language, to be likely to obtain general acceptance, or to be of use for any

other purpose than that of occasional illustration.

              Wealth, then, may be defined, all useful or agreeable things which

possess exchangeable value; or, in other words, all useful or agreeable things

except those which can be obtained, in the quantity desired, without labour or

sacrifice. To this definition, the only objection seems to be, that it leaves in

uncertainty a question which has been much debated — whether what are

called immaterial products are to be considered as wealth: whether, for

example, the skill of a workman, or any other natural or acquired power of

body or mind, shall be called wealth, or not: a question, not of very greatimportance, and which, so far as requiring discussion, will be more

conveniently considered in another place.

              These things having been premised respecting wealth, we shall next

turn our attention to the extraordinary differences in respect to it, which exist

between nation and nation, and between different ages of the world;

differences both in the quantity of wealth, and in the kind of it; as well as in

the manner in which the wealth existing in the community is shared among

its members.

              There is perhaps, no people or community, now existing, which

subsists entirely on the spontaneous produce of vegetation. But many tribes

still live exclusively, or almost exclusively, on wild animals, the produce of

hunting or fishing. Their clothing is skins; their habitations, huts rudely

formed of logs or boughs of trees, and abandoned at an hour’s notice. The

food they use being little susceptible of storing up, they have no

accumulation of it, and are often exposed to great privations. The wealth of

such a community consists solely of the skins they wear; a few ornaments,

the taste for which exists among most savages; some rude utensils; the

weapons with which they kill their game, or fight against hostile competitors

for the means of subsistence; canoes for crossing rivers and lakes, or fishing

in the sea; and perhaps some furs or other productions of the wilderness,

collected to be exchanged with civilized people for blankets, brandy, and

tobacco; of which foreign produce also there may be some unconsumed

portion in store. To this scanty inventory of material wealth, ought to be

added their land; an instrument of production of which they make slender

use, compared with more settled communities, but which is still the source of

their subsistence, and which has a marketable value if there be any

agricultural community in the neighbourhood requiring more land than it

possesses. This is the state of greatest poverty in which any entire community

of human beings is known to exist; though there are much richer

communities in which portions of the inhabitants are in a condition, as to

subsistence and comfort, as little enviable as that of the savage.

              The first great advance beyond this state consists in the

domestication of the more useful animals; giving rise to the pastoral or

nomad state, in which mankind do not live on the produce of hunting, but on

milk and its products, and on the annual increase of flocks and herds. This

condition is not only more desirable in itself, but more conducive to furtherprogress: and a much more considerable amount of wealth is accumulated

under it. So long as the vast natural pastures of the earth are not yet so fully

occupied as to be consumed more rapidly than they are spontaneously

reproduced, a large and constantly increasing stock of subsistence may be

collected and preserved, with little other labour than that of guarding the

cattle from the attacks of wild beasts, and from the force or wiles of predatory

men. Large flocks and herds, therefore, are in time possessed, by active and

thrifty individuals through their own exertions, and by the heads of families

and tribes through the exertions of those who are connected with them by

allegiance. There thus arises, in the shepherd state, inequality of possessions;

a thing which scarcely exists in the savage state, where no one has much

more than absolute necessaries, and in case of deficiency must share even

those with his tribe. In the nomad state, some have an abundance of cattle,

sufficient for the food of a multitude, while others have not contrived to

appropriate and retain any superfluity, or perhaps any cattle at all. But

subsistence has ceased to be precarious, since the more successful have no

other use which they can make of their surplus than to feed the less fortunate,

while every increase in the number of persons connected with them is an

increase both of security and of power: and thus they are enabled to divest

themselves of all labour except that of government and superintendence, and

acquire dependents to fight for them in war and to serve them in peace. One

of the features of this state of society is, that a part of the community, and in

some degree even the whole of it, possess leisure. Only a portion of time is

required for procuring food, and the remainder is not engrossed by anxious

thought for the morrow, or necessary repose from muscular activity. Such a

life is highly favourable to the growth of new wants, and opens a possibility

of their gratification. A desire arises for better clothing, utensils, and

implements, than the savage state contents itself with; and the surplus food

renders it practicable to devote to these purposes the exertions of a part of the

tribe. In all or most nomad communities we find domestic manufactures of a

coarse, and in some, of a fine kind. There is ample evidence that while those

parts of the world which have been the cradle of modern civilization were

still generally in the nomad state, considerable skill had been attained in

spinning, weaving, and dyeing woollen garments, in the preparation of

leather, and in what appears a still more difficult invention, that of working in

metals. Even speculative science took its first beginnings from the leisure

characteristic of this stage of social progress. The earliest astronomicalobservations are attributed, by a tradition which has much appearance of

truth, to the shepherds of Chaldea.

              From this state of society to the agricultural the transition is not

indeed easy (for no great change in the habits of mankind is otherwise than

difficult, and in general either painful or very slow), but it lies in what may be

called the spontaneous corse of events. The growth of the population of men

and cattle began in time to press upon the earth’s capabilities of yielding

natural pasture: and this cause doubtless produced the first tilling of the

ground, just as at a later period the same cause made the superfluous hordes

of the nations which had remained nomad precipitate themselves upon those

which had already become agricultural; until, these having become

sufficiently powerful to repel such inroads, the invading nations, deprived of

this outlet, were obliged also to become agricultural communities.

              But after this great step had been completed, the subsequent progress

of mankind seems by no means to have been so rapid (certain rare

combinations of circumstances excepted) as might perhaps have been

anticipated. The quantity of human food which the earth is capable of

returning even to the most wretched system of agriculture, so much exceeds

what could be obtained in the purely pastoral state, that a great increase of

population is invariably the result. But this additional food is only obtained

by a great additional amount of labour; so that not only an agricultural has

much less leisure than a pastoral population, but, with the imperfect tools and

unskilful processes which are for a long time employed (and which over the

greater part of the earth have not even yet been abandoned), agriculturists do

not, unless in unusually advantageous circumstances of climate and soil,

produce so great a surplus of food, beyond their necessary consumption, as to

support any large class of labourers engaged in other departments of industry.

The surplus, too, whether small or great, is usually torn from the producers,

either by the government to which they are subject, or by individuals, who by

superior force, or by availing themselves of religious or traditional feelings of

subordination, have established themselves as lords of the soil.

              The first of these modes of appropriation, by the government, is

characteristic of the extensive monarchies which from a time beyond

historical record have occupied the plains of Asia. The government, in those

countries, though varying in its qualities according to the accidents of

personal character, seldom leaves much to the cultivators beyond merenecessaries, and often strips them so bare even of these, that it finds itself

obliged, after taking all they have, to lend part of it back to those from whom

it has been taken, in order to provide them with seed, and enable them to

support life until another harvest. Under the régime in question, though the

bulk of the population are ill provided for, the government, by collecting

small contributions from great numbers, is enabled, with any tolerable

management, to make a show of riches quite out of proportion to the general

condition of the society; and hence the inveterate impression, of which

Europeans have only at a late period been disabused, concerning the great

opulence of Oriental nations. In this wealth, without reckoning the large

portion which adheres to the hands employed in collecting it, many persons

of course participate, besides the immediate household of the sovereign. A

large part is distributed among the various functionaries of government, and

among the objects of the sovereign’s favour or caprice. A part is occasionally

employed in works of public utility. The tanks, wells, and canals for

irrigation, without which in many tropical climates cultivation could hardly

be carried on; the embankments which confine the rivers, the bazars for

dealers, and the seraees for travellers, none of which could have been made

by the scanty means in the possession of those using them, owe their

existence to the liberality and enlightened self-interest of the better order of

princes, or to the benevolence or ostentation of here and there a rich

individual, whose fortune, if traced to its source, is always found to have

been drawn immediately or remotely from the public revenue, most

frequently by a direct grant of a portion of it from the sovereign.

              The ruler of a society of this description, after providing largely for

his own support, and that of all persons in whom he feels an interest, and

after maintaining as many soldiers as he thinks needful for his security or his

state, has a disposable residue, which he is glad to exchange for articles of

luxury suitable to his disposition: as have also the class of persons who have

been enriched by his favour, or by handling the public revenues. A demand

thus arises for elaborate and costly manufactured articles, adapted to a narrow

but a wealthy market. This demand is often supplied almost exclusively by

the merchants of more advanced communities, but often also raises up in the

country itself a class of artificers, by whom certain fabrics are carried to as

high excellence as can be given by patience, quickness of perception and

observation, and manual dexterity, without any considerable knowledge of

the properties of objects: such as some of the cotton fabrics of India. Theseartificers are fed by the surplus food which has been taken by the government

and its agents as their share of the produce. So literally is this the case, that in

some countries the workman, instead of taking his work home, and being

paid for it after it is finished, proceeds with his tools to his customer’s house,

and is there subsisted until the work is complete. The insecurity, however, of

all possessions in this state of society, induces even the richest purchasers to

give a preference to such articles as, being of an imperishable nature, and

containing great value in small bulk, are adapted for being concealed or

carried off. Gold and jewels, therefore, constitute a large proportion of the

wealth of these nations, and many a rich Asiatic carries nearly his whole

fortune on his person, or on those of the women of his harem. No one, except

the monarch, thinks of investing his wealth in a manner not susceptible of

removal. He, indeed, if he feels safe on his throne, and reasonably secure of

transmitting it to his descendants, sometimes indulges a taste for durable

edifices, and produces the Pyramids, or the Taj Mehal and the Mausoleum at

Sekundra. The rude manufactures destined for the wants of the cultivators are

worked up by village artisans, who are remunerated by land given to them

rent-free to cultivate, or by fees paid to them in kind from such share of the

crop as is left to the villagers by the government. This state of society,

however, is not destitute of a mercantile class; composed of two divisions,

grain dealers and money dealers. The grain dealers do not usually buy grain

from the producers, but from the agents of government, who, receiving the

revenue in kind, are glad to devolve upon others the business of conveying it

to the places where the prince, his chief civil and military officers, the bulk of

his troops, and the artisans who supply the wants of these various persons, are

assembled. The money dealers lend to the unfortunate cultivators, when

ruined by bad seasons or fiscal exactions, the means of supporting life and

continuing their cultivation, and are repaid with enormous interest at the next

harvest; or, on a larger scale, they lend to the government, or to those to

whom it has granted a portion of the revenue, and are indemnified by

assignments on the revenue collectors, or by having certain districts put into

their possession, that they may pay themselves from the revenues; to enable

them to do which, a great portion of the powers of government are usually

made over simultaneously, to be exercised by them until either the districts

are redeemed, or their receipts have liquidated the debt. Thus, the commercial

operations of both these classes of dealers take pLace principally upon that

part of the produce of the country which forms the revenue of thegovernment. From that revenue their capital is periodically replaced with a

profit, and that is also the source from which their original funds have almost

always been derived. Such, in its general features, is the economical

condition of most of the countries of Asia, as it has been from beyond the

commencement of authentic history, and is still, wherever not disturbed by

foreign influences.

              In the agricultural communities of ancient Europe whose early

condition is best known to us, the course of things was different. These, at

their origin, were mostly small town-communities, at the first plantation of

which, in an unoccupied country, or in one from which the former inhabitants

had been expelled, the land which was taken possession of was regularly

divided, in equal or in graduated allotments, among the families composing

the community. In some cases, instead of a town there was a confederation of

towns, occupied by people of the same reputed race, and who were supposed

to have settled in the country about the same time. Each family produced its

own food and the materials of its clothing, which were worked up within

itself, usually by the women of the family, into the coarse fabrics with which

the age was contented. Taxes there were none, as there were either no paid

officers of government, or if there were, their payment had been provided for

by a reserved portion of land, cultivated by slaves on account of the state; and

the army consisted of the body of citizens. The whole produce of the soil,

therefore, belonged, without deduction, to the family which cultivated it. So

long as the process of events permitted this disposition of property to last, the

state of society was, for the majority of the free cultivators, probably not an

undesirable one; and under it, in some cases, the advance of mankind in

intellectual culture was extraordinarily rapid and brilliant. This more

especially happened where, along with advantageous circumstances of race

and climate, and no doubt with many favourable accidents of which all trace

is now lost, was combined the advantage of a position on the shores of a great

inland sea, the other coasts of which were already occupied by settled

communities. The knowledge which in such a position was acquired of

foreign productions, and the easy access of foreign ideas and inventions,

made the chain of routine, usually so strong in a rude people, hang loosely on

these communities. To speak only of their industrial development; they early

acquired variety of wants and desires, which stimulated them to extract from

their own soil the utmost which they knew how to make it yield; and when

their soil was sterile, or after they had reached the limit of its capacity, theyoften became traders, and bought up the productions of foreign countries, to

sell them in other countries with a profit.

              The duration, however, of this state of things was from the first

precarious. These little communities lived in a state of almost perpetual war.

For this there were many causes. In the ruder and purely agricultural

communities a frequent cause was the mere pressure of their increasing

population upon their limited land, aggravated as that pressure so often was

by deficient harvests, in the rude state of their agriculture, and depending as

they did for food upon a very small extent of country. On these occasions, the

community often emigrated en masse, or sent forth a swarm of its youth, to

seek, sword in hand, for some less warlike people, who could be expelled

from their land, or detained to cultivate it as slaves for the benefit of their

despoilers. What the less advanced tribes did from necessity, the more

prosperous did from ambition and the military spirit: and after a time the

whole of these city-communities were either conquerors or conquered. In

some cases, the conquering state contented itself with imposing a tribute on

the vanquished: who being, in consideration of that burden, freed from the

expense and trouble of their own military and naval protection, might enjoy

under it a considerable share of economical prosperity, while the ascendant

community obtained a surplus of wealth, available for purposes of collective

luxury or magnificence. From such a surplus the Parthenon and the Propylaea

were built, the sculptures of Pheidias paid for, and the festivals celebrated, for

which AEschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, and Aristophanes composed their

dramas. But this state of political relations, most useful, while it lasted, to the

progress and ultimate interest of mankind, had not the elements of durability.

A small conquering community which does not incorporate its conquests,

always ends by being conquered. Universal dominion, therefore, at last rested

with the people who practised this art — with the Romans; who, whatever

were their other devices, always either began or ended by taking a great part

of the land to enrich their own leading citizens, and by adopting into the

governing body the principal possessors of the remainder. It is unnecessary to

dwell on the melancholy economomical history of the Roman empire. When

inequality of wealth once commences, in a community not constantly

engaged in repairing by industry the injuries of fortune, its advances are

gigantic; the great masses of wealth swallow up the smaller. The Roman

empire ultimately became covered with the vast landed possessions of a

comparatively few families, for whose luxury, and still more for whoseostentation, the most costly products were raised, soil were slaves, or small

tenants in a while the condition. cultivators of the soil were slaves, or small

tenants in nearly servile condition. From this time the weaLth of the empire

progressively declined. In the beginning, the public revenues, and the

resources of rich individuals, sufficed at least to cover Italy with splendid

edifices, public and private; but at length so dwindled under the enervating

influences of misgovernment, that what remained was not even sufficient to

keep those edifices from decay. The strength and riches of the civilized world

became inadequate to make head against the nomad population which skirted

its northern frontier; they overran the empire, and a different order of things

succeeded.

              In the new frame in which European society was now cast, the

population of each country may be considered as composed, in unequal

proportions, of two distinct nations or races, the conquerors and the

conquered: the first the proprietors of the land, the latter the tillers of it. These

tillers were allowed to occupy the land on conditions which, being the

product of force, were always onerous, but seldom to the extent of absolute

slavery. Already, in the later times of the Roman empire, predial slavery had

extensively transformed itself into a kind of serfdom: the coloni of the

Romans were rather villeins than actual slaves; and the incapacity and

distaste of the barbarian conquerors for personally superintending industrial

occupations, left no alternative but to allow to the cultivators, as an incentive

to exertion, some real interest in the soil. If, for example, they were

compelled to labour, three days in the week, for their superior, the produce of

the remaining days was their own. If they were required to supply the

provisions of various sorts, ordinarily needed for the consumption of the

castle, and were often subject to requisitions in excess, yet after supplying

these demands they were suffered to dispose at their will of whatever

additional produce they could raise. Under this system during the Middle

Ages it was not impossible, no more than in modern Russia (where, up to the

recent measure of emancipation, the same system still essentially prevailed),

for serfs to acquire property; and in fact, their accumulations are the primitive

source of the wealth of modern Europe.

              In that age of violence and disorder, the first use made by a serf of

any small provision which he had been able to accumulate, was to buy his

freedom and withdraw himself to some town or fortified village, which hadremained undestroyed from the time of the Roman dominion; or, without

buying his freedom, to abscond thither. In that place of refuge, surrounded by

others of his own class. he attempted to live, secured in some measure from

the outrages and exactions of the warrior caste, by his own prowess and that

of his fellows. These emancipated serfs mostly became artificers; and lived

by exchanging the produce of their industry for the surplus food and material

which the soil yielded to its feudal proprietors. This gave rise to a sort of

European counterpart of the economical condition of Asiatic countries;

except that, in lieu of a single monarch and a fluctuating body of favourites

and employés, there was a numerous and in a considerable degree fixed class

of great landholders; exhibiting far less splendour, because individually

disposing of a much smaller surplus produce, and for a long time expending

the chief part of it in maintaining the body of retainers whom the warlike

habits of society, and the little protection afforded by government, rendered

indispensable to their safety. The greater stability, the fixity of personal

position, which this state of society afforded, in comparison with the Asiatic

polity to which it economically corresponded, was one main reason why it

was also found more favourable to improvement. From this time the

economical advancement of society has not been further interrupted. Security

of person and property grew slowly, but steadily. the arts of life made

constant progress; plunder ceased to be the principal source of accumulation;

and feudal Europe ripened into commercial and manufacturing Europe. In the

latter part of the Middle Ages, the towns of Italy and Flanders, the free cities

of Germany, and some towns of France and England, contained a large and

energetic population of artisans, and many rich burghers, whose wealth had

been acquired by manufacturing industry, or by trading in the produce of

such industry. The Commons of England, the Tiers–Etat of France, the

bourgeoisie of the Continent generally, are the descendants of this class. As

these were a saving class, while the posterity of the feudal aristocracy were a

squandering class, the former by degrees substituted themselves for the latter

as the owners of a great proportion of the land. This natural tendency was in

some cases retarded by laws contrived for the purpose of detaining the land in

the families of its existing possessors, in other cases accelerated by political

revolutions. Gradually, though more slowly, the immediate cultivators of the

soil, in all the more civilized countries, ceased to be in a servile or semi-

servile state: though the legal position, as well as the economical condition

attained by them, vary extremely in the different nations of Europe, and in the