of the times are proportional to the cubes of the distances, what he did was

simply to ascertain the property in which the periodic times of all the

different planets agreed.

              Since, therefore, all that is true and to the purpose in Dr. Whewell’s

doctrine of Conceptions might be fully expressed by the more familiar term

Hypothesis; and since his Colligation of Facts by means of appropriate

Conceptions, is but the ordinary process of finding by a comparison of

phenomena, in what consists their agreement or resemblance; I would

willingly have confined myself to those better understood expressions, and

persevered to the end in the same abstinence which I have hitherto observed

from ideological discussions; considering the mechanism of our thoughts to

be a topic distinct from and irrelevant to the principles and rules by which the

trustworthiness of the results of thinking is to be estimated. Since, however, a

work of such high pretensions, and, it must also be said, of so much real

merit, has rested the whole theory of Induction upon such ideological

considerations, it seems necessary for others who follow to claim for

themselves and their doctrines whatever position may properly belong to

them on the same metaphysical ground. And this is the object of the

succeeding chapter.

 

 

     Chapter II. – Of Abstraction, Or The Formation Of Conceptions.

 

 

              § 1. The metaphysical inquiry into the nature and composition of

what have been called Abstract Ideas, or, in other words, of the notions which

answer in the mind to classes and to general names, belongs not to Logic, but

to a different science, and our purpose does not require that we should enter

upon it here. We are only concerned with the universally acknowledged fact,

that such notions or conceptions do exist. The mind can conceive a multitude

of individual things as one assemblage or class; and general names do really

suggest to us certain ideas or mental representations, otherwise we could not

use the names with consciousness of a meaning. Whether the idea called up

by a general name is composed of the various circumstances in which all the

individuals denoted by the name agree, and of no others (which is the

doctrine of Locke, Brown, and the Conceptualists); or whether it be the idea

of some one of those individuals, clothed in its individualizing peculiarities,

but with the accompanying knowledge that those peculiarities are not
                                                                                  207
properties of the class (which is the doctrine of Berkeley, Mr. Bailey, and

the modern Nominalists); or whether (as held by Mr. James Mill) the idea of

the class is that of a miscellaneous assemblage of individuals belonging to the

class; or whether, finally, it be any one or any other of all these, according to

the accidental circumstances of the case; certain it is, that some idea or mental

conception is suggested by a general name, whenever we either hear it or

employ it with consciousness of a meaning. And this, which we may call, if

we please, a general idea, represents in our minds the whole class of things to

which the name is applied. Whenever we think or reason concerning the

class, we do so by means of this idea. And the voluntary power which the

mind has, of attending to one part of what is present to it at any moment, and

neglecting another part, enables us to keep our reasonings and conclusions

respecting the class unaffected by any thing in the idea or mental image

which is not really, or at least which we do not really believe to be common,
                    208
to the whole class.

              There are, then, such things as general conceptions, or conceptions

by means of which we can think generally; and when we form a set of

phenomena into a class, that is, when we compare them with one another toascertain in what they agree, some general conception is implied in this

mental operation. And inasmuch as such a comparison is a necessary

preliminary to Induction, it is most true that Induction could not go on

without general conceptions.

              § 2. But it does not therefore follow that these general conceptions

must have existed in the mind previously to the comparison. It is not a law of

our intellect, that in comparing things with each other and taking note of their

agreement we merely recognize as realized in the outward world something

that we already had in our minds. The conception originally found its way to

us as the result of such a comparison. It was obtained (in metaphysical

phrase) by abstraction from individual things. These things may be things

which we perceived or thought of on former occasions, but they may also be

the things which we are perceiving or thinking of on the very occasion. When

Kepler compared the observed places of the planet Mars, and found that they

agreed in being points of an elliptic circumference, he applied a general

conception which was already in his mind, having been derived from his

former experience. But this is by no means universally the case. When we

compare several objects and find them to agree in being white, or when we

compare the various species of ruminating animals and find them to agree in

being cloven-footed, we have just as much a general conception in our minds

as Kepler had in his: we have the conception of “a white thing,” or the

conception of “a cloven-footed animal.” But no one supposes that we

necessarily bring these conceptions with us, and superinduce them (to adopt

Dr. Whewell’s expression) upon the facts: because in these simple cases

every body sees that the very act of comparison which ends in our connecting

the facts by means of the conception, may be the source from which we

derive the conception itself. If we had never seen any white object or had

never seen any cloven-footed animal before, we should at the same time and

by the same mental act acquire the idea, and employ it for the colligation of

the observed phenomena. Kepler, on the contrary, really had to bring the idea

with him, and superinduce it upon the facts; he could not evolve it out of

them: if he had not already had the idea, he would not have been able to

acquire it by a comparison of the planet’s positions. But this inability was a

mere accident; the idea of an ellipse could have been acquired from the paths

of the planets as effectually as from any thing else, if the paths had not

happened to be invisible. If the planet had left a visible track, and we had

been so placed that we could see it at the proper angle, we might haveabstracted our original idea of an ellipse from the planetary orbit. Indeed,

every conception which can be made the instrument for connecting a set of

facts, might have been originally evolved from those very facts. The

conception is a conception of something; and that which it is a conception of,

is really in the facts, and might, under some supposable circumstances, or by

some supposable extension of the faculties which we actually possess, have

been detected in them. And not only is this always in itself possible, but it

actually happens in almost all cases in which the obtaining of the right

conception is a matter of any considerable difficulty. For if there be no new

conception required; if one of those already familiar to mankind will serve

the purpose, the accident of being the first to whom the right one occurs, may

happen to almost any body; at least in the case of a set of phenomena which

the whole scientific world are engaged in attempting to connect. The honor,

in Kepler’s case, was that of the accurate, patient, and toilsome calculations

by which he compared the results that followed from his different guesses,

with the observations of Tycho Brahe; but the merit was very small of

guessing an ellipse; the only wonder is that men had not guessed it before,

nor could they have failed to do so if there had not existed an obstinate a

priori prejudice that the heavenly bodies must move, if not in a circle, in

some combination of circles.

              The really difficult cases are those in which the conception destined

to create light and order out of darkness and confusion has to be sought for

among the very phenomena which it afterward serves to arrange. Why,

according to Dr. Whewell himself, did the ancients fail in discovering the

laws of mechanics, that is, of equilibrium and of the communication of

motion? Because they had not, or at least had not clearly, the ideas or

conceptions of pressure and resistance, momentum, and uniform and

accelerating force. And whence could they have obtained these ideas except

from the very facts of equilibrium and motion? The tardy development of

several of the physical sciences, for example, of optics, electricity,

magnetism, and the higher generalizations of chemistry, he ascribes to the

fact that mankind had not yet possessed themselves of the Idea of Polarity,

that is, the idea of opposite properties in opposite directions. But what was

there to suggest such an idea, until, by a separate examination of several of

these different branches of knowledge, it was shown that the facts of each of

them did present, in some instances at least, the curious phenomenon of

opposite properties in opposite directions? The thing was superficiallymanifest only in two cases, those of the magnet and of electrified bodies; and

there the conception was encumbered with the circumstance of material

poles, or fixed points in the body itself, in which points this opposition of

properties seemed to be inherent. The first comparison and abstraction had

led only to this conception of poles; and if any thing corresponding to that

conception had existed in the phenomena of chemistry or optics, the

difficulty now justly considered so great, would have been extremely small.

The obscurity arose from the fact, that the polarities in chemistry and optics

were distinct species, though of the same genus, with the polarities in

electricity and magnetism; and that in order to assimilate the phenomena to

one another, it was necessary to compare a polarity without poles, such for

instance as is exemplified in the polarization of light, and the polarity with

(apparent) poles, which we see in the magnet; and to recognize that these

polarities, while different in many other respects, agree in the one character

which is expressed by the phrase, opposite properties in opposite directions.

From the result of such a comparison it was that the minds of scientific men

formed this new general conception; between which, and the first confused

feeling of an analogy between some of the phenomena of light and those of

electricity and magnetism, there is a long interval, filled up by the labors and

more or less sagacious suggestions of many superior minds.

              The conceptions, then, which we employ for the colligation and

methodization of facts, do not develop themselves from within, but are

impressed upon the mind from without; they are never obtained otherwise

than by way of comparison and abstraction, and, in the most important and

the most numerous cases, are evolved by abstraction from the very

phenomena which it is their office to colligate. I am far, however, from

wishing to imply that it is not often a very difficult thing to perform this

process of abstraction well, or that the success of an inductive operation does

not, in many cases, principally depend on the skill with which we perform it.

Bacon was quite justified in designating as one of the principal obstacles to

good induction, general conceptions wrongly formed, “notiones temerè à

rebus abstractæ;” to which Dr. Whewell adds, that not only does bad

abstraction make bad induction, but that, in order to perform induction well,

we must have abstracted well; our general conceptions must be “clear” and

“appropriate” to the matter in hand.

              § 3. In attempting to show what the difficulty in this matter really is,and how it is surmounted, I must beg the reader, once for all, to bear this in

mind; that although, in discussing the opinions of a different school of

philosophy, I am willing to adopt their language, and to speak, therefore, of

connecting facts through the instrumentality of a conception, this technical

phraseology means neither more nor less than what is commonly called

comparing the facts with one another and determining in what they agree.

Nor has the technical expression even the advantage of being metaphysically

correct. The facts are not connected , except in a merely metaphorical

acceptation of the term. The ideas of the facts may become connected, that is,

we may be led to think of them together; but this consequence is no more

than what may be produced by any casual association. What really takes

place, is, I conceive, more philosophically expressed by the common word

Comparison, than by the phrases “to connect” or “to superinduce.” For, as the

general conception is itself obtained by a comparison of particular

phenomena, so, when obtained, the mode in which we apply it to other

phenomena is again by comparison. We compare phenomena with each other

to get the conception, and we then compare those and other phenomena with

the conception. We get the conception of an animal (for instance) by

comparing different animals, and when we afterward see a creature

resembling an animal, we compare it with our general conception of an

animal; and if it agrees with that general conception, we include it in the

class. The conception becomes the type of comparison.

              And we need only consider what comparison is, to see that where the

objects are more than two, and still more when they are an indefinite number,

a type of some sort is an indispensable condition of the comparison. When

we have to arrange and classify a great number of objects according to their

agreements and differences, we do not make a confused attempt to compare

all with all. We know that two things are as much as the mind can easily

attend to at a time, and we therefore fix upon one of the objects, either at

hazard or because it offers in a peculiarly striking manner some important

character, and, taking this as our standard, compare it with one object after

another. If we find a second object which presents a remarkable agreement

with the first, inducing us to class them together, the question instantly arises,

in what particular circumstances do they agree? and to take notice of these

circumstances is already a first stage of abstraction, giving rise to a general

conception. Having advanced thus far, when we now take in hand a third

object we naturally ask ourselves the question, not merely whether this thirdobject agrees with the first, but whether it agrees with it in the same

circumstances in which the second did? in other words, whether it agrees

with the general conception which has been obtained by abstraction from the

first and second? Thus we see the tendency of general conceptions, as soon as

formed, to substitute themselves as types, for whatever individual objects

previously answered that purpose in our comparisons. We may, perhaps, find

that no considerable number of other objects agree with this first general

conception; and that we must drop the conception, and beginning again with

a different individual case, proceed by fresh comparisons to a different

general conception. Sometimes, again, we find that the same conception will

serve, by merely leaving out some of its circumstances; and by this higher

effort of abstraction, we obtain a still more general conception; as in the case

formerly referred to, the scientific world rose from the conception of poles to

the general conception of opposite properties in opposite directions; or as

those South–Sea islanders, whose conception of a quadruped had been

abstracted from hogs (the only animals of that description which they had

seen), when they afterward compared that conception with other quadrupeds,

dropped some of the circumstances, and arrived at the more general

conception which Europeans associate with the term.

              These brief remarks contain, I believe, all that is well grounded in

the doctrine, that the conception by which the mind arranges and gives unity

to phenomena must be furnished by the mind itself, and that we find the right

conception by a tentative process, trying first one and then another until we

hit the mark. The conception is not furnished by the mind until it has been

furnished to the mind; and the facts which supply it are sometimes extraneous

facts, but more often the very facts which we are attempting to arrange by it.

It is quite true, however, that in endeavoring to arrange the facts, at whatever

point we begin, we never advance three steps without forming a general

conception, more or less distinct and precise; and that this general conception

becomes the clue which we instantly endeavor to trace through the rest of the

facts, or rather, becomes the standard with which we thenceforth compare

them. If we are not satisfied with the agreements which we discover among

the phenomena by comparing them with this type, or with some still more

general conception which by an additional stage of abstraction we can form

from the type; we change our path, and look out for other agreements; we

recommence the comparison from a different starting-point, and so generate a

different set of general conceptions. This is the tentative process which Dr.Whewell speaks of; and which has not unnaturally suggested the theory, that

the conception is supplied by the mind itself; since the different conceptions

which the mind successively tries, it either already possessed from its

previous experience, or they were supplied to it in the first stage of the

corresponding act of comparison; so that, in the subsequent part of the

process, the conception manifested itself as something compared with the

phenomena, not evolved from them.

              § 4. If this be a correct account of the instrumentality of general

conceptions in the comparison which necessarily precedes Induction, we are

now able to translate into our own language what Dr. Whewell means by

saying that conceptions, to be subservient to Induction, must be “clear” and

“appropriate.”

              If the conception corresponds to a real agreement among the

phenomena; if the comparison which we have made of a set of objects has led

us to class them according to real resemblances and differences; the

conception which does this can not fail to be appropriate, for some purpose or

other. The question of appropriateness is relative to the particular object we

have in view. As soon as, by our comparison, we have ascertained some

agreement, something which can be predicated in common of a number of

objects; we have obtained a basis on which an inductive process is capable of

being founded. But the agreements, or the ulterior consequences to which

those agreements lead, may be of very different degrees of importance. If, for

instance, we only compare animals according to their color, and class those

together which are colored alike, we form the general conceptions of a white

animal, a black animal, etc., which are conceptions legitimately formed; and

if an induction were to be attempted concerning the causes of the colors of

animals, this comparison would be the proper and necessary preparation for

such an induction, but would not help us toward a knowledge of the laws of

any other of the properties of animals; while if, with Cuvier, we compare and

class them according to the structure of the skeleton, or, with Blainville,

according to the nature of their outward integuments, the agreements and

differences which are observable in these respects are not only of much

greater importance in themselves, but are marks of agreements and

differences in many other important particulars of the structure and mode of

life of the animals. If, therefore, the study of their structure and habits be our

object, the conceptions generated by these last comparisons are far more“appropriate” than those generated by the former. Nothing, other than this,

can be meant by the appropriateness of a conception.

              When Dr. Whewell says that the ancients, or the school-men, or any

modern inquirers, missed discovering the real law of a phenomenon because

they applied to it an inappropriate instead of an appropriate conception; he

can only mean that in comparing various instances of the phenomenon, to

ascertain in what those instances agreed, they missed the important points of

agreement; and fastened upon such as were either imaginary, and not

agreements at all, or, if real agreements, were comparatively trifling, and had

no connection with the phenomenon, the law of which was sought.

              Aristotle, philosophizing on the subject of motion, remarked that

certain motions apparently take place spontaneously; bodies fall to the

ground, flame ascends, bubbles of air rise in water, etc.; and these he called

natural motions; while others not only never take place without external

incitement, but even when such incitement is applied, tend spontaneously to

cease; which, to distinguish them from the former, he called violent motions.

Now, in comparing the so-called natural motions with one another, it

appeared to Aristotle that they agreed in one circumstance, namely, that the

body which moved (or seemed to move) spontaneously, was moving toward

its own place ; meaning thereby the place from whence it originally came, or

the place where a great quantity of matter similar to itself was assembled. In

the other class of motions, as when bodies are thrown up in the air, they are,

on the contrary, moving from their own place. Now, this conception of a

body moving toward its own place may justly be considered inappropriate;

because, though it expresses a circumstance really found in some of the most

familiar instances of motion apparently spontaneous, yet, first, there are many

other cases of such motion, in which that circumstance is absent; the motion,

for instance, of the earth and planets. Secondly, even when it is present, the

motion, on closer examination, would often be seen not to be spontaneous;

as, when air rises in water, it does not rise by its own nature, but is pushed up

by the superior weight of the water which presses upon it. Finally, there are

many cases in which the spontaneous motion takes place in the contrary

direction to what the theory considers as the body’s own place; for instance,

when a fog rises from a lake, or when water dries up. The agreement,

therefore, which Aristotle selected as his principle of classification, did not

extend to all cases of the phenomenon he wanted to study, spontaneousmotion; while it did include cases of the absence of the phenomenon, cases of

motion not spontaneous. The conception was hence “inappropriate.” We may

add that, in the case in question, no conception would be appropriate; there is

no agreement which runs through all the cases of spontaneous or apparently

spontaneous motion and no others; they can not be brought under one law; it
                                    209
is a case of Plurality of Causes.

              § 5. So much for the first of Dr. Whewell’s conditions, that

conceptions must be appropriate. The second is, that they shall be “clear:”

and let us consider what this implies. Unless the conception corresponds to a

real agreement, it has a worse defect than that of not being clear: it is not

applicable to the case at all. Among the phenomena, therefore, which we are

attempting to connect by means of the conception, we must suppose that

there really is an agreement, and that the conception is a conception of that

agreement. In order, then, that it may be clear, the only requisite is, that we

shall know exactly in what the agreement consists; that it shall have been

carefully observed, and accurately remembered. We are said not to have a

clear conception of the resemblance among a set of objects, when we have

only a general feeling that they resemble, without having analyzed their

resemblance, or perceived in what points it consists, and fixed in our memory

an exact recollection of those points. This want of clearness, or, as it may be

otherwise called, this vagueness in the general conception, may be owing

either to our having no accurate knowledge of the objects themselves, or

merely to our not having carefully compared them. Thus a person may have

no clear idea of a ship because he has never seen one, or because he

remembers but little, and that faintly, of what he has seen. Or he may have a

perfect knowledge and remembrance of many ships of various kinds, frigates

among the rest, but he may have no clear but only a confused idea of a

frigate, because he has never been told, and has not compared them

sufficiently to have remarked and remembered, in what particular points a

frigate differs from some other kind of ship.

              It is not, however, necessary, in order to have clear ideas, that we

should know all the common properties of the things which we class together.

That would be to have our conception of the class complete as well as clear.

It is sufficient if we never class things together without knowing exactly why

we do so — without having ascertained exactly what agreements we are

about to include in our conception; and if, after having thus fixed ourconception, we never vary from it, never include in the class any thing which

has not those common properties, nor exclude from it any thing which has. A

clear conception means a determinate conception; one which does not

fluctuate, which is not one thing to-day and another to-morrow, but remains

fixed and invariable, except when, from the progress of our knowledge, or the

correction of some error, we consciously add to it or alter it. A person of clear

ideas is a person who always knows in virtue of what properties his classes

are constituted; what attributes are connoted by his general names.

              The principal requisites, therefore, of clear conceptions, are habits of

attentive observation, an extensive experience, and a memory which receives

and retains an exact image of what is observed. And in proportion as any one

has the habit of observing minutely and comparing carefully a particular class

of phenomena, and an accurate memory for the results of the observation and

comparison, so will his conceptions of that class of phenomena be clear;

provided he has the indispensable habit (naturally, however, resulting from

those other endowments), of never using general names without a precise

connotation.

              As the clearness of our conceptions chiefly depends on the

carefulness and accuracy of our observing and comparing faculties, so their

appropriateness, or rather the chance we have of hitting upon the appropriate

conception in any case, mainly depends on the activity of the same faculties.

He who by habit, grounded on sufficient natural aptitude, has acquired a

readiness in accurately observing and comparing phenomena, will perceive

so many more agreements, and will perceive them so much more rapidly than

other people, that the chances are much greater of his perceiving, in any

instance, the agreement on which the important consequences depend.

              § 6. It is of so much importance that the part of the process of

investigating truth, discussed in this chapter, should be rightly understood,

that I think it is desirable to restate the results we have arrived at, in a

somewhat different mode of expression.

              We can not ascertain general truths, that is, truths applicable to

classes, unless we have formed the classes in such a manner that general

truths can be affirmed of them. In the formation of any class, there is

involved a conception of it as a class, that is, a conception of certain

circumstances as being those which characterize the class, and distinguish theobjects composing it from all other things. When we know exactly what these

circumstances are, we have a clear idea (or conception) of the class, and of

the meaning of the general name which designates it. The primary condition

implied in having this clear idea, is that the class be really a class; that it

correspond to a real distinction; that the things it includes really do agree with

one another in certain particulars, and differ, in those same particulars, from

all other things. A person without clear ideas is one who habitually classes

together, under the same general names, things which have no common

properties, or none which are not possessed also by other things; or who, if

the usage of other people prevents him from actually misclassing things, is

unable to state to himself the common properties in virtue of which he classes

them rightly.

              But is it not the sole requisite of classification that the classes should

be real classes, framed by a legitimate mental process? Some modes of

classing things are more valuable than others for human uses, whether of

speculation or of practice; and our classifications are not well made, unless

the things which they bring together not only agree with each other in

something which distinguishes them from all other things, but agree with

each other and differ from other things in the very circumstances which are of

primary importance for the purpose (theoretical or practical) which we have

in view, and which constitutes the problem before us. In other words, our

conceptions, though they may be clear, are not appropriate for our purpose,

unless the properties we comprise in them are those which will help us

toward what we wish to understand — i.e. , either those which go deepest

into the nature of the things, if our object be to understand that, or those

which are most closely connected with the particular property which we are

endeavoring to investigate.

              We can not, therefore, frame good general conceptions beforehand.

That the conception we have obtained is the one we want, can only be known

when we have done the work for the sake of which we wanted it; when we

completely understand the general character of the phenomena, or the

conditions of the particular property with which we concern ourselves.

General conceptions formed without this thorough knowledge, are Bacon’s

“notiones temerè à rebus abstractæ.” Yet such premature conceptions we

must be continually making up, in our progress to something better. They are

an impediment to the progress of knowledge, only when they arepermanently acquiesced in. When it has become our habit to group things in

wrong classes — in groups which either are not really classes, having no

distinctive points of agreement (absence of clear ideas), or which are not

classes of which any thing important to our purpose can be predicated

(absence of appropriate ideas); and when, in the belief that these badly made

classes are those sanctioned by nature, we refuse to exchange them for others,

and can not or will not make up our general conceptions from any other

elements; in that case all the evils which Bacon ascribes to his “notiones

temerè abstractæ” really occur. This was what the ancients did in physics, and

what the world in general does in morals and politics to the present day.

              It would thus, in my view of the matter, be an inaccurate mode of

expression to say, that obtaining appropriate conceptions is a condition

precedent to generalization. Throughout the whole process of comparing

phenomena with one another for the purpose of generalization, the mind is

trying to make up a conception; but the conception which it is trying to make

up is that of the really important point of agreement in the phenomena. As we

obtain more knowledge of the phenomena themselves, and of the conditions

on which their important properties depend, our views on this subject

naturally alter; and thus we advance from a less to a more “appropriate”

general conception, in the progress of our investigations.

              We ought not, at the same time, to forget that the really important

agreement can not always be discovered by mere comparison of the very

phenomena in question, without the aid of a conception acquired elsewhere;

as in the case, so often referred to, of the planetary orbits.

              The search for the agreement of a set of phenomena is in truth very

similar to the search for a lost or hidden object. At first we place ourselves in

a sufficiently commanding position, and cast our eyes round us, and if we can

see the object it is well; if not, we ask ourselves mentally what are the places

in which it may be hid, in order that we may there search for it: and so on,

until we imagine the place where it really is. And here too we require to have

had a previous conception, or knowledge, of those different places. As in this

familiar process, so in the philosophical operation which it illustrates, we first

endeavor to find the lost object or recognize the common attribute, without

conjecturally invoking the aid of any previously acquired conception, or, in

other words, of any hypothesis. Having failed in this, we call upon our

imagination for some hypothesis of a possible place, or a possible point ofresemblance, and then look to see whether the facts agree with the conjecture.

              For such cases something more is required than a mind accustomed

to accurate observation and comparison. It must be a mind stored with

general conceptions, previously acquired, of the sorts which bear affinity to

the subject of the particular inquiry. And much will also depend on the

natural strength and acquired culture of what has been termed the scientific

imagination; on the faculty possessed of mentally arranging known elements

into new combinations, such as have not yet been observed in nature, though

not contradictory to any known laws.

              But the variety of intellectual habits, the purposes which they serve,

and the modes in which they may be fostered and cultivated, are

considerations belonging to the Art of Education: a subject far wider than

Logic, and which this treatise does not profess to discuss. Here, therefore, the

present chapter may properly close.

 

 

           Chapter III. – Of Naming, As Subsidiary To Induction.

 

 

              § 1. It does not belong to the present undertaking to dwell on the

importance of language as a medium of human intercourse, whether for

purposes of sympathy or of information. Nor does our design admit of more

than a passing allusion to that great property of names, on which their

functions as an intellectual instrument are, in reality, ultimately dependent;

their potency as a means of forming, and of riveting, associations among our
                                                      210
other ideas; a subject on which an able thinker has thus written:

              “Names are impressions of sense, and as such take the strongest hold

on the mind, and of all other impressions can be most easily recalled and

retained in view. They therefore serve to give a point of attachment to all the

more volatile objects of thought and feeling. Impressions that when passed

might be dissipated forever, are, by their connection with language, always

within reach. Thoughts, of themselves, are perpetually slipping out of the

field of immediate mental vision; but the name abides with us, and the

utterance of it restores them in a moment. Words are the custodiers of every

product of mind less impressive than themselves. All extensions of human

knowledge, all new generalizations, are fixed and spread, even

unintentionally, by the use of words. The child growing up learns, along with

the vocables of his mother-tongue, that things which he would have believed

to be different are, in important points, the same. Without any formal

instruction, the language in which we grow up teaches us all the common

philosophy of the age. It directs us to observe and know things which we

should have overlooked; it supplies us with classifications ready made, by

which things are arranged (as far as the light of by-gone generations admits)

with the objects to which they bear the greatest total resemblance. The

number of general names in a language, and the degree of generality of those

names, afford a test of the knowledge of the era, and of the intellectual insight

which is the birthright of any one born into it.”

              It is not, however, of the functions of Names, considered generally,

that we have here to treat, but only of the manner and degree in which they

are directly instrumental to the investigation of truth; in other words, to the

process of induction.              § 2. Observation and Abstraction, the operations which formed the

subject of the two foregoing chapters, are conditions indispensable to

induction; there can be no induction where they are not. It has been imagined

that Naming is also a condition equally indispensable. There are thinkers who

have held that language is not solely, according to a phrase generally current,

an instrument of thought, but the instrument; that names, or something

equivalent to them, some species of artificial signs, are necessary to

reasoning; that there could be no inference, and consequently no induction,

without them. But if the nature of reasoning was correctly explained in the

earlier part of the present work, this opinion must be held to be an

exaggeration, though of an important truth. If reasoning be from particulars to

particulars, and if it consist in recognizing one fact as a mark of another, or a

mark of a mark of another, nothing is required to render reasoning possible,

except senses and association; senses to perceive that two facts are conjoined;

association, as the law by which one of those two facts raises up the idea of
          211
the other. For these mental phenomena, as well as for the belief or

expectation which follows, and by which we recognize as having taken place,

or as about to take place, that of which we have perceived a mark, there is

evidently no need of language. And this inference of one particular fact from

another is a case of induction. It is of this sort of induction that brutes are

capable; it is in this shape that uncultivated minds make almost all their

inductions, and that we all do so in the cases in which familiar experience

forces our conclusions upon us without any active process of inquiry on our

part, and in which the belief or expectation follows the suggestion of the
                                                                    212
evidence with the promptitude and certainty of an instinct.

              § 3. But though inference of an inductive character is possible

without the use of signs, it could never, without them, be carried much

beyond the very simple cases which we have just described, and which form,

in all probability, the limit of the reasonings of those animals to whom

conventional language is unknown. Without language, or something

equivalent to it, there could only be as much reasoning from experience as

can take place without the aid of general propositions. Now, though in

strictness we may reason from past experience to a fresh individual case

without the intermediate stage of a general proposition, yet without general

propositions we should seldom remember what past experience we have had,

and scarcely ever what conclusions that experience will warrant. The division

of the inductive process into two parts, the first ascertaining what is a mark ofthe given fact, the second whether in the new case that mark exists, is natural,

and scientifically indispensable. It is, indeed, in a majority of cases, rendered

necessary by mere distance of time. The experience by which we are to guide

our judgments may be other people’s experience, little of which can be

communicated to us otherwise than by language; when it is our own, it is

generally experience long past; unless, therefore, it were recorded by means

of artificial signs, little of it (except in cases involving our intenser sensations

or emotions, or the subjects of our daily and hourly contemplation) would be

retained in the memory. It is hardly necessary to add, that when the inductive

inference is of any but the most direct and obvious nature — when it requires

several observations or experiments, in varying circumstances, and the

comparison of one of these with another — it is impossible to proceed a step,

without the artificial memory which words bestow. Without words, we

should, if we had often seen A and B in immediate and obvious conjunction,

expect B whenever we saw A; but to discover their conjunction when not

obvious, or to determine whether it is really constant or only casual, and

whether there is reason to expect it under any given change of circumstances,

is a process far too complex to be performed without some contrivance to

make our remembrance of our own mental operations accurate. Now,

language is such a contrivance. When that instrument is called to our aid, the

difficulty is reduced to that of making our remembrance of the meaning of

words accurate. This being secured, whatever passes through our minds may

be remembered accurately, by putting it carefully into words, and committing

the words either to writing or to memory.

              The function of Naming, and particularly of General Names, in

Induction, may be recapitulated as follows. Every inductive inference which

is good at all, is good for a whole class of cases; and, that the inference may

have any better warrant of its correctness than the mere clinging together of

two ideas, a process of experimentation and comparison is necessary; in

which the whole class of cases must be brought to view, and some uniformity

in the course of nature evolved and ascertained, since the existence of such a

uniformity is required as a justification for drawing the inference in even a

single case. This uniformity, therefore, may be ascertained once for all; and

if, being ascertained, it can be remembered, it will serve as a formula for

making, in particular cases, all such inferences as the previous experience

will warrant. But we can only secure its being remembered, or give ourselves

even a chance of carrying in our memory any considerable number of suchuniformities, by registering them through the medium of permanent signs;

which (being, from the nature of the case, signs not of an individual fact, but

of a uniformity, that is, of an indefinite number of facts similar to one

another) are general signs; universals; general names, and general

propositions.

              § 4. And here I can not omit to notice an oversight committed by

some eminent thinkers; who have said that the cause of our using general

names is the infinite multitude of individual objects, which, making it

impossible to have a name for each, compels us to make one name serve for

many.

              This is a very limited view of the function of general names. Even if

there were a name for every individual object, we should require general

names as much as we now do. Without them we could not express the result

of a single comparison, nor record any one of the uniformities existing in

nature; and should be hardly better off in respect to Induction than if we had

no names at all. With none but names of individuals (or, in other words,

proper names), we might, by pronouncing the name, suggest the idea of the

object, but we could not assert any proposition; except the unmeaning ones

formed by predicating two proper names one of another. It is only by means

of general names that we can convey any information, predicate any attribute,

even of an individual, much more of a class. Rigorously speaking, we could

get on without any other general names than the abstract names of attributes;

all our propositions might be of the form “such an individual object possesses

such an attribute,” or “such an attribute is always (or never) conjoined with

such another attribute.” In fact, however, mankind have always given general

names to objects as well as attributes, and indeed before attributes: but the

general names given to objects imply attributes, derive their whole meaning

from attributes; and are chiefly useful as the language by means of which we

predicate the attributes which they connote.

              It remains to be considered what principles are to be adhered to in

giving general names, so that these names, and the general propositions in

which they fill a place, may conduce most to the purposes of Induction.Chapter IV. – Of The Requisites Of A Philosophical Language, And The

                              Principles Of Definition.

 

 

              § 1. In order that we may possess a language perfectly suitable for

the investigation and expression of general truths, there are two principal, and

several minor requisites. The first is, that every general name should have a

meaning, steadily fixed, and precisely determined. When, by the fulfillment

of this condition, such names as we possess are fitted for the due performance

of their functions, the next requisite, and the second in order of importance, is

that we should possess a name wherever one is needed; wherever there is any

thing to be designated by it, which it is of importance to express.

              The former of these requisites is that to which our attention will be

exclusively directed in the present chapter.

              § 2. Every general name, then, must have a certain and knowable

meaning. Now the meaning (as has so often been explained) of a general

connotative name, resides in the connotation; in the attribute on account of

which, and to express which, the name is given. Thus, the name animal being

given to all things which possess the attributes of sensation and voluntary

motion, the word connotes those attributes exclusively, and they constitute

the whole of its meaning. If the name be abstract, its denotation is the same

with the connotation of the corresponding concrete; it designates directly the

attribute, which the concrete term implies. To give a precise meaning to

general names is, then, to fix with steadiness the attribute or attributes

connoted by each concrete general name, and denoted by the corresponding

abstract. Since abstract names, in the order of their creation, do not precede

but follow concrete ones, as is proved by the etymological fact that they are

almost always derived from them; we may consider their meaning as

determined by, and dependent on, the meaning of their concrete; and thus the

problem of giving a distinct meaning to general language, is all included in

that of giving a precise connotation to all concrete general names.

              This is not difficult in the case of new names; of the technical terms

created by scientific inquirers for the purposes of science or art. But when a

name is in common use, the difficulty is greater; the problem in this case notbeing that of choosing a convenient connotation for the name, but of

ascertaining and fixing the connotation with which it is already used. That

this can ever be a matter of doubt, is a sort of paradox. But the vulgar

(including in that term all who have not accurate habits of thought) seldom

know exactly what assertion they intend to make, what common property

they mean to express, when they apply the same name to a number of

different things. All which the name expresses with them, when they

predicate it of an object, is a confused feeling of resemblance between that

object and some of the other things which they have been accustomed to

denote by the name. They have applied the name Stone to various objects

previously seen; they see a new object, which appears to them somewhat like

the former, and they call it a stone, without asking themselves in what respect

it is like, or what mode or degree of resemblance the best authorities, or even

they themselves, require as a warrant for using the name. This rough general

impression of resemblance is, however, made up of particular circumstances

of resemblance; and into these it is the business of the logician to analyze it;

to ascertain what points of resemblance among the different things commonly

called by the name, have produced in the common mind this vague feeling of

likeness; have given to the things the similarity of aspect, which has made

them a class, and has caused the same name to be bestowed upon them.

              But though general names are imposed by the vulgar without any

more definite connotation than that of a vague resemblance; general

propositions come in time to be made, in which predicates are applied to

those names, that is, general assertions are made concerning the whole of the

things which are denoted by the name. And since by each of these

propositions some attribute, more or less precisely conceived, is of course

predicated, the ideas of these various attributes thus become associated with

the name, and in a sort of uncertain way it comes to connote them; there is a

hesitation to apply the name in any new case in which any of the attributes

familiarly predicated of the class do not exist. And thus, to common minds,

the propositions which they are in the habit of hearing or uttering concerning

a class make up in a loose way a sort of connotation for the class name. Let

us take, for instance, the word Civilized. How few could be found, even

among the most educated persons, who would undertake to say exactly what

the term Civilized connotes. Yet there is a feeling in the minds of all who use

it, that they are using it with a meaning; and this meaning is made up, in a

confused manner, of every thing which they have heard or read that civilizedmen or civilized communities are, or may be expected to be.

              It is at this stage, probably, in the progress of a concrete name, that

the corresponding abstract name generally comes into use. Under the notion

that the concrete name must of course convey a meaning, or, in other words,

that there is some property common to all things which it denotes, people

give a name to this common property; from the concrete Civilized, they form

the abstract Civilization. But since most people have never compared the

different things which are called by the concrete name, in such a manner as to

ascertain what properties these things have in common, or whether they have

any; each is thrown back upon the marks by which he himself has been

accustomed to be guided in his application of the term; and these, being

merely vague hearsays and current phrases, are not the same in any two

persons, nor in the same person at different times. Hence the word (as

Civilization, for example) which professes to be the designation of the

unknown common property, conveys scarcely to any two minds the same

idea. No two persons agree in the things they predicate of it; and when it is

itself predicated of any thing, no other person knows, nor does the speaker

himself know with precision, what he means to assert. Many other words

which could be named, as the word honor , or the word gentleman ,

exemplify this uncertainty still more strikingly.

              It needs scarcely be observed, that general propositions of which no

one can tell exactly what they assert, can not possibly have been brought to

the test of a correct induction. Whether a name is to be used as an instrument

of thinking, or as a means of communicating the result of thought, it is

imperative to determine exactly the attribute or attributes which it is to

express; to give it, in short, a fixed and ascertained connotation.

              § 3. It would, however, be a complete misunderstanding of the

proper office of a logician in dealing with terms already in use, if we were to

think that because a name has not at present an ascertained connotation, it is

competent to any one to give it such a connotation at his own choice. The

meaning of a term actually in use is not an arbitrary quantity to be fixed, but

an unknown quantity to be sought.

              In the first place, it is obviously desirable to avail ourselves, as far as

possible, of the associations already connected with the name; not enjoining

the employment of it in a manner which conflicts with all previous habits,and especially not so as to require the rupture of those strongest of all

associations between names, which are created by familiarity with

propositions in which they are predicated of one another. A philosopher

would have little chance of having his example followed, if he were to give

such a meaning to his terms as should require us to call the North American

Indians a civilized people, or the higher classes in Europe savages; or to say

that civilized people live by hunting, and savages by agriculture. Were there

no other reason, the extreme difficulty of effecting so complete a revolution

in speech would be more than a sufficient one. The endeavor should be, that

all generally received propositions into which the term enters, should be at

least as true after its meaning is fixed, as they were before; and that the

concrete name, therefore, should not receive such a connotation as shall

prevent it from denoting things which, in common language, it is currently

affirmed of. The fixed and precise connotation which it receives should not

be in deviation from, but in agreement (as far as it goes) with, the vague and

fluctuating connotation which the term already had.

              To fix the connotation of a concrete name, or the denotation of the

corresponding abstract, is to define the name. When this can be done without

rendering any received assertions inadmissible, the name can be defined in

accordance with its received use, which is vulgarly called defining not the

name but the thing. What is meant by the improper expression of defining a

thing (or rather a class of things — for nobody talks of defining an

individual), is to define the name, subject to the condition that it shall denote

those things. This, of course, supposes a comparison of the things, feature by

feature and property by property, to ascertain what attributes they agree in;

and not unfrequently an operation strictly inductive, for the purpose of

ascertaining some unobvious agreement, which is the cause of the obvious

agreements.

              For, in order to give a connotation to a name, consistently with its

denoting certain objects, we have to make our selection from among the

various attributes in which those objects agree. To ascertain in what they do

agree is, therefore, the first logical operation requisite. When this has been

done as far as is necessary or practicable, the question arises, which of these

common attributes shall be selected to be associated with the name. For if the

class which the name denotes be a Kind, the common properties are

innumerable; and even if not, they are often extremely numerous. Our choiceis first limited by the preference to be given to properties which are well

known, and familiarly predicated of the class; but even these are often too

numerous to be all included in the definition, and, besides, the properties

most generally known may not be those which serve best to mark out the

class from all others. We should therefore select from among the common

properties (if among them any such are to be found) those on which it has

been ascertained by experience, or proved by deduction, that many others

depend; or at least which are sure marks of them, and from whence, therefore,

many others will follow by inference. We thus see that to frame a good

definition of a name already in use, is not a matter of choice but of

discussion, and discussion not merely respecting the usage of language, but

respecting the properties of things, and even the origin of those properties.

And hence every enlargement of our knowledge of the objects to which the

name is applied, is liable to suggest an improvement in the definition. It is

impossible to frame a perfect set of definitions on any subject, until the

theory of the subject is perfect; and as science makes progress, its definitions

are also progressive.

              § 4. The discussion of Definitions, in so far as it does not turn on the

use of words but on the properties of things, Dr. Whewell calls the

Explication of Conceptions. The act of ascertaining, better than before, in

what particulars any phenomena which are classed together agree, he calls in

his technical phraseology, unfolding the general conception in virtue of

which they are so classed. Making allowance for what appears to me the

darkening and misleading tendency of this mode of expression, several of his

remarks are so much to the purpose, that I shall take the liberty of

transcribing them.

                        213
              He observes, that many of the controversies which have had an

important share in the formation of the existing body of science, have

“assumed the form of a battle of Definitions. For example, the inquiry

concerning the laws of falling bodies led to the question whether the proper

definition of a uniform force is that it generates a velocity proportional to the

space from rest, or to the time . The controversy of the vis viva was what was

the proper definition of the measure of force . A principal question in the

classification of minerals is, what is the definition of a mineral species .

Physiologists have endeavored to throw light on their subject by defining

organization , or some similar term.” Questions of the same nature were longopen and are not yet completely closed, respecting the definitions of Specific

Heat, Latent Heat, Chemical Combination, and Solution.

              “It is very important for us to observe, that these controversies have

never been questions of insulated and arbitrary definitions, as men seem

often tempted to imagine them to have been. In all cases there is a tacit

assumption of some proposition which is to be expressed by means of the

definition, and which gives it its importance. The dispute concerning the

definition thus acquires a real value, and becomes a question concerning true

and false. Thus, in the discussion of the question, What is a uniform force? it

was taken for granted that gravity is a uniform force. In the debate of the vis

viva , it was assumed that in the mutual action of bodies the whole effect of

the force is unchanged. In the zoological definition of species (that it consists

of individuals which have, or may have, sprung from the same parents), it is

presumed that individuals so related resemble each other more than those

which are excluded by such a definition; or, perhaps, that species so defined

have permanent and definite differences. A definition of organization, or of

some other term which was not employed to express some principle, would

be of no value.

              “The establishment, therefore, of a right definition of a term, may be

a useful step in the explication of our conceptions; but this will be the case

then only when we have under our consideration some proposition in which

the term is employed. For then the question really is, how the conception

shall be understood and defined in order that the proposition may be true.

              “To unfold our conceptions by means of definitions has never been

serviceable to science, except when it has been associated with an immediate

use of the definitions. The endeavor to define a Uniform Force was combined

with the assertion that gravity is a uniform force; the attempt to define

Accelerating Force was immediately followed by the doctrine that

accelerating forces may be compounded; the process of defining Momentum

was connected with the principle that momenta gained and lost are equal;

naturalists would have given in vain the definition of Species which we have

quoted, if they had not also given the characters of species so separated....

Definition may be the best mode of explaining our conception, but that which

alone makes it worth while to explain it in any mode, is the opportunity of

using it in the expression of truth. When a definition is propounded to us as a

useful step in knowledge, we are always entitled to ask what principle itserves to enunciate.”

              In giving, then, an exact connotation to the phrase, “a uniform

force,” the condition was understood, that the phrase should continue to

denote gravity. The discussion, therefore, respecting the definition, resolved

itself into this question, What is there of a uniform nature in the motions

produced by gravity? By observations and comparisons, it was found that

what was uniform in those motions was the ratio of the velocity acquired to

the time elapsed; equal velocities being added in equal times. A uniform

force, therefore, was defined a force which adds equal velocities in equal

times. So, again, in defining momentum. It was already a received doctrine

that, when two objects impinge upon one another, the momentum lost by the

one is equal to that gained by the other. This proposition it was deemed

necessary to preserve, not from the motive (which operates in many other

cases) that it was firmly fixed in popular belief; for the proposition in

question had never been heard of by any but the scientifically instructed. But

it was felt to contain a truth; even a superficial observation of the phenomena

left no doubt that in the propagation of motion from one body to another,

there was something of which the one body gained precisely what the other

lost; and the word momentum had been invented to express this unknown

something. The settlement, therefore, of the definition of momentum,

involved the determination of the question, What is that of which a body,

when it sets another body in motion, loses exactly as much as it

communicates? And when experiment had shown that this something was the

product of the velocity of the body by its mass, or quantity of matter, this

became the definition of momentum.

                                    214
              The following remarks, therefore, are perfectly just: “The business

of definition is part of the business of discovery.... To define, so that our

definition shall have any scientific value, requires no small portion of that

sagacity by which truth is detected.... When it has been clearly seen what

ought to be our definition, it must be pretty well known what truth we have to

state. The definition, as well as the discovery, supposes a decided step in our

knowledge to have been made. The writers on Logic, in the Middle Ages,

made Definition the last stage in the progress of knowledge; and in this

arrangement at least, the history of science, and the philosophy derived from

the history, confirm their speculative views.” For in order to judge finally

how the name which denotes a class may best be defined, we must know allthe properties common to the class, and all the relations of causation or

dependence among those properties.

              If the properties which are fittest to be selected as marks of other

common properties are also obvious and familiar, and especially if they bear

a great part in producing that general air of resemblance which was the

original inducement to the formation of the class, the definition will then be

most felicitous. But it is often necessary to define the class by some property

not familiarly known, provided that property be the best mark of those which

are known. M. De Blainville, for instance, founded his definition of life on

the process of decomposition and recomposition which incessantly takes

place in every living body, so that the particles composing it are never for

two instants the same. This is by no means one of the most obvious properties

of living bodies; it might escape altogether the notice of an unscientific

observer. Yet great authorities (independently of M. De Blainville, who is

himself a first-rate authority) have thought that no other property so well

answers the conditions required for the definition.

              § 5. Having laid down the principles which ought for the most part

to be observed in attempting to give a precise connotation to a term in use, I

must now add, that it is not always practicable to adhere to those principles,

and that even when practicable, it is occasionally not desirable.

              Cases in which it is impossible to comply with all the conditions of a

precise definition of a name in agreement with usage, occur very frequently.

There is often no one connotation capable of being given to a word, so that it

shall still denote every thing it is accustomed to denote; or that all the

propositions into which it is accustomed to enter, and which have any

foundation in truth, shall remain true. Independently of accidental

ambiguities, in which the different meanings have no connection with one

another; it continually happens that a word is used in two or more senses

derived from each other, but yet radically distinct. So long as a term is vague,

that is, so long as its connotation is not ascertained and permanently fixed, it

is constantly liable to be applied by extension from one thing to another, until

it reaches things which have little, or even no, resemblance to those which

were first designated by it.

                                                                                    215
              “Suppose,” says Dugald Stewart, in his Philosophical Essays ,

“that the letters A, B, C, D, E, denote a series of objects; that A possessessome one quality in common with B; B a quality in common with C; C a

quality in common with D; D a quality in common with E; while at the same

time, no quality can be found which belongs in common to any three objects

in the series. Is it not conceivable, that the affinity between A and B may

produce a transference of the name of the first to the second; and that, in

consequence of the other affinities which connect the remaining objects

together, the same name may pass in succession from B to C; from C to D;

and from D to E? In this manner, a common appellation will arise between A

and E, although the two objects may, in their nature and properties, be so

widely distant from each other, that no stretch of imagination can conceive

how the thoughts were led from the former to the latter. The transitions,

nevertheless, may have been all so easy and gradual, that, were they

successfully detected by the fortunate ingenuity of a theorist, we should

instantly recognize, not only the verisimilitude, but the truth of the

conjecture: in the same way as we admit, with the confidence of intuitive

conviction, the certainty of the well-known etymological process which

connects the Latin preposition e or ex with the English substantive stranger ,

the moment that the intermediate links of the chain are submitted to our
              216
examination.”

              The applications which a word acquires by this gradual extension of

it from one set of objects to another, Stewart, adopting an expression from

Mr. Payne Knight, calls its transitive applications; and after briefly

illustrating such of them as are the result of local or casual associations, he
                      217
proceeds as follows:

              “But although by far the greater part of the transitive or derivative

applications of words depend on casual and unaccountable caprices of the

feelings or the fancy, there are certain cases in which they open a very

interesting field of philosophical speculation. Such are those, in which an

analogous transference of the corresponding term may be remarked

universally, or very generally, in other languages; and in which, of course,

the uniformity of the result must be ascribed to the essential principles of the

human frame. Even in such cases, however, it will by no means be always

found, on examination, that the various applications of the same term have

arisen from any common quality or qualities in the objects to which they

relate. In the greater number of instances, they may be traced to some natural

and universal associations of ideas, founded in the common faculties,common organs, and common condition of the human race.... According to

the different degrees of intimacy and strength in the associations on which

the transitions of language are founded, very different effects may be

expected to arise. Where the association is slight and casual, the several

meanings will remain distinct from each other, and will often, in process of

time, assume the appearance of capricious varieties in the use of the same

arbitrary sign. Where the association is so natural and habitual as to become

virtually indissoluble, the transitive meanings will coalesce in one complex

conception; and every new transition will become a more comprehensive

generalization of the term in question. ”

              I solicit particular attention to the law of mind expressed in the last

sentence, and which is the source of the perplexity so often experienced in

detecting these transitions of meaning. Ignorance of that law is the shoal on

which some of the most powerful intellects which have adorned the human

race have been stranded. The inquiries of Plato into the definitions of some of

the most general terms of moral speculation are characterized by Bacon as a

far nearer approach to a true inductive method than is elsewhere to be found

among the ancients, and are, indeed, almost perfect examples of the

preparatory process of comparison and abstraction; but, from being unaware

of the law just mentioned, he often wasted the powers of this great logical

instrument on inquiries in which it could realize no result, since the

phenomena, whose common properties he so elaborately endeavored to

detect, had not really any common properties. Bacon himself fell into the

same error in his speculations on the nature of heat, in which he evidently

confounded under the name hot, classes of phenomena which have no

property in common. Stewart certainly overstates the matter when he speaks

of “a prejudice which has descended to modern times from the scholastic

ages, that when a word admits of a variety of significations, these different

significations must all be species of the same genus, and must consequently

include some essential idea common to every individual to which the generic
                        218
term can be applied;” for both Aristotle and his followers were well aware

that there are such things as ambiguities of language, and delighted in

distinguishing them. But they never suspected ambiguity in the cases where

(as Stewart remarks) the association on which the transition of meaning was

founded is so natural and habitual, that the two meanings blend together in

the mind, and a real transition becomes an apparent generalization.

Accordingly they wasted infinite pains in endeavoring to find a definitionwhich would serve for several distinct meanings at once; as in an instance

noticed by Stewart himself, that of “causation; the ambiguity of the word

which, in the Greek language corresponds to the English word cause , having

suggested to them the vain attempt of tracing the common idea which, in the

case of any effect , belongs to the efficient , to the matter , to the form , and to

the end . The idle generalities” (he adds) “we meet with in other

philosophers, about the ideas of the good , the fit , and the becoming , have

taken their rise from the same undue influence of popular epithets on the
                                219
speculations of the learned.”

              Among the words which have undergone so many successive

transitions of meaning that every trace of a property common to all the things

they are applied to, or at least common and also peculiar to those things, has

been lost, Stewart considers the word Beautiful to be one. And (without

attempting to decide a question which in no respect belongs to logic) I can

not but feel, with him, considerable doubt whether the word beautiful

connotes the same property when we speak of a beautiful color, a beautiful

face, a beautiful scene, a beautiful character, and a beautiful poem. The word

was doubtless extended from one of these objects to another on account of a

resemblance between them, or, more probably, between the emotions they

excited; and, by this progressive extension, it has at last reached things very

remote from those objects of sight to which there is no doubt that it was first

appropriated; and it is at least questionable whether there is now any property

common to all the things which, consistently with usage, may be called

beautiful, except the property of agreeableness, which the term certainly does

connote, but which can not be all that people usually intend to express by it,

since there are many agreeable things which are never called beautiful. If

such be the case, it is impossible to give to the word Beautiful any fixed

connotation, such that it shall denote all the objects which in common use it

now denotes, but no others. A fixed connotation, however, it ought to have;

for, so long as it has not, it is unfit to be used as a scientific term, and is a

perpetual source of false analogies and erroneous generalizations.

              This, then, constitutes a case in exemplification of our remark, that

even when there is a property common to all the things denoted by a name, to

erect that property into the definition and exclusive connotation of the name

is not always desirable. The various things called beautiful unquestionably

resemble one another in being agreeable; but to make this the definition ofbeauty, and so extend the word Beautiful to all agreeable things, would be to

drop altogether a portion of meaning which the word really, though

indistinctly, conveys, and to do what depends on us toward causing those

qualities of the objects which the word previously, though vaguely, pointed

at, to be overlooked and forgotten. It is better, in such a case, to give a fixed

connotation to the term by restricting, than by extending its use; rather

excluding from the epithet Beautiful some things to which it is commonly

considered applicable, than leaving out of its connotation any of the qualities

by which, though occasionally lost sight of, the general mind may have been

habitually guided in the commonest and most interesting applications of the

term. For there is no question that when people call any thing beautiful, they

think they are asserting more than that it is merely agreeable. They think they

are ascribing a peculiar sort of agreeableness, analogous to that which they

find in some other of the things to which they are accustomed to apply the

same name. If, therefore, there be any peculiar sort of agreeableness which is

common though not to all, yet to the principal things which are called

beautiful, it is better to limit the denotation of the term to those things, than to

leave that kind of quality without a term to connote it, and thereby divert

attention from its peculiarities.

              § 6. The last remark exemplifies a rule of terminology, which is of

great importance, and which has hardly yet been recognized as a rule, but by

a few thinkers of the present century. In attempting to rectify the use of a

vague term by giving it a fixed connotation, we must take care not to discard

(unless advisedly, and on the ground of a deeper knowledge of the subject)

any portion of the connotation which the word, in however indistinct a

manner, previously carried with it. For otherwise language loses one of its

inherent and most valuable properties, that of being the conservator of

ancient experience; the keeper-alive of those thoughts and observations of

former ages, which may be alien to the tendencies of the passing time. This

function of language is so often overlooked or undervalued, that a few

observations on it appear to be extremely required.

              Even when the connotation of a term has been accurately fixed, and

still more if it has been left in the state of a vague unanalyzed feeling of

resemblance; there is a constant tendency in the word, through familiar use,

to part with a portion of its connotation. It is a well-known law of the mind,

that a word originally associated with a very complex cluster of ideas, is farfrom calling up all those ideas in the mind, every time the word is used; it

calls up only one or two, from which the mind runs on by fresh associations

to another set of ideas, without waiting for the suggestion of the remainder of

the complex cluster. If this were not the case, processes of thought could not

take place with any thing like the rapidity which we know they possess. Very

often, indeed, when we are employing a word in our mental operations, we

are so far from waiting until the complex idea which corresponds to the

meaning of the word is consciously brought before us in all its parts, that we

run on to new trains of ideas by the other associations which the mere word

excites, without having realized in our imagination any part whatever of the

meaning; thus using the word, and even using it well and accurately, and

carrying on important processes of reasoning by means of it, in an almost

mechanical manner; so much so, that some metaphysicians, generalizing

from an extreme case, have fancied that all reasoning is but the mechanical

use of a set of terms according to a certain form. We may discuss and settle

the most important interests of towns or nations, by the application of general

theorems or practical maxims previously laid down, without having had

consciously suggested to us, once in the whole process, the houses and green

fields, the thronged market-places and domestic hearths, of which not only

those towns and nations consist, but which the words town and nation

confessedly mean.

              Since, then, general names come in this manner to be used (and even

to do a portion of their work well) without suggesting to the mind the whole

of their meaning, and often with the suggestion of a very small, or no part at

all of that meaning; we can not wonder that words so used come in time to be

no longer capable of suggesting any other of the ideas appropriated to them,

than those with which the association is most immediate and strongest, or

most kept up by the incidents of life; the remainder being lost altogether;

unless the mind, by often consciously dwelling on them, keeps up the

association. Words naturally retain much more of their meaning to persons of

active imagination, who habitually represent to themselves things in the

concrete, with the detail which belongs to them in the actual world. To minds

of a different description, the only antidote to this corruption of language is

predication. The habit of predicating of the name, all the various properties

which it originally connoted, keeps up the association between the name and

those properties.              But in order that it may do so, it is necessary that the predicates

should themselves retain their association with the properties which they

severally connote. For the propositions can not keep the meaning of the

words alive, if the meaning of the propositions themselves should die. And

nothing is more common than for propositions to be mechanically repeated,

mechanically retained in the memory, and their truth undoubtingly assented

to and relied on, while yet they carry no meaning distinctly home to the mind;

and while the matter of fact or law of nature which they originally expressed

is as much lost sight of, and practically disregarded, as if it never had been

heard of at all. In those subjects which are at the same time familiar and

complicated, and especially in those which are so in as great a degree as

moral and social subjects are, it is a matter of common remark how many

important propositions are believed and repeated from habit, while no

account could be given, and no sense is practically manifested, of the truths

which they convey. Hence it is, that the traditional maxims of old experience,

though seldom questioned, have often so little effect on the conduct of life;

because their meaning is never, by most persons, really felt, until personal

experience has brought it home. And thus also it is that so many doctrines of

religion, ethics, and even politics, so full of meaning and reality to first

converts, have manifested (after the association of that meaning with the

verbal formulas has ceased to be kept up by the controversies which

accompanied their first introduction) a tendency to degenerate rapidly into

lifeless dogmas; which tendency, all the efforts of an education expressly and

skillfully directed to keeping the meaning alive, are barely sufficient to

counteract.

              Considering, then, that the human mind, in different generations,

occupies itself with different things, and in one age is led by the

circumstances which surround it to fix more of its attention upon one of the

properties of a thing, in another age upon another; it is natural and inevitable

that in every age a certain portion of our recorded and traditional knowledge,

not being continually suggested by the pursuits and inquiries with which

mankind are at that time engrossed, should fall asleep, as it were, and fade

from the memory. It would be in danger of being totally lost, if the

propositions or formulas, the results of the previous experience, did not

remain, as forms of words it may be, but of words that once really conveyed,

and are still supposed to convey, a meaning: which meaning, though

suspended, may be historically traced, and when suggested, may berecognized by minds of the necessary endowments as being still matter of

fact, or truth. While the formulas remain, the meaning may at any time

revive; and as, on the one hand, the formulas progressively lose the meaning

they were intended to convey, so, on the other, when this forgetfulness has

reached its height and begun to produce obvious consequences, minds arise

which from the contemplation of the formulas rediscover the truth, when

truth it was, which was contained in them, and announce it again to mankind,

not as a discovery, but as the meaning of that which they have been taught,

and still profess to believe.

              Thus there is a perpetual oscillation in spiritual truths, and in

spiritual doctrines of any significance, even when not truths. Their meaning is

almost always in a process either of being lost or of being recovered.

Whoever has attended to the history of the more serious convictions of

mankind — of the opinions by which the general conduct of their lives is, or

as they conceive ought to be, more especially regulated — is aware that even

when recognizing verbally the same doctrines, they attach to them at different

periods a greater or a less quantity, and even a different kind of meaning. The

words in their original acceptation connoted, and the propositions expressed,

a complication of outward facts and inward feelings, to different portions of

which the general mind is more particularly alive in different generations of

mankind. To common minds, only that portion of the meaning is in each

generation suggested, of which that generation possesses the counterpart in

its own habitual experience. But the words and propositions lie ready to

suggest to any mind duly prepared the remainder of the meaning. Such

individual minds are almost always to be found; and the lost meaning,

revived by them, again by degrees works its way into the general mind.

              The arrival of this salutary reaction may, however, be materially

retarded by the shallow conceptions and incautious proceedings of mere

logicians. It sometimes happens that toward the close of the downward

period, when the words have lost part of their significance, and have not yet

begun to recover it, persons arise whose leading and favorite idea is the

importance of clear conceptions and precise thought, and the necessity,

therefore, of definite language. These persons, in examining the old formulas,

easily perceive that words are used in them without a meaning; and if they are

not the sort of persons who are capable of rediscovering the lost signification,

they naturally enough dismiss the formula, and define the name withoutreference to it. In so doing they fasten down the name to what it connotes in

common use at the time when it conveys the smallest quantity of meaning;

and introduce the practice of employing it, consistently and uniformly,

according to that connotation. The word in this way acquires an extent of

denotation far beyond what it had before; it becomes extended to many things

to which it was previously, in appearance capriciously, refused. Of the

propositions in which it was formerly used, those which were true in virtue of

the forgotten part of its meaning are now, by the clearer light which the

definition diffuses, seen not to be true according to the definition; which,

however, is the recognized and sufficiently correct expression of all that is

perceived to be in the mind of any one by whom the term is used at the

present day. The ancient formulas are consequently treated as prejudices; and

people are no longer taught as before, though not to understand them, yet to

believe that there is truth in them. They no longer remain in the general mind

surrounded by respect, and ready at any time to suggest their original

meaning. Whatever truths they contain are not only, in these circumstances,

rediscovered far more slowly, but, when rediscovered, the prejudice with

which novelties are regarded is now, in some degree at least, against them,

instead of being on their side.

              An example may make these remarks more intelligible. In all ages,

except where moral speculation has been silenced by outward compulsion, or

where the feelings which prompt to it still continue to be satisfied by the

traditional doctrines of an established faith, one of the subjects which have

most occupied the minds of thinking persons is the inquiry, What is virtue?

or, What is a virtuous character? Among the different theories on the subject

which have, at different times, grown up and obtained partial currency, every

one of which reflected as in the clearest mirror the express image of the age

which gave it birth; there was one, according to which virtue consists in a

correct calculation of our own personal interests, either in this world only, or

also in another. To make this theory plausible, it was of course necessary that

the only beneficial actions which people in general were accustomed to see,

or were therefore accustomed to praise, should be such as were, or at least

might without contradicting obvious facts be supposed to be, the result of a

prudential regard to self-interest; so that the words really connoted no more,

in common acceptation, than was set down in the definition.

              Suppose, now, that the partisans of this theory had contrived tointroduce a consistent and undeviating use of the term according to this

definition. Suppose that they had seriously endeavored, and had succeeded in

the endeavor, to banish the word disinterestedness from the language; had

obtained the disuse of all expressions attaching odium to selfishness or

commendation to self-sacrifice, or which implied generosity or kindness to be

any thing but doing a benefit in order to receive a greater personal advantage

in return. Need we say that this abrogation of the old formulas for the sake of

preserving clear ideas and consistency of thought, would have been a great

evil? while the very inconsistency incurred by the co-existence of the

formulas with philosophical opinions which seemed to condemn them as

absurdities, operated as a stimulus to the re-examination of the subject and

thus the very doctrines originating in the oblivion into which a part of the

truth had fallen, were rendered indirectly, but powerfully, instrumental to its

revival.

              The doctrine of the Coleridge school, that the language of any

people among whom culture is of old date, is a sacred deposit, the property of

all ages, and which no one age should consider itself empowered to alter —

borders indeed, as thus expressed, on an extravagance; but it is grounded on a

truth, frequently overlooked by that class of logicians who think more of

having a clear than of having a comprehensive meaning; and who perceive

that every age is adding to the truths which it has received from its

predecessors, but fail to see that a counter process of losing truths already

possessed, is also constantly going on, and requiring the most sedulous

attention to counteract it. Language is the depository of the accumulated body

of experience to which all former ages have contributed their part, and which

is the inheritance of all yet to come. We have no right to prevent ourselves

from transmitting to posterity a larger portion of this inheritance than we may

ourselves have profited by. However much we may be able to improve on the

conclusions of our forefathers, we ought to be careful not inadvertently to let

any of their premises slip through our fingers. It may be good to alter the

meaning of a word, but it is bad to let any part of the meaning drop. Whoever

seeks to introduce a more correct use of a term with which important

associations are connected, should be required to possess an accurate

acquaintance with the history of the particular word, and of the opinions

which in different stages of its progress it served to express. To be qualified

to define the name, we must know all that has ever been known of the

properties of the class of objects which are, or originally were, denoted by it.For if we give it a meaning according to which any proposition will be false

which has ever been generally held to be true, it is incumbent on us to be sure

that we know and have considered all which those who believed the

proposition understood by it.

 

 

     Chapter V. – On The Natural History Of The Variations In The

                                Meaning Of Terms.

 

 

              § 1. It is not only in the mode which has now been pointed out,

namely by gradual inattention to a portion of the ideas conveyed, that words

in common use are liable to shift their connotation. The truth is, that the

connotation of such words is perpetually varying; as might be expected from

the manner in which words in common use acquire their connotation. A

technical term, invented for purposes of art or science, has, from the first, the

connotation given to it by its inventor; but a name which is in every one’s

mouth before any one thinks of defining it, derives its connotation only from

the circumstances which are habitually brought to mind when it is

pronounced. Among these circumstances, the properties common to the

things denoted by the name, have naturally a principal place; and would have

the sole place, if language were regulated by convention rather than by

custom and accident. But besides these common properties, which if they

exist are certainly present whenever the name is employed, any other

circumstance may casually be found along with it, so frequently as to become

associated with it in the same manner, and as strongly, as the common

properties themselves. In proportion as this association forms itself, people

give up using the name in cases in which those casual circumstances do not

exist. They prefer using some other name, or the same name with some

adjunct, rather than employ an expression which will call up an idea they do

not want to excite. The circumstance originally casual, thus becomes

regularly a part of the connotation of the word.

              It is this continual incorporation of circumstances originally

accidental, into the permanent signification of words, which is the cause that

there are so few exact synonyms. It is this also which renders the dictionary

meaning of a word, by universal remark so imperfect an exponent of its real

meaning. The dictionary meaning is marked out in a broad, blunt way, and

probably includes all that was originally necessary for the correct

employment of the term; but in process of time so many collateral

associations adhere to words, that whoever should attempt to use them with

no other guide than the dictionary, would confound a thousand nicedistinctions and subtle shades of meaning which dictionaries take no account

of; as we notice in the use of a language in conversation or writing by a

foreigner not thoroughly master of it. The history of a word, by showing the

causes which determine its use, is in these cases a better guide to its

employment than any definition; for definitions can only show its meaning at

the particular time, or at most the series of its successive meanings, but its

history may show the law by which the succession was produced. The word

gentleman , for instance, to the correct employment of which a dictionary

would be no guide, originally meant simply a man born in a certain rank.

From this it came by degrees to connote all such qualities or adventitious

circumstances as were usually found to belong to persons of that rank. This

consideration at once explains why in one of its vulgar acceptations it means

any one who lives without labor, in another without manual labor, and in its

more elevated signification it has in every age signified the conduct,

character, habits, and outward appearance, in whomsoever found, which,

according to the ideas of that age, belonged or were expected to belong to

persons born and educated in a high social position.

              It continually happens that of two words, whose dictionary meanings

are either the same or very slightly different, one will be the proper word to

use in one set of circumstances, another in another, without its being possible

to show how the custom of so employing them originally grew up. The

accident that one of the words was used and not the other on a particular

occasion or in a particular social circle, will be sufficient to produce so strong

an association between the word and some specialty of circumstances, that

mankind abandon the use of it in any other case, and the specialty becomes

part of its signification. The tide of custom first drifts the word on the shore

of a particular meaning, then retires and leaves it there.

              An instance in point is the remarkable change which, in the English

language at least, has taken place in the signification of the word loyalty .

That word originally meant in English, as it still means in the language from

whence it came, fair, open dealing, and fidelity to engagements; in that sense

the quality it expressed was part of the ideal chivalrous or knightly character.

By what process, in England, the term became restricted to the single case of

fidelity to the throne, I am not sufficiently versed in the history of courtly

language to be able to pronounce. The interval between a loyal chevalier and

a loyal subject is certainly great. I can only suppose that the word was, atsome period, the favorite term at court to express fidelity to the oath of

allegiance; until at length those who wished to speak of any other, and as it

was probably deemed, inferior sort of fidelity, either did not venture to use so

dignified a term, or found it convenient to employ some other in order to

avoid being misunderstood.

              § 2. Cases are not unfrequent in which a circumstance, at first

casually incorporated into the connotation of a word which originally had no

reference to it, in time wholly supersedes the original meaning, and becomes

not merely a part of the connotation, but the whole of it. This is exemplified

in the word pagan, paganus ; which originally, as its etymology imports, was

equivalent to villager ; the inhabitant of a pagus , or village. At a particular

era in the extension of Christianity over the Roman empire, the adherents of

the old religion, and the villagers or country people, were nearly the same

body of individuals, the inhabitants of the towns having been earliest

converted; as in our own day, and at all times, the greater activity of social

intercourse renders them the earliest recipients of new opinions and modes,

while old habits and prejudices linger longest among the country people; not

to mention that the towns were more immediately under the direct influence

of the Government, which at that time had embraced Christianity. From this

casual coincidence, the word paganus carried with it, and began more and

more steadily to suggest, the idea of a worshiper of the ancient divinities;

until at length it suggested that idea so forcibly that people who did not desire

to suggest the idea avoided using the word. But when paganus had come to

connote heathenism, the very unimportant circumstance, with reference to

that fact, of the place of residence, was soon disregarded in the employment

of the word. As there was seldom any occasion for making separate

assertions respecting heathens who lived in the country, there was no need for

a separate word to denote them; and pagan came not only to mean heathen,

but to mean that exclusively.

              A case still more familiar to most readers is that of the word villain

or villein . This term, as every body knows, had in the Middle Ages a

connotation as strictly defined as a word could have, being the proper legal

designation for those persons who were the subjects of the less onerous forms

of feudal bondage. The scorn of the semi-barbarous military aristocracy for

these their abject dependants, rendered the act of likening any person to this

class of people a mark of the greatest contumely; the same scorn led them toascribe to the same people all manner of hateful qualities, which doubtless

also, in the degrading situation in which they were held, were often not

unjustly imputed to them. These circumstances combined to attach to the

term villain ideas of crime and guilt, in so forcible a manner that the

application of the epithet even to those to whom it legally belonged became

an affront, and was abstained from whenever no affront was intended. From

that time guilt was part of the connotation; and soon became the whole of it,

since mankind were not prompted by any urgent motive to continue making a

distinction in their language between bad men of servile station and bad men

of any other rank in life.

              These and similar instances in which the original signification of a

term is totally lost — another and an entirely distinct meaning being first

ingrafted upon the former, and finally substituted for it — afford examples of

the double movement which is always taking place in language: two counter-

movements, one of Generalization, by which words are perpetually losing

portions of their connotation, and becoming of less meaning and more

general acceptation; the other of Specialization, by which other, or even these

same words, are continually taking on fresh connotation; acquiring additional

meaning by being restricted in their employment to a part only of the

occasions on which they might properly be used before. This double

movement is of sufficient importance in the natural history of language (to

which natural history the artificial modifications ought always to have some

degree of reference), to justify our dwelling a little longer on the nature of the

twofold phenomenon, and the causes to which it owes its existence.

              § 3. To begin with the movement of generalization. It might seem

unnecessary to dwell on the changes in the meaning of names which take

place merely from their being used ignorantly, by persons who, not having

properly mastered the received connotation of a word, apply it in a looser and

wider sense than belongs to it. This, however, is a real source of alterations in

the language; for when a word, from being often employed in cases where

one of the qualities which it connotes does not exist, ceases to suggest that

quality with certainty, then even those who are under no mistake as to the

proper meaning of the word, prefer expressing that meaning in some other

way, and leave the original word to its fate. The word ’Squire, as standing for

an owner of a landed estate; Parson, as denoting not the rector of the parish,

but clergymen in general; Artist, to denote only a painter or sculptor; arecases in point. Such cases give a clear insight into the process of the

degeneration of languages in periods of history when literary culture was

suspended; and we are now in danger of experiencing a similar evil through

the superficial extension of the same culture. So many persons without any

thing deserving the name of education have become writers by profession,

that written language may almost be said to be principally wielded by persons

ignorant of the proper use of the instrument, and who are spoiling it more and

more for those who understand it. Vulgarisms, which creep in nobody knows

how, are daily depriving the English language of valuable modes of

expressing thought. To take a present instance: the verb transpire formerly

conveyed very expressively its correct meaning, viz., to become known

through unnoticed channels — to exhale, as it were, into publicity through

invisible pores, like a vapor or gas disengaging itself. But of late a practice

has commenced of employing this word, for the sake of finery, as a mere

synonym of to happen : “the events which have transpired in the Crimea,”

meaning the incidents of the war. This vile specimen of bad English is

already seen in the dispatches of noblemen and viceroys; and the time is

apparently not far distant when nobody will understand the word if used in its

proper sense. In other cases it is not the love of finery, but simple want of

education, which makes writers employ words in senses unknown to genuine

English. The use of “aggravating” for “provoking,” in my boyhood a

vulgarism of the nursery, has crept into almost all newspapers, and into many

books; and when the word is used in its proper sense, as when writers on

criminal law speak of aggravating and extenuating circumstances, their

meaning, it is probable, is already misunderstood. It is a great error to think

that these corruptions of language do no harm. Those who are struggling with

the difficulty (and who know by experience how great it already is) of

expressing one’s self clearly with precision, find their resources continually

narrowed by illiterate writers, who seize and twist from its purpose some

form of speech which once served to convey briefly and compactly an

unambiguous meaning. It would hardly be believed how often a writer is

compelled to a circumlocution by the single vulgarism, introduced during the

last few years, of using the word alone as an adverb, only not being fine

enough for the rhetoric of ambitious ignorance. A man will say “to which I

am not alone bound by honor but also by law,” unaware that what he has

unintentionally said is, that he is not alone bound, some other person being

bound with him. Formerly, if any one said, “I am not alone responsible forthis,” he was understood to mean (what alone his words mean in correct

English), that he is not the sole person responsible; but if he now used such

an expression, the reader would be confused between that and two other

meanings: that he is not only responsible but something more; or that he is

responsible not only for this but for something besides. The time is coming

when Tennyson’s Œnone could not say, “I will not die alone,” lest she should

be supposed to mean that she would not only die but do something else.

              The blunder of writing predicate for predict has become so widely

diffused that it bids fair to render one of the most useful terms in the

scientific vocabulary of Logic unintelligible. The mathematical and logical

term “to eliminate” is undergoing a similar destruction. All who are

acquainted either with the proper use of the word or with its etymology know

that to eliminate a thing is to thrust it out: but those who know nothing about

it, except that it is a fine-looking phrase, use it in a sense precisely the

reverse, to denote, not turning any thing out, but bringing it in. They talk of
                                                                                220
eliminating some truth, or other useful result, from a mass of details. A

similar permanent deterioration in the language is in danger of being

produced by the blunders of translators. The writers of telegrams, and the

foreign correspondents of newspapers, have gone on so long translating

demander by “to demand,” without a suspicion that it means only to ask, that

(the context generally showing that nothing else is meant) English readers are

gradually associating the English word demand with simple asking, thus

leaving the language without a term to express a demand in its proper sense.

In like manner, “transaction,” the French word for a compromise, is

translated into the English word transaction; while, curiously enough, the

inverse change is taking place in France, where the word “compromis” has

lately begun to be used for expressing the same idea. If this continues, the

two countries will have exchanged phrases.

              Independently, however, of the generalization of names through

their ignorant misuse, there is a tendency in the same direction consistently

with a perfect knowledge of their meaning; arising from the fact, that the

number of things known to us, and of which we feel a desire to speak,

multiply faster than the names for them. Except on subjects for which there

has been constructed a scientific terminology, with which unscientific

persons do not meddle, great difficulty is generally found in bringing a new

name into use; and independently of that difficulty, it is natural to prefergiving to a new object a name which at least expresses its resemblance to

something already known, since by predicating of it a name entirely new we

at first convey no information. In this manner the name of a species often

becomes the name of a genus; as salt , for example, or oil ; the former of

which words originally denoted only the muriate of soda, the latter, as its

etymology indicates, only olive-oil; but which now denote large and

diversified classes of substances resembling these in some of their qualities,

and connote only those common qualities, instead of the whole of the

distinctive properties of olive-oil and sea-salt. The words glass and soap are

used by modern chemists in a similar manner, to denote genera of which the

substances vulgarly so called are single species. And it often happens, as in

those instances, that the term keeps its special signification in addition to its

more general one, and becomes ambiguous, that is, two names instead of one.

              These changes, by which words in ordinary use become more and

more generalized, and less and less expressive, take place in a still greater

degree with the words which express the complicated phenomena of mind

and society. Historians, travelers, and in general those who speak or write

concerning moral and social phenomena with which they are not familiarly

acquainted, are the great agents in this modification of language. The

vocabulary of all except unusually instructed as well as thinking persons, is,

on such subjects, eminently scanty. They have a certain small set of words to

which they are accustomed, and which they employ to express phenomena

the most heterogeneous, because they have never sufficiently analyzed the

facts to which those words correspond in their own country, to have attached

perfectly definite ideas to the words. The first English conquerors of Bengal,

for example, carried with them the phrase landed proprietor into a country

where the rights of individuals over the soil were extremely different in

degree, and even in nature, from those recognized in England. Applying the

term with all its English associations in such a state of things; to one who had

only a limited right they gave an absolute right, from another because he had

not an absolute right they took away all right, drove whole classes of people

to ruin and despair, filled the country with banditti, created a feeling that

nothing was secure, and produced, with the best intentions, a disorganization

of society which had not been produced in that country by the most ruthless

of its barbarian invaders. Yet the usage of persons capable of so gross a

misapprehension determines the meaning of language; and the words they

thus misuse grow in generality, until the instructed are obliged to acquiesce;and to employ those words (first freeing them from vagueness by giving them

a definite connotation) as generic terms, subdividing the genera into species.

              § 4. While the more rapid growth of ideas than of names thus creates

a perpetual necessity for making the same names serve, even if imperfectly,

on a greater number of occasions; a counter-operation is going on, by which

names become on the contrary restricted to fewer occasions, by taking on, as

it were, additional connotation, from circumstances not originally included in

the meaning, but which have become connected with it in the mind by some

accidental cause. We have seen above, in the words pagan and villain ,

remarkable examples of the specialization of the meaning of words from

casual associations, as well as of the generalization of it in a new direction,

which often follows.

              Similar specializations are of frequent occurrence in the history even

of scientific nomenclature. “It is by no means uncommon,” says Dr. Paris, in
                      221
his Pharmacologia , “to find a word which is used to express general

characters subsequently become the name of a specific substance in which

such characters are predominant; and we shall find that some important

anomalies in nomenclature may be thus explained. The term Αρσενίκον, from

which the word Arsenic is derived, was an ancient epithet applied to those

natural substances which possessed strong and acrimonious properties; and as

the poisonous quality of arsenic was found to be remarkably powerful, the

term was especially applied to Orpiment, the form in which this metal most

usually occurred. So the term Verbena (quasi Herbena ) originally denoted

all those herbs that were held sacred on account of their being employed in

the rites of sacrifice, as we learn from the poets; but as one herb was usually

adopted upon these occasions, the word Verbena came to denote that

particular herb only , and it is transmitted to us to this day under the same

title, viz., Verbena or Vervain, and indeed until lately it enjoyed the medical

reputation which its sacred origin conferred upon it, for it was worn

suspended around the neck as an amulet. Vitriol , in the original application

of the word, denoted any crystalline body with a certain degree of

transparency (vitrum ); it is hardly necessary to observe that the term is now

appropriated to a particular species: in the same manner, Bark, which is a

general term, is applied to express one genus, and by way of eminence it has

the article The prefixed, as The bark; the same observation will apply to the

word Opium, which, in its primitive sense, signifies any juice (ὀπὸς, Succus ),while it now only denotes one species, viz., that of the poppy. So, again,

Elaterium was used by Hippocrates to signify various internal applications,

especially purgatives, of a violent and drastic nature (from the word ἐλαύνω,

agito , moveo , stimulo ), but by succeeding authors it was exclusively

applied to denote the active matter which subsides from the juice of the wild

cucumber. The word Fecula , again, originally meant to imply any substance

which was derived by spontaneous subsidence from a liquid (from fæx , the

grounds or settlement of any liquor); afterward it was applied to Starch,

which is deposited in this manner by agitating the flour of wheat in water;

and, lastly, it has been applied to a peculiar vegetable principle, which, like

starch, is insoluble in cold, but completely soluble in boiling water, with

which it forms a gelatinous solution. This indefinite meaning of the word

fecula has created numerous mistakes in pharmaceutic chemistry; Elaterium,

for instance, is said to be fecula , and, in the original sense of the word, it is

properly so called, inasmuch as it is procured from a vegetable juice by

spontaneous subsidence, but in the limited and modern acceptation of the

term it conveys an erroneous idea; for instead of the active principle of the

juice residing in fecula , it is a peculiar proximate principle, sui generis , to

which I have ventured to bestow the name of Elatin . For the same reason,

much doubt and obscurity involve the meaning of the word Extract , because

it is applied generally to any substance obtained by the evaporation of a

vegetable solution, and specifically to a peculiar proximate principle,

possessed of certain characters, by which it is distinguished from every other

elementary body.”

              A generic term is always liable to become thus limited to a single

species, or even individual, if people have occasion to think and speak of that

individual or species much oftener than of any thing else which is contained

in the genus. Thus by cattle, a stage-coachman will understand horses; beasts,

in the language of agriculturists, stands for oxen; and birds, with some

sportsmen, for partridges only. The law of language which operates in these

trivial instances is the very same in conformity to which the terms Θεός,

Deus, and God, were adopted from Polytheism by Christianity, to express the

single object of its own adoration. Almost all the terminology of the Christian

Church is made up of words originally used in a much more general

acceptation: Ecclesia , Assembly; Bishop , Episcopus, Overseer; Priest ,

Presbyter, Elder; Deacon , Diaconus, Administrator; Sacrament , a vow of

allegiance; Evangelium , good tidings; and some words, as Minister , are stillused both in the general and in the limited sense. It would be interesting to

trace the progress by which author came, in its most familiar sense, to signify

a writer, and ποίητης, or maker, a poet.

              Of the incorporation into the meaning of a term, of circumstances

accidentally connected with it at some particular period, as in the case of

Pagan, instances might easily be multiplied. Physician (φυσίκος, or

naturalist) became, in England, synonymous with a healer of diseases,

because until a comparatively late period medical practitioners were the only

naturalists. Clerc , or clericus, a scholar, came to signify an ecclesiastic,

because the clergy were for many centuries the only scholars.

              Of all ideas, however, the most liable to cling by association to any

thing with which they have ever been connected by proximity, are those of

our pleasures and pains, or of the things which we habitually contemplate as

sources of our pleasures or pains. The additional connotation, therefore,

which a word soonest and most readily takes on, is that of agreeableness or

painfulness, in their various kinds and degrees; of being a good or bad thing;

desirable or to be avoided; an object of hatred, of dread, contempt,

admiration, hope, or love. Accordingly there is hardly a single name,

expressive of any moral or social fact calculated to call forth strong affections

either of a favorable or of a hostile nature, which does not carry with it

decidedly and irresistibly a connotation of those strong affections, or, at the

least, of approbation or censure; insomuch that to employ those names in

conjunction with others by which the contrary sentiments were expressed,

would produce the effect of a paradox, or even a contradiction in terms. The

baneful influence of a connotation thus acquired, on the prevailing habits of

thought, especially in morals and politics, has been well pointed out on many

occasions by Bentham. It gives rise to the fallacy of “question-begging

names.” The very property which we are inquiring whether a thing possesses

or not, has become so associated with the name of the thing as to be part of

its meaning, insomuch that by merely uttering the name we assume the point

which was to be made out; one of the most frequent sources of apparently

self-evident propositions.

              Without any further multiplication of examples to illustrate the

changes which usage is continually making in the signification of terms, I

shall add, as a practical rule, that the logician, not being able to prevent such

transformations, should submit to them with a good grace when they areirrevocably effected, and if a definition is necessary, define the word

according to its new meaning; retaining the former as a second signification,

if it is needed, and if there is any chance of being able to preserve it either in

the language of philosophy or in common use. Logicians can not make the

meaning of any but scientific terms; that of all other words is made by the

collective human race. But logicians can ascertain clearly what it is which,

working obscurely, has guided the general mind to a particular employment

of a name; and when they have found this, they can clothe it in such distinct

and permanent terms, that mankind shall see the meaning which before they

only felt, and shall not suffer it to be afterward forgotten or misapprehended.

 

   Chapter VI. – The Principles Of A Philosophical Language Further

                                      Considered.

 

 

              § 1. We have, thus far, considered only one of the requisites of a

language adapted for the investigation of truth; that its terms shall each of

them convey a determinate and unmistakable meaning. There are, however,

as we have already remarked, other requisites; some of them important only

in the second degree, but one which is fundamental, and barely yields in point

of importance, if it yields at all, to the quality which we have already

discussed at so much length. That the language may be fitted for its purposes,

not only should every word perfectly express its meaning, but there should be

no important meaning without its word. Whatever we have occasion to think

of often, and for scientific purposes, ought to have a name appropriated to it.

              This requisite of philosophical language may be considered under

three different heads; that number of separate conditions being involved in it.

              § 2. First, there ought to be all such names, as are needful for making

such a record of individual observations that the words of the record shall

exactly show what fact it is which has been observed. In other words, there

should be an accurate Descriptive Terminology.

              The only things which we can observe directly being our own

sensations, or other feelings, a complete descriptive language would be one in

which there should be a name for every variety of elementary sensation or

feeling. Combinations of sensations or feelings may always be described, if

we have a name for each of the elementary feelings which compose them; but

brevity of description, and clearness (which often depends very much on

brevity), are greatly promoted by giving distinctive names not to the elements

alone, but also to all combinations which are of frequent recurrence. On this
                                                                    222
occasion I can not do better than quote from Dr. Whewell some of the

excellent remarks which he has made on this important branch of our subject.

              “The meaning of [descriptive] technical terms can be fixed in the

first instance only by convention, and can be made intelligible only by

presenting to the senses that which the terms are to signify. The knowledge of

a color by its name can only be taught through the eye. No description canconvey to a hearer what we mean by apple-green or French gray . It might,

perhaps, be supposed that, in the first example, the term apple , referring to

so familiar an object, sufficiently suggests the color intended. But it may

easily be seen that this is not true; for apples are of many different hues of

green, and it is only by a conventional selection that we can appropriate the

term to one special shade. When this appropriation is once made, the term

refers to the sensation, and not to the parts of the term; for these enter into the

compound merely as a help to the memory, whether the suggestion be a

natural connection as in ‘apple-green,’ or a casual one as in ‘French gray.’ In

order to derive due advantage from technical terms of the kind, they must be

associated immediately with the perception to which they belong; and not

connected with it through the vague usages of common language. The

memory must retain the sensation; and the technical word must be understood

as directly as the most familiar word, and more distinctly. When we find such

terms as tin-white or pinchbeck-brown , the metallic color so denoted ought

to start up in our memory without delay or search.

              “This, which it is most important to recollect with respect to the

simpler properties of bodies, as color and form, is no less true with respect to

more compound notions. In all cases the term is fixed to a peculiar meaning

by convention; and the student, in order to use the word, must be completely

familiar with the convention, so that he has no need to frame conjectures

from the word itself. Such conjectures would always be insecure, and often

erroneous. Thus the term papilionaceous applied to a flower is employed to

indicate, not only a resemblance to a butterfly, but a resemblance arising from

five petals of a certain-peculiar shape and arrangement; and even if the

resemblance were much stronger than it is in such cases, yet, if it were

produced in a different way, as, for example, by one petal, or two only,

instead of a ‘standard,’ two ‘wings,’ and a ‘keel’ consisting of two parts more

or less united into one, we should be no longer justified in speaking of it as a

‘papilionaceous’ flower.”

              When, however, the thing named is, as in this last case, a

combination of simple sensations, it is not necessary, in order to learn the

meaning of the word, that the student should refer back to the sensations

themselves; it may be communicated to him through the medium of other

words; the terms, in short, may be defined. But the names of elementary

sensations, or elementary feelings of any sort, can not be defined; nor is thereany mode of making their signification known but by making the learner

experience the sensation, or referring him, through some known mark, to his

remembrance of having experienced it before. Hence it is only the

impressions on the outward senses, or those inward feelings which are

connected in a very obvious and uniform manner with outward objects, that

are really susceptible of an exact descriptive language. The countless variety

of sensations which arise, for instance, from disease, or from peculiar

physiological states, it would be in vain to attempt to name; for as no one can

judge whether the sensation I have is the same with his, the name can not

have, to us two, real community of meaning. The same may be said, to a

considerable extent, of purely mental feelings. But in some of the sciences

which are conversant with external objects, it is scarcely possible to surpass

the perfection to which this quality of a philosophical language has been

carried.

                          223
              “The formation of an exact and extensive descriptive language for

botany has been executed with a degree of skill and felicity, which, before it

was attained, could hardly have been dreamed of as attainable. Every part of

a plant has been named; and the form of every part, even the most minute,

has had a large assemblage of descriptive terms appropriated to it, by means

of which the botanist can convey and receive knowledge of form and

structure, as exactly as if each minute part were presented to him vastly

magnified. This acquisition was part of the Linnæan reform.... ‘Tournefort,’

says Decandolle, ‘appears to have been the first who really perceived the

utility of fixing the sense of terms in such a way as always to employ the

same word in the same sense, and always to express the same idea by the

same words; but it was Linnæus who really created and fixed this botanical

language, and this is his fairest claim to glory, for by this fixation of language

he has shed clearness and precision over all parts of the science.’

              “It is not necessary here to give any detailed account of the terms of

botany. The fundamental ones have been gradually introduced, as the parts of

plants were more carefully and minutely examined. Thus the flower was

necessarily distinguished into the calyx , the corolla , the stamens , and the

pistils ; the sections of the corolla were termed petals by Columna; those of

the calyx were called sepals by Necker. Sometimes terms of greater

generality were devised; as perianth , to include the calyx and corolla,

whether one or both of these were present; pericarp , for the part inclosingthe grain, of whatever kind it be, fruit, nut, pod, etc. And it may easily be

imagined, that descriptive terms may, by definition and combination, become

very numerous and distinct. Thus leaves may be called pinnatifid ,

pinnatipartite , pinnatisect , pinnatilobate , palmatifid , palmatipartite , etc.,

and each of these words designates different combinations of the modes and

extent of the divisions of the leaf with the divisions of its outline. In some

cases, arbitrary numerical relations are introduced into the definition: thus, a

leaf is called bilobate , when it is divided into two parts by a notch; but if the

notch go to the middle of its length, it is bifid ; if it go near the base of the

leaf, it is bipartite ; if to the base, it is bisect . Thus, too, a pod of a

cruciferous plant is a siliqua , if it is four times as long as it is broad, but if it

be shorter than this it is a silicula . Such terms being established, the form of

the very complex leaf or frond of a fern (Hymenophyllum Wilsoni) is exactly

conveyed by the following phrase: ‘fronds rigid pinnate, pinnæ recurved

subunilateral, pinnatifid, the segments linear undivided or bifid, spinuloso-

serrate.’

              “Other characters, as well as form, are conveyed with the like

precision: Color by means of a classified scale of colors.... This was done

with most precision by Werner, and his scale of colors is still the most usual

standard of naturalists. Werner also introduced a more exact terminology

with regard to other characters which are important in mineralogy, as lustre,

hardness. But Mohs improved upon this step by giving a numerical scale of

hardness, in which talc is 1, gypsum 2, calc spar 3, and so on.... Some

properties, as specific gravity, by their definition give at once a numerical

measure; and others, as crystalline form, require a very considerable array of

mathematical calculation and reasoning, to point out their relations and

gradations.”

              § 3. Thus far of Descriptive Terminology, or of the language

requisite for placing on record our observation of individual instances. But

when we proceed from this to Induction, or rather to that comparison of

observed instances which is the preparatory step toward it, we stand in need

of an additional and a different sort of general names.

              Whenever, for purposes of Induction, we find it necessary to

introduce (in Dr. Whewell’s phraseology) some new general conception; that

is, whenever the comparison of a set of phenomena leads to the recognition in

them of some common circumstance, which, our attention not having beendirected to it on any former occasion, is to us a new phenomenon; it is of

importance that this new conception, or this new result of abstraction, should

have a name appropriated to it; especially if the circumstance it involves be

one which leads to many consequences, or which is likely to be found also in

other classes of phenomena. No doubt, in most cases of the kind, the meaning

might be conveyed by joining together several words already in use. But

when a thing has to be often spoken of, there are more reasons than the

saving of time and space, for speaking of it in the most concise manner

possible. What darkness would be spread over geometrical demonstrations, if

wherever the word circle is used, the definition of a circle were inserted

instead of it. In mathematics and its applications, where the nature of the

processes demands that the attention should be strongly concentrated, but

does not require that it should be widely diffused, the importance of

concentration also in the expressions has always been duly felt; and a

mathematician no sooner finds that he shall often have occasion to speak of

the same two things together, than he at once creates a term to express them

whenever combined: just as, in his algebraical operations, he substitutes for

(a m + b n) p/q, or for a /b + b /c + c /d + etc., the single letter P, Q, or S; not

solely to shorten his symbolical expressions, but to simplify the purely

intellectual part of his operations, by enabling the mind to give its exclusive

attention to the relation between the quantity S and the other quantities which

enter into the equation, without being distracted by thinking unnecessarily of

the parts of which S is itself composed.

              But there is another reason, in addition to that of promoting

perspicuity, for giving a brief and compact name to each of the more

considerable results of abstraction which are obtained in the course of our

intellectual phenomena. By naming them, we fix our attention upon them; we

keep them more constantly before the mind. The names are remembered, and

being remembered, suggest their definition; while if instead of specific and

characteristic names, the meaning had been expressed by putting together a

number of other names, that particular combination of words already in

common use for other purposes would have had nothing to make itself

remembered by. If we want to render a particular combination of ideas

permanent in the mind, there is nothing which clinches it like a name

specially devoted to express it. If mathematicians had been obliged to speak

of “that to which a quantity, in increasing or diminishing, is always

approaching nearer, so that the difference becomes less than any assignablequantity, but to which it never becomes exactly equal,” instead of expressing

all this by the simple phrase, “the limit of a quantity,” we should probably

have long remained without most of the important truths which have been

discovered by means of the relation between quantities of various kinds and

their limits. If instead of speaking of momentum , it had been necessary to

say, “the product of the number of units of velocity in the velocity by the

number of units of mass in the mass,” many of the dynamical truths now

apprehended by means of this complex idea would probably have escaped

notice, for want of recalling the idea itself with sufficient readiness and

familiarity. And on subjects less remote from the topics of popular

discussion, whoever wishes to draw attention to some new or unfamiliar

distinction among things, will find no way so sure as to invent or select

suitable names for the express purpose of marking it.

              A volume devoted to explaining what the writer means by

civilization, does not raise so vivid a conception of it as the single expression,

that Civilization is a different thing from Cultivation; the compactness of that

brief designation for the contrasted quality being an equivalent for a long

discussion. So, if we would impress forcibly upon the understanding and

memory the distinction between the two different conceptions of a

representative government, we can not more effectually do so than by saying

that Delegation is not Representation. Hardly any original thoughts on mental

or social subjects ever make their way among mankind, or assume their

proper importance in the minds even of their inventors, until aptly-selected

words or phrases have, as it were, nailed them down and held them fast.

              § 4. Of the three essential parts of a philosophical language, we have

now mentioned two: a terminology suited for describing with precision the

individual facts observed; and a name for every common property of any

importance or interest, which we detect by comparing those facts; including

(as the concretes corresponding to those abstract terms) names for the classes

which we artificially construct in virtue of those properties, or as many of

them, at least, as we have frequent occasion to predicate any thing of.

              But there is a sort of classes, for the recognition of which no such

elaborate process is necessary; because each of them is marked out from all

others not by some one property, the detection of which may depend on a

difficult act of abstraction, but by its properties generally. I mean, the Kinds

of things, in the sense which, in this treatise, has been specially attached tothat term. By a Kind, it will be remembered, we mean one of those classes

which are distinguished from all others not by one or a few definite

properties, but by an unknown multitude of them; the combination of

properties on which the class is grounded, being a mere index to an indefinite

number of other distinctive attributes. The class horse is a Kind, because the

things which agree in possessing the characters by which we recognize a

horse, agree in a great number of other properties, as we know, and, it can not

be doubted, in many more than we know. Animal, again, is a Kind, because

no definition that could be given of the name animal could either exhaust the

properties common to all animals, or supply premises from which the

remainder of those properties could be inferred. But a combination of

properties which does not give evidence of the existence of any other

independent peculiarities, does not constitute a Kind. White horse, therefore,

is not a Kind; because horses which agree in whiteness, do not agree in any

thing else, except the qualities common to all horses, and whatever may be

the causes or effects of that particular color.

              On the principle that there should be a name for every thing which

we have frequent occasion to make assertions about, there ought evidently to

be a name for every Kind; for as it is the very meaning of a Kind that the

individuals composing it have an indefinite multitude of properties in

common, it follows that, if not with our present knowledge, yet with that

which we may hereafter acquire, the Kind is a subject to which there will

have to be applied many predicates. The third component element of a

philosophical language, therefore, is that there shall be a name for every

Kind. In other words, there must not only be a terminology, but also a

nomenclature.

              The words Nomenclature and Terminology are employed by most

authors almost indiscriminately; Dr. Whewell being, as far as I am aware, the

first writer who has regularly assigned to the two words different meanings.

The distinction, however, which he has drawn between them being real and

important, his example is likely to be followed; and (as is apt to be the case

when such innovations in language are felicitously made) a vague sense of

the distinction is found to have influenced the employment of the terms in

common practice, before the expediency had been pointed out of

discriminating them philosophically. Every one would say that the reform

effected by Lavoisier and Guyton–Morveau in the language of chemistryconsisted in the introduction of a new nomenclature, not of a new

terminology. Linear, lanceolate, oval, or oblong, serrated, dentate, or crenate

leaves, are expressions forming part of the terminology of botany, while the

names “Viola odorata,” and “Ulex Europæus,” belong to its nomenclature.

              A nomenclature may be defined, the collection of the names of all

the Kinds with which any branch of knowledge is conversant; or more

properly, of all the lowest Kinds, or infirmæ species — those which may be

subdivided indeed, but not into Kinds, and which generally accord with what

in natural history are termed simply species. Science possesses two splendid

examples of a systematic nomenclature; that of plants and animals,

constructed by Linnæus and his successors, and that of chemistry, which we

owe to the illustrious group of chemists who flourished in France toward the

close of the eighteenth century. In these two departments, not only has every

known species, or lowest Kind, a name assigned to it, but when new lowest

Kinds are discovered, names are at once given to them on a uniform

principle. In other sciences the nomenclature is not at present constructed on

any system, either because the species to be named are not numerous enough

to require one (as in geometry, for example), or because no one has yet

suggested a suitable principle for such a system, as in mineralogy; in which

the want of a scientifically constructed nomenclature is now the principal

cause which retards the progress of the science.

              § 5. A word which carries on its face that it belongs to a

nomenclature, seems at first sight to differ from other concrete general names

in this — that its meaning does not reside in its connotation, in the attributes

implied in it, but in its denotation, that is, in the particular group of things

which it is appointed to designate; and can not, therefore, be unfolded by

means of a definition, but must be made known in another way. This opinion,

however, appears to me erroneous. Words belonging to a nomenclature

differ, I conceive, from other words mainly in this, that besides the ordinary

connotation, they have a peculiar one of their own: besides connoting certain

attributes, they also connote that those attributes are distinctive of a Kind.

The term “peroxide of iron,” for example, belonging by its form to the

systematic nomenclature of chemistry, bears on its face that it is the name of

a peculiar Kind of substance. It moreover connotes, like the name of any

other class, some portion of the properties common to the class; in this

instance the property of being a compound of iron and the largest dose ofoxygen with which iron will combine. These two things, the fact of being

such a compound, and the fact of being a Kind, constitute the connotation of

the name peroxide of iron. When we say of the substance before us, that it is

the peroxide of iron, we thereby assert, first, that it is a compound of iron and

a maximum of oxygen, and next, that the substance so composed is a peculiar

Kind of substance.

              Now, this second part of the connotation of any word belonging to a

nomenclature is as essential a portion of its meaning as the first part, while

the definition only declares the first; and hence the appearance that the

signification of such terms can not be conveyed by a definition: which

appearance, however, is fallacious. The name Viola odorata denotes a Kind,

of which a certain number of characters, sufficient to distinguish it, are

enunciated in botanical works. This enumeration of characters is surely, as in

other cases, a definition of the name. No, say some, it is not a definition, for

the name Viola odorata does not mean those characters; it means that

particular group of plants, and the characters are selected from among a much

greater number, merely as marks by which to recognize the group. But to this

I reply, that the name does not mean that group, for it would be applied to

that group no longer than while the group is believed to be an infima species ;

if it were to be discovered that several distinct Kinds have been confounded

under this one name, no one would any longer apply the name Viola odorata

to the whole of the group, but would apply it, if retained at all, to one only of

the Kinds retained therein. What is imperative, therefore, is not that the name

shall denote one particular collection of objects, but that it shall denote a

Kind, and a lowest Kind. The form of the name declares that, happen what

will, it is to denote an infima species ; and that, therefore, the properties

which it connotes, and which are expressed in the definition, are to be

connoted by it no longer than while we continue to believe that those

properties, when found together, indicate a Kind, and that the whole of them

are found in no more than one Kind.

              With the addition of this peculiar connotation, implied in the form of

every word which belongs to a systematic nomenclature; the set of characters

which is employed to discriminate each Kind from all other Kinds (and

which is a real definition) constitutes as completely as in any other case the

whole meaning of the term. It is no objection to say that (as is often the case

in natural history) the set of characters may be changed, and anothersubstituted as being better suited for the purpose of distinction, while the

word, still continuing to denote the same group or things, is not considered to

have changed its meaning. For this is no more than may happen in the case of

any other general name: we may, in reforming its connotation, leave its

denotation untouched; and it is generally desirable to do so. The connotation,

however, is not the less for this the real meaning, for we at once apply the

name wherever the characters set down in the definition are found; and that

which exclusively guides us in applying the term, must constitute its

signification. If we find, contrary to our previous belief, that the characters

are not peculiar to one species, we cease to use the term co-extensively with

the characters; but then it is because the other portion of the connotation fails;

the condition that the class must be a Kind. The connotation, therefore, is still

the meaning; the set of descriptive characters is a true definition; and the

meaning is unfolded, not indeed (as in other cases) by the definition alone,

but by the definition and the form of the word taken together.

              § 6. We have now analyzed what is implied in the two principal

requisites of a philosophical language; first, precision, or definiteness; and,

secondly, completeness. Any further remarks on the mode of constructing a

nomenclature must be deferred until we treat of Classification; the mode of

naming the Kinds of things being necessarily subordinate to the mode of

arranging those Kinds into larger classes. With respect to the minor requisites

of terminology, some of them are well stated and illustrated in the

“Aphorisms concerning the Language of Science,” included in Dr. Whewell’s

Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences . These, as being of secondary

importance in the peculiar point of view of Logic, I shall not further refer to,

but shall confine my observations to one more quality, which, next to the two

already treated of, appears to be the most valuable which the language of

science can possess. Of this quality a general notion may be conveyed by the

following aphorism:

              Whenever the nature of the subject permits our reasoning processes

to be, without danger, carried on mechanically, the language should be

constructed on as mechanical principles as possible; while, in the contrary

case, it should be so constructed that there shall be the greatest possible

obstacles to a merely mechanical use of it.

              I am aware that this maxim requires much explanation, which I shall

at once proceed to give. At first, as to what is meant by using a languagemechanically. The complete or extreme case of the mechanical use of

language, is when it is used without any consciousness of a meaning, and

with only the consciousness of using certain visible or audible marks in

conformity to technical rules previously laid down. This extreme case is

nowhere realized except in the figures of arithmetic, and still more the

symbols of algebra, a language unique in its kind, and approaching as nearly

to perfection, for the purposes to which it is destined, as can, perhaps, be said

of any creation of the human mind. Its perfection consists in the completeness

of its adaptation to a purely mechanical use. The symbols are mere counters,

without even the semblance of a meaning apart from the convention which is

renewed each time they are employed, and which is altered at each renewal,

the same symbol a or x being used on different occasions to represent things

which (except that, like all things, they are susceptible of being numbered)

have no property in common. There is nothing, therefore, to distract the mind

from the set of mechanical operations which are to be performed upon the

symbols, such as squaring both sides of the equation, multiplying or dividing

them by the same or by equivalent symbols, and so forth. Each of these

operations, it is true, corresponds to a syllogism; represents one step of a

ratiocination relating not to the symbols, but to the things signified by them.

But as it has been found practicable to frame a technical form, by conforming

to which we can make sure of finding the conclusion of the ratiocination, our

end can be completely attained without our ever thinking of any thing but the

symbols. Being thus intended to work merely as mechanism, they have the

qualities which mechanism ought to have. They are of the least possible bulk,

so that they take up scarcely any room, and waste no time in their

manipulation; they are compact, and fit so closely together that the eye can

take in the whole at once of almost every operation which they are employed

to perform.

              These admirable properties of the symbolical language of

mathematics have made so strong an impression on the minds of many

thinkers, as to have led them to consider the symbolical language in question

as the ideal type of philosophical language generally; to think that names in

general, or (as they are fond of calling them) signs, are fitted for the purposes

of thought in proportion as they can be made to approximate to the

compactness, the entire unmeaningness, and the capability of being used as

counters without a thought of what they represent, which are characteristic of

the a and b , the x and y , of algebra. This notion has led to sanguine views ofthe acceleration of the progress of science by means which, I conceive, can

not possibly conduce to that end, and forms part of that exaggerated estimate

of the influence of signs, which has contributed in no small degree to prevent

the real laws of our intellectual operations from being rightly understood.

              In the first place, a set of signs by which we reason without

consciousness of their meaning, can be serviceable, at most, only in our

deductive operations. In our direct inductions we can not for a moment

dispense with a distinct mental image of the phenomena, since the whole

operation turns on a perception of the particulars in which those phenomena

agree and differ. But, further, this reasoning by counters is only suitable to a

very limited portion even of our deductive processes. In our reasonings

respecting numbers, the only general principles which we ever have occasion

to introduce are these, Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to

one another, and The sums or differences of equal things are equal; with their

various corollaries. Not only can no hesitation ever arise respecting the

applicability of these principles, since they are true of all magnitudes

whatever; but every possible application of which they are susceptible, may

be reduced to a technical rule; and such, in fact, the rules of the calculus are.

But if the symbols represent any other things than mere numbers, let us say

even straight or curve lines, we have then to apply theorems of geometry not

true of all lines without exception, and to select those which are true of the

lines we are reasoning about. And how can we do this unless we keep

completely in mind what particular lines these are? Since additional

geometrical truths may be introduced into the ratiocination in any stage of its

progress, we can not suffer ourselves, during even the smallest part of it, to

use the names mechanically (as we use algebraical symbols) without an

image annexed to them. It is only after ascertaining that the solution of a

question concerning lines can be made to depend on a previous question

concerning numbers, or, in other words, after the question has been (to speak

technically) reduced to an equation, that the unmeaning signs become

available, and that the nature of the facts themselves to which the

investigation relates can be dismissed from the mind. Up to the establishment

of the equation, the language in which mathematicians carry on their

reasoning does not differ in character from that employed by close reasoners

on any other kind of subject.

              I do not deny that every correct ratiocination, when thrown into thesyllogistic shape, is conclusive from the mere form of the expression,

provided none of the terms used be ambiguous; and this is one of the

circumstances which have led some writers to think that if all names were so

judiciously constructed and so carefully defined as not to admit of any

ambiguity, the improvement thus made in language would not only give to

the conclusions of every deductive science the same certainty with those of

mathematics, but would reduce all reasonings to the application of a technical

form, and enable their conclusiveness to be rationally assented to after a

merely mechanical process, as is undoubtedly the case in algebra. But, if we

except geometry, the conclusions of which are already as certain and exact as

they can be made, there is no science but that of number, in which the

practical validity of a reasoning can be apparent to any person who has

looked only at the reasoning itself. Whoever has assented to what was said in

the last Book concerning the case of the Composition of Causes, and the still

stronger case of the entire supersession of one set of laws by another, is

aware that geometry and algebra are the only sciences of which the

propositions are categorically true; the general propositions of all other

sciences are true only hypothetically, supposing that no counteracting cause

happens to interfere. A conclusion, therefore, however correctly deduced, in

point of form, from admitted laws of nature, will have no other than an

hypothetical certainty. At every step we must assure ourselves that no other

law of nature has superseded, or intermingled its operation with, those which

are the premises of the reasoning; and how can this be done by merely

looking at the words? We must not only be constantly thinking of the

phenomena themselves, but we must be constantly studying them; making

ourselves acquainted with the peculiarities of every case to which we attempt

to apply our general principles.

              The algebraic notation, considered as a philosophical language, is

perfect in its adaptation to the subjects for which it is commonly employed,

namely those of which the investigations have already been reduced to the

ascertainment of a relation between numbers. But, admirable as it is for its

own purpose, the properties by which it is rendered such are so far from

constituting it the ideal model of philosophical language in general, that the

more nearly the language of any other branch of science approaches to it, the

less fit that language is for its own proper functions. On all other subjects,

instead of contrivances to prevent our attention from being distracted by

thinking of the meaning of our signs, we ought to wish for contrivances tomake it impossible that we should ever lose sight of that meaning even for an

instant.

              With this view, as much meaning as possible should be thrown into

the formation of the word itself; the aids of derivation and analogy being

made available to keep alive a consciousness of all that is signified by it. In

this respect those languages have an immense advantage which form their

compounds and derivatives from native roots, like the German, and not from

those of a foreign or dead language, as is so much the case with English,

French, and Italian; and the best are those which form them according to

fixed analogies, corresponding to the relations between the ideas to be

expressed. All languages do this more or less, but especially, among modern

European languages, the German; while even that is inferior to the Greek, in

which the relation between the meaning of a derivative word and that of its

primitive is in general clearly marked by its mode of formation, except in the

case of words compounded with prepositions, which are often, in both those

languages, extremely anomalous.

              But all that can be done, by the mode of constructing words, to

prevent them from degenerating into sounds passing through the mind

without any distinct apprehension of what they signify, is far too little for the

necessity of the case. Words, however well constructed originally, are always

tending, like coins, to have their inscription worn off by passing from hand to

hand; and the only possible mode of reviving it is to be ever stamping it

afresh, by living in the habitual contemplation of the phenomena themselves,

and not resting in our familiarity with the words that express them. If any

one, having possessed himself of the laws of phenomena as recorded in

words, whether delivered to him originally by others, or even found out by

himself, is content from thenceforth to live among these formulæ, to think

exclusively of them, and of applying them to cases as they arise, without

keeping up his acquaintance with the realities from which these laws were

collected — not only will he continually fail in his practical efforts, because

he will apply his formulæ without duly considering whether, in this case and

in that, other laws of nature do not modify or supersede them; but the

formulæ themselves will progressively lose their meaning to him, and he will

cease at last even to be capable of recognizing with certainty whether a case

falls within the contemplation of his formula or not. It is, in short, as

necessary, on all subjects not mathematical, that the things on which wereason should be conceived by us in the concrete, and “clothed in

circumstances,” as it is in algebra that we should keep all individualizing

peculiarities sedulously out of view.

              With this remark we close our observations on the Philosophy of

Language.

 

 

       Chapter VII. – Of Classification, As Subsidiary To Induction.

 

 

              § 1. There is, as has been frequently remarked in this work, a

classification of things, which is inseparable from the fact of giving them

general names. Every name which connotes an attribute, divides, by that very

fact, all things whatever into two classes, those which have the attribute and

those which have it not; those of which the name can be predicated, and those

of which it can not. And the division thus made is not merely a division of

such things as actually exist, or are known to exist, but of all such as may

hereafter be discovered, and even of all which can be imagined.

              On this kind of Classification we have nothing to add to what has

previously been said. The Classification which requires to be discussed as a

separate act of the mind, is altogether different. In the one, the arrangement of

objects in groups, and distribution of them into compartments, is a mere

incidental effect consequent on the use of names given for another purpose,

namely that of simply expressing some of their qualities. In the other, the

arrangement and distribution are the main object, and the naming is

secondary to, and purposely conforms itself to, instead of governing, that

more important operation.

              Classification, thus regarded, is a contrivance for the best possible

ordering of the ideas of objects in our minds; for causing the ideas to

accompany or succeed one another in such a way as shall give us the greatest

command over our knowledge already acquired, and lead most directly to the

acquisition of more. The general problem of Classification, in reference to

these purposes, may be stated as follows: To provide that things shall be

thought of in such groups, and those groups in such an order, as will best

conduce to the remembrance and to the ascertainment of their laws.

              Classification thus considered, differs from classification in the

wider sense, in having reference to real objects exclusively, and not to all that

are imaginable: its object being the due co-ordination in our minds of those

things only, with the properties of which we have actually occasion to make

ourselves acquainted. But, on the other hand, it embraces all really existing

objects. We can not constitute any one class properly, except in reference to ageneral division of the whole of nature; we can not determine the group in

which any one object can most conveniently be placed, without taking into

consideration all the varieties of existing objects, all at least which have any

degree of affinity with it. No one family of plants or animals could have been

rationally constituted, except as part of a systematic arrangement of all plants

or animals; nor could such a general arrangement have been properly made,

without first determining the exact place of plants and animals in a general

division of nature.

              § 2. There is no property of objects which may not be taken, if we

please, as the foundation for a classification or mental grouping of those

objects; and in our first attempts we are likely to select for that purpose

properties which are simple, easily conceived, and perceptible on a first view,

without any previous process of thought. Thus Tournefort’s arrangement of

plants was founded on the shape and divisions of the corolla; and that which

is commonly called the Linnæan (though Linnæus also suggested another and

more scientific arrangement) was grounded chiefly on the number of the

stamens and pistils.

              But these classifications, which are at first recommended by the

facility they afford of ascertaining to what class any individual belongs, are

seldom much adapted to the ends of that Classification which is the subject of

our present remarks. The Linnæan arrangement answers the purpose of

making us think together of all those kinds of plants which possess the same

number of stamens and pistils; but to think of them in that manner is of little

use, since we seldom have any thing to affirm in common of the plants which

have a given number of stamens and pistils. If plants of the class Pentandria,

order Monogynia, agreed in any other properties, the habit of thinking and

speaking of the plants under a common designation would conduce to our

remembering those common properties so far as they were ascertained, and

would dispose us to be on the lookout for such of them as were not yet

known. But since this is not the case, the only purpose of thought which the

Linnæan classification serves is that of causing us to remember, better than

we should otherwise have done, the exact number of stamens and pistils of

every species of plants. Now, as this property is of little importance or

interest, the remembering it with any particular accuracy is of no moment.

And, inasmuch as, by habitually thinking of plants in those groups, we are

prevented from habitually thinking of them in groups which have a greaternumber of properties in common, the effect of such a classification, when

systematically adhered to, upon our habits of thought, must be regarded as

mischievous.

              The ends of scientific classification are best answered, when the

objects are formed into groups respecting which a greater number of general

propositions can be made, and those propositions more important, than could

be made respecting any other groups into which the same things could be

distributed. The properties, therefore, according to which objects are

classified, should, if possible, be those which are causes of many other

properties; or, at any rate, which are sure marks of them. Causes are

preferable, both as being the surest and most direct of marks, and as being

themselves the properties on which it is of most use that our attention should

be strongly fixed. But the property which is the cause of the chief

peculiarities of a class, is unfortunately seldom fitted to serve also as the

diagnostic of the class. Instead of the cause, we must generally select some of

its more prominent effects, which may serve as marks of the other effects and

of the cause.

              A classification thus formed is properly scientific or philosophical,

and is commonly called a Natural, in contradistinction to a Technical or

Artificial, classification or arrangement. The phrase Natural Classification

seems most peculiarly appropriate to such arrangements as correspond, in the

groups which they form, to the spontaneous tendencies of the mind, by

placing together the objects most similar in their general aspect; in opposition

to those technical systems which, arranging things according to their

agreement in some circumstance arbitrarily selected, often throw into the

same group objects which in the general aggregate of their properties present

no resemblance, and into different and remote groups, others which have the

closest similarity. It is one of the most valid recommendations of any

classification to the character of a scientific one, that it shall be a natural

classification in this sense also; for the test of its scientific character is the

number and importance of the properties which can be asserted in common of

all objects included in a group; and properties on which the general aspect of

the things depends are, if only on that ground, important, as well as, in most

cases, numerous. But, though a strong recommendation, this circumstance is

not a sine qua non ; since the most obvious properties of things may be of

trifling importance compared with others that are not obvious. I have seen itmentioned as a great absurdity in the Linnæan classification, that it places

(which by-the-way it does not) the violet by the side of the oak; it certainly

dissevers natural affinities, and brings together things quite as unlike as the

oak and the violet are. But the difference, apparently so wide, which renders

the juxtaposition of those two vegetables so suitable an illustration of a bad

arrangement, depends, to the common eye, mainly on mere size and texture;

now if we made it our study to adopt the classification which would involve

the least peril of similar rapprochements , we should return to the obsolete

division into trees, shrubs, and herbs, which though of primary importance

with regard to mere general aspect, yet (compared even with so petty and

unobvious a distinction as that into dicotyledons and monocotyledons)

answers to so few differences in the other properties of plants, that a

classification founded on it (independently of the indistinctness of the lines of

demarcation) would be as completely artificial and technical as the Linnæan.

              Our natural groups, therefore, must often be founded not on the

obvious but on the unobvious properties of things, when these are of greater

importance. But in such cases it is essential that there should be some other

property or set of properties, more readily recognizable by the observer,

which co-exist with, and may be received as marks of, the properties which

are the real groundwork of the classification. A natural arrangement, for

example, of animals, must be founded in the main on their internal structure,

but (as M. Comte remarks) it would be absurd that we should not be able to

determine the genus and species of an animal without first killing it. On this

ground, the preference, among zoological classifications, is probably due to

that of M. De Blainville, founded on the differences in the external

integuments; differences which correspond, much more accurately than might

be supposed, to the really important varieties, both in the other parts of the

structure, and in the habits and history of the animals.

              This shows, more strongly than ever, how extensive a knowledge of

the properties of objects is necessary for making a good classification of

them. And as it is one of the uses of such a classification that by drawing

attention to the properties on which it is founded, and which, if the

classification be good, are marks of many others, it facilitates the discovery

of those others; we see in what manner our knowledge of things, and our

classification of them, tend mutually and indefinitely to the improvement of

each other.              We said just now that the classification of objects should follow

those of their properties which indicate not only the most numerous, but also

the most important peculiarities. What is here meant by importance? It has

reference to the particular end in view; and the same objects, therefore, may

admit with propriety of several different classifications. Each science or art

forms its classification of things according to the properties which fall within

its special cognizance, or of which it must take account in order to

accomplish its peculiar practical end. A farmer does not divide plants, like a

botanist, into dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous, but into useful plants

and weeds. A geologist divides fossils, not like a zoologist, into families

corresponding to those of living species, but into fossils of the paleozoic,

mesozoic, and tertiary periods, above the coal and below the coal, etc.

Whales are or are not fish according to the purpose for which we are

considering them. “If we are speaking of the internal structure and

physiology of the animal, we must not call them fish; for in these respects

they deviate widely from fishes; they have warm blood, and produce and

suckle their young as land quadrupeds do. But this would not prevent our

speaking of the whale-fishery , and calling such animals fish on all occasions

connected with this employment; for the relations thus arising depend upon

the animal’s living in the water, and being caught in a manner similar to other

fishes. A plea that human laws which mention fish do not apply to whales,
                                                          224
would be rejected at once by an intelligent judge.”

              These different classifications are all good, for the purposes of their

own particular departments of knowledge or practice. But when we are

studying objects not for any special practical end, but for the sake of

extending our knowledge of the whole of their properties and relations, we

must consider as the most important attributes those which contribute most,

either by themselves or by their effects, to render the things like one another,

and unlike other things; which give to the class composed of them the most

marked individuality; which fill, as it were, the largest space in their

existence, and would most impress the attention of a spectator who knew all

their properties but was not specially interested in any. Classes formed on this

principle may be called, in a more emphatic manner than any others, natural

groups.

              § 3. On the subject of these groups Dr. Whewell lays down a theory,

grounded on an important truth, which he has, in some respects, expressedand illustrated very felicitously, but also, as it appears to me, with some

admixture of error. It will be advantageous, for both these reasons, to extract

the statement of his doctrine in the very words he has used.

                                                            225
              “Natural groups,” according to this theory, are “given by Type, not

by Definition.” And this consideration accounts for that “indefiniteness and

indecision which we frequently find in the descriptions of such groups, and

which must appear so strange and inconsistent to any one who does not

suppose these descriptions to assume any deeper ground of connection than

an arbitrary choice of the botanist. Thus in the family of the rose-tree, we are

told that the ovules are very rarely erect, the stigmata usually simple. Of what

use, it might be asked, can such loose accounts be? To which the answer is,

that they are not inserted in order to distinguish the species, but in order to

describe the family, and the total relations of the ovules and the stigmata of

the family are better known by this general statement. A similar observation

may be made with regard to the Anomalies of each group, which occur so

commonly, that Dr. Lindley, in his Introduction to the Natural System of

Botany , makes the ‘Anomalies’ an article in each family. Thus, part of the

character of the Rosaceæ is, that they have alternate stipulate leaves, and that

the albumen is obliterated ; but yet in Lowea , one of the genera of this

family, the stipulæ are absent ; and the albumen is present in another, Neillia

. This implies, as we have already seen, that the artificial character (or

diagnosis , as Mr. Lindley calls it) is imperfect. It is, though very nearly, yet

not exactly, commensurate with the natural group; and hence in certain cases

this character is made to yield to the general weight of natural affinities.

              “These views — of classes determined by characters which can not

be expressed in words — of propositions which state, not what happens in all

cases, but only usually — of particulars which are included in a class, though

they transgress the definition of it, may probably surprise the reader. They are

so contrary to many of the received opinions respecting the use of definitions,

and the nature of scientific propositions, that they will probably appear to

many persons highly illogical and unphilosophical. But a disposition to such

a judgment arises in a great measure from this, that the mathematical and

mathematico-physical sciences have, in a great degree, determined men’s

views of the general nature and form of scientific truth; while Natural History

has not yet had time or opportunity to exert its due influence upon the current

habits of philosophizing. The apparent indefiniteness and inconsistency of theclassifications and definitions of Natural History belongs, in a far higher

degree, to all other except mathematical speculations; and the modes in which

approximations to exact distinctions and general truths have been made in

Natural History, may be worthy our attention, even for the light they throw

upon the best modes of pursuing truth of all kinds.

              “Though in a Natural group of objects a definition can no longer be

of any use as a regulative principle, classes are not therefore left quite loose,

without any certain standard or guide. The class is steadily fixed, though not

precisely limited; it is given, though not circumscribed; it is determined, not

by a boundary-line without, but by a central point within; not by what it

strictly excludes, but by what it eminently includes; by an example, not by a

precept; in short, instead of a Definition we have a Type for our director.

              “A Type is an example of any class, for instance a species of a

genus, which is considered as eminently possessing the character of the class.

All the species which have a greater affinity with this type-species than with

any others, form the genus, and are arranged about it, deviating from it in

various directions and different degrees. Thus a genus may consist of several

species which approach very near the type, and of which the claim to a place

with it is obvious; while there may be other species which straggle farther

from this central knot, and which yet are clearly more connected with it than

with any other. And even if there should be some species of which the place

is dubious, and which appear to be equally bound to two generic types, it is

easily seen that this would not destroy the reality of the generic groups, any

more than the scattered trees of the intervening plain prevent our speaking

intelligibly of the distinct forests of two separate hills.

              “The type-species of every genus, the type-genus of every family, is

then, one which possesses all the characters and properties of the genus in a

marked and prominent manner. The type of the Rose family has alternate

stipulate leaves, wants the albumen, has the ovules not erect, has the stigmata

simple, and besides these features, which distinguish it from the exceptions or

varieties of its class, it has the features which make it prominent in its class. It

is one of those which possess clearly several leading attributes; and thus,

though we can not say of any one genus that it must be the type of the family,

or of any one species that it must be the type of the genus, we are still not

wholly to seek; the type must be connected by many affinities with most of

the others of its group; it must be near the centre of the crowd, and not one ofthe stragglers.”

              In this passage (the latter part of which especially I can not help

noticing as an admirable example of philosophic style) Dr. Whewell has

stated very clearly and forcibly, but (I think) without making all necessary

distinctions, one of the principles of a Natural Classification. What this

principle is, what are its limits, and in what manner he seems to me to have

overstepped them, will appear when we have laid down another rule of

Natural Arrangement, which appears to me still more fundamental.

              § 4. The reader is by this time familiar with the general truth (which

I restate so often on account of the great confusion in which it is commonly

involved), that there are in nature distinctions of Kind; distinctions not

consisting in a given number of definite properties plus the effects which

follow from those properties, but running through the whole nature, through

the attributes generally, of the things so distinguished. Our knowledge of the

properties of a Kind is never complete. We are always discovering, and

expecting to discover, new ones. Where the distinction between two classes

of things is not one of Kind, we expect to find their properties alike, except

where there is some reason for their being different. On the contrary, when

the distinction is in Kind, we expect to find the properties different unless

there be some cause for their being the same. All knowledge of a Kind must

be obtained by observation and experiment upon the Kind itself; no inference

respecting its properties from the properties of things not connected with it by

Kind, goes for more than the sort of presumption usually characterized as an

analogy, and generally in one of its fainter degrees.

              Since the common properties of a true Kind, and consequently the

general assertions which can be made respecting it, or which are certain to be

made hereafter as our knowledge extends, are indefinite and inexhaustible;

and since the very first principle of natural classification is that of forming

the classes so that the objects composing each may have the greatest number

of properties in common; this principle prescribes that every such

classification shall recognize and adopt into itself all distinctions of Kind,

which exist among the objects it professes to classify. To pass over any

distinctions of Kind, and substitute definite distinctions, which, however

considerable they may be, do not point to ulterior unknown differences,

would be to replace classes with more by classes with fewer attributes in

common; and would be subversive of the Natural Method of Classification.              Accordingly all natural arrangements, whether the reality of the

distinction of Kinds was felt or not by their framers, have been led, by the

mere pursuit of their own proper end, to conform themselves to the

distinctions of Kind, so far as these have been ascertained at the time. The

species of Plants are not only real Kinds, but are probably, all of them, real

lowest Kinds, Infimæ Species; which, if we were to subdivide, as of course it

is open to us to do, into sub-classes, the subdivision would necessarily be

founded on definite distinctions, not pointing (apart from what may be known

of their causes or effects) to any difference beyond themselves.

              In so far as a natural classification is grounded on real Kinds, its

groups are certainly not conventional: it is perfectly true that they do not

depend upon an arbitrary choice of the naturalist. But it does not follow, nor,

I conceive, is it true, that these classes are determined by a type, and not by

characters. To determine them by a type would be as sure a way of missing

the Kind, as if we were to select a set of characters arbitrarily. They are

determined by characters, but these are not arbitrary. The problem is, to find a

few definite characters which point to the multitude of indefinite ones. Kinds

are Classes between which there is an impassable barrier; and what we have

to seek is, marks whereby we may determine on which side of the barrier an

object takes its place. The characters which will best do this should be

chosen: if they are also important in themselves, so much the better. When

we have selected the characters, we parcel out the objects according to those

characters, and not, I conceive, according to resemblance to a type. We do

not compose the species Ranunculus acris, of all plants which bear a

satisfactory degree of resemblance to a model buttercup, but of those which

possess certain characters selected as marks by which we might recognize the

possibility of a common parentage; and the enumeration of those characters is

the definition of the species.

              The question next arises, whether, as all Kinds must have a place

among the classes, so all the classes in a natural arrangement must be Kinds?

And to this I answer, certainly not. The distinctions of Kinds are not

numerous enough to make up the whole of a classification. Very few of the

genera of plants, or even of the families, can be pronounced with certainty to

be Kinds. The great distinctions of Vascular and Cellular, Dicotyledonous or

Exogenous and Monocotyledonous or Endogenous plants, are perhaps

differences of kind; the lines of demarcation which divide those classes seem(though even on this I would not pronounce positively) to go through the

whole nature of the plants. But the different species of a genus, or genera of a

family, usually have in common only a limited number of characters. A Rose

does not seem to differ from a Rubus, or the Umbelliferæ from the

Ranunculaceæ, in much else than the characters botanically assigned to those

genera or those families. Unenumerated differences certainly do exist in some

cases; there are families of plants which have peculiarities of chemical

composition, or yield products having peculiar effects on the animal

economy. The Cruciferæ and Fungi contain an unusual proportion of

nitrogen; the Labiatæ are the chief sources of essential oils, the Solaneæ are

very commonly narcotic, etc. In these and similar cases there are possibly

distinctions of Kind; but it is by no means indispensable that there should be.

Genera and Families may be eminently natural, though marked out from one

another by properties limited in number; provided those properties are

important, and the objects contained in each genus or family resemble each

other more than they resemble any thing which is excluded from the genus or

family.

              After the recognition and definition, then, of the infimæ species , the

next step is to arrange those infimæ species into larger groups: making these

groups correspond to Kinds wherever it is possible, but in most cases without

any such guidance. And in doing this it is true that we are naturally and

properly guided, in most cases at least, by resemblance to a type. We form

our groups round certain selected Kinds, each of which serves as a sort of

exemplar of its group. But though the groups are suggested by types, I can

not think that a group when formed is determined by the type; that in

deciding whether a species belongs to the group, a reference is made to the

type, and not to the characters; that the characters “can not be expressed in

words.” This assertion is inconsistent with Dr. Whewell’s own statement of

the fundamental principle of classification, namely, that “general assertions

shall be possible.” If the class did not possess any characters in common,

what general assertions would be possible respecting it? Except that they all

resemble each other more than they resemble any thing else, nothing

whatever could be predicated of the class.

              The truth is, on the contrary, that every genus or family is framed

with distinct reference to certain characters, and is composed, first and

principally, of species which agree in possessing all those characters. Tothese are added, as a sort of appendix, such other species, generally in small

number, as possess nearly all the properties selected; wanting some of them

one property, some another, and which, while they agree with the rest almost

as much as these agree with one another, do not resemble in an equal degree

any other group. Our conception of the class continues to be grounded on the

characters; and the class might be defined, those things which either possess

that set of characters, or resemble the things that do so, more than they

resemble any thing else.

              And this resemblance itself is not, like resemblance between simple

sensations, an ultimate fact, unsusceptible of analysis. Even the inferior

degree of resemblance is created by the possession of common characters.

Whatever resembles the genus Rose more than it resembles any other genus,

does so because it possesses a greater number of the characters of that genus

than of the characters of any other genus. Nor can there be any real difficulty

in representing, by an enumeration of characters, the nature and degree of the

resemblance which is strictly sufficient to include any object in the class.

There are always some properties common to all things which are included.

Others there often are, to which some things, which are nevertheless

included, are exceptions. But the objects which are exceptions to one

character are not exceptions to another; the resemblance which fails in some

particulars must be made up for in others. The class, therefore, is constituted

by the possession of all the characters which are universal, and most of those

which admit of exceptions. If a plant had the ovules erect, the stigmata

divided, possessed the albumen, and was without stipules, it possibly would

not be classed among the Rosaceæ. But it may want any one, or more than

one of these characters, and not be excluded. The ends of a scientific

classification are better answered by including it. Since it agrees so nearly, in

its known properties, with the sum of the characters of the class, it is likely to

resemble that class more than any other in those of its properties which are

still undiscovered.

              Not only, therefore, are natural groups, no less than any artificial

classes, determined by characters; they are constituted in contemplation of,

and by reason of, characters. But it is in contemplation not of those characters

only which are rigorously common to all the objects included in the group,

but of the entire body of characters, all of which are found in most of those

objects, and most of them in all. And hence our conception of the class, theimage in our minds which is representative of it, is that of a specimen

complete in all the characters; most naturally a specimen which, by

possessing them all in the greatest degree in which they are ever found, is the

best fitted to exhibit clearly, and in a marked manner, what they are. It is by a

mental reference to this standard, not instead of, but in illustration of, the

definition of the class, that we usually and advantageously determine whether

any individual or species belongs to the class or not. And this, as it seems to

me, is the amount of truth contained in the doctrine of Types.

              We shall see presently that where the classification is made for the

express purpose of a special inductive inquiry, it is not optional, but

necessary for fulfilling the conditions of a correct Inductive Method, that we

should establish a type-species or genus, namely, the one which exhibits in

the most eminent degree the particular phenomenon under investigation. But

of this hereafter. It remains, for completing the theory of natural groups, that

a few words should be said on the principles of the nomenclature adapted to

them.

              § 5. A Nomenclature in science is, as we have said, a system of the

names of Kinds. These names, like other class-names, are defined by the

enumeration of the characters distinctive of the class. The only merit which a

set of names can have beyond this, is to convey, by the mode of their

construction, as much information as possible: so that a person who knows

the thing, may receive all the assistance which the name can give in

remembering what he knows; while he who knows it not, may receive as

much knowledge respecting it as the case admits of, by merely being told its

name.

              There are two modes of giving to the name of a Kind this sort of

significance. The best, but which unfortunately is seldom practicable, is when

the word can be made to indicate, by its formation, the very properties which

it is designed to connote. The name of a Kind does not, of course, connote all

the properties of the Kind, since these are inexhaustible, but such of them as

are sufficient to distinguish it; such as are sure marks of all the rest. Now, it is

very rarely that one property, or even any two or three properties, can answer

this purpose. To distinguish the common daisy from all other species of

plants would require the specification of many characters. And a name can

not, without being too cumbrous for use, give indication, by its etymology or

mode of construction, of more than a very small number of these. Thepossibility, therefore, of an ideally perfect Nomenclature, is probably

confined to the one case in which we are happily in possession of something

approaching to it — the Nomenclature of elementary Chemistry. The

substances, whether simple or compound, with which chemistry is

conversant, are Kinds, and, as such, the properties which distinguish each of

them from the rest are innumerable; but in the case of compound substances

(the simple ones are not numerous enough to require a systematic

nomenclature), there is one property, the chemical composition, which is of

itself sufficient to distinguish the Kind; and is (with certain reservations not

yet thoroughly understood) a sure mark of all the other properties of the

compound. All that was needful, therefore, was to make the name of every

compound express, on the first hearing, its chemical composition; that is, to

form the name of the compound, in some uniform manner, from the names of

the simple substances which enter into it as elements. This was done, most

skillfully and successfully, by the French chemists, though their

nomenclature has become inadequate to the convenient expression of the

very complicated compounds now known to chemists. The only thing left

unexpressed by them was the exact proportion in which the elements were

combined; and even this, since the establishment of the atomic theory, it has

been found possible to express by a simple adaptation of their phraseology.

              But where the characters which must be taken into consideration, in

order sufficiently to designate the Kind, are too numerous to be all signified

in the derivation of the name, and where no one of them is of such

preponderant importance as to justify its being singled out to be so indicated,

we may avail ourselves of a subsidiary resource. Though we can not indicate

the distinctive properties of the Kind, we may indicate its nearest natural

affinities, by incorporating into its name the name of the proximate natural

group of which it is one of the species. On this principle is founded the

admirable binary nomenclature of botany and zoology. In this nomenclature

the name of every species consists of the name of the genus, or natural group

next above it, with a word added to distinguish the particular species. The last

portion of the compound name is sometimes taken from some one of the

peculiarities in which that species differs from others of the genus; as

Clematis integrifolia , Potentilla alba , Viola palustris , Artemisia vulgaris ;

sometimes from a circumstance of an historical nature, as Narcissus poeticus

, Potentilla tormentilla (indicating that the plant is that which was formerly

known by the latter name), Exacum Candollii (from the fact that De Candollewas its first discoverer); and sometimes the word is purely conventional, as

Thlaspi bursapastoris , Ranunculus thora ; it is of little consequence which;

since the second, or, as it is usually called, the specific name, could at most

express, independently of convention, no more than a very small portion of

the connotation of the term. But by adding to this the name of the superior

genus, we may make the best amends we can for the impossibility of so

contriving the name as to express all the distinctive characters of the Kind.

We make it, at all events, express as many of those characters as are common

to the proximate natural group in which the Kind is included. If even those

common characters are so numerous or so little familiar as to require a further

extension of the same resource, we might, instead of a binary, adopt a ternary

nomenclature, employing not only the name of the genus, but that of the next

natural group in order of generality above the genus, commonly called the

Family. This was done in the mineralogical nomenclature proposed by

Professor Mohs. “The names framed by him were not composed of two, but

of three elements, designating respectively the Species, the Genus, and the

Order; thus he has such species as Rhombohedral Lime Haloide , Octohedral
                                              226
Fluor Haloide , Prismatic Hal Baryte .” The binary construction, however,

has been found sufficient in botany and zoology, the only sciences in which

this general principle has hitherto been successfully adopted in the

construction of a nomenclature.

              Besides the advantage which this principle of nomenclature

possesses, in giving to the names of species the greatest quantity of

independent significance which the circumstances of the case admit of, it

answers the further end of immensely economizing the use of names, and

preventing an otherwise intolerable burden on the memory. When the names
                                                                                  227
of species become extremely numerous, some artifice (as Dr. Whewell

observes) becomes absolutely necessary to make it possible to recollect or

apply them. “The known species of plants, for example, were ten thousand in

the time of Linnæus, and are now probably sixty thousand. It would be

useless to endeavor to frame and employ separate names for each of these

species. The division of the objects into a subordinated system of

classification enables us to introduce a Nomenclature which does not require

this enormous number of names. Each of the genera has its name, and the

species are marked by the addition of some epithet to the name of the genus.

In this manner about seventeen hundred generic names, with a moderate

number of specific names, were found by Linnæus sufficient to designatewith precision all the species of vegetables known at his time.” And though

the number of generic names has since greatly increased, it has not increased

in any thing like the proportion of the multiplication of known species.

                   Chapter VIII – Of Classification By Series.

 

 

              § 1. Thus far, we have considered the principles of scientific

classification so far only as relates to the formation of natural groups; and at

this point most of those who have attempted a theory of natural arrangement,

including, among the rest, Dr. Whewell, have stopped. There remains,

however, another, and a not less important portion of the theory, which has

not yet, as far as I am aware, been systematically treated of by any writer

except M. Comte. This is, the arrangement of the natural groups into a natural
      228
series.

              The end of Classification, as an instrument for the investigation of

nature, is (as before stated) to make us think of those objects together which

have the greatest number of important common properties; and which,

therefore, we have oftenest occasion, in the course of our inductions, for

taking into joint consideration. Our ideas of objects are thus brought into the

order most conducive to the successful prosecution of inductive inquiries

generally. But when the purpose is to facilitate some particular inductive

inquiry, more is required. To be instrumental to that purpose, the

classification must bring those objects together, the simultaneous

contemplation of which is likely to throw most light upon the particular

subject. That subject being the laws of some phenomenon or some set of

connected phenomena; the very phenomenon or set of phenomena in question

must be chosen as the groundwork of the classification.

              The requisites of a classification intended to facilitate the study of a

particular phenomenon, are, first to bring into one class all Kinds of things

which exhibit that phenomenon, in whatever variety of forms or degrees; and,

secondly, to arrange those Kinds in a series according to the degree in which

they exhibit it, beginning with those which exhibit most of it, and terminating

with those which exhibit least. The principal example, as yet, of such a

classification, is afforded by comparative anatomy and physiology, from

which, therefore, our illustrations shall be taken.

              § 2. The object being supposed to be, the investigation of the laws of

animal life; the first step, after forming the most distinct conception of thephenomenon itself, possible in the existing state of our knowledge, is to erect

into one great class (that of animals) all the known Kinds of beings where

that phenomenon presents itself; in however various combinations with other

properties, and in however different degrees. As some of these Kinds

manifest the general phenomenon of animal life in a very high degree, and

others in an insignificant degree, barely sufficient for recognition; we must,

in the next place, arrange the various Kinds in a series, following one another

according to the degrees in which they severally exhibit the phenomenon;

beginning therefore with man, and ending with the most imperfect kinds of

zoophytes.

              This is merely saying that we should put the instances, from which

the law is to be inductively collected, into the order which is implied in one

of the four Methods of Experimental Inquiry discussed in the preceding

Book; the fourth Method, that of Concomitant Variations. As formerly

remarked, this is often the only method to which recourse can be had, with

assurance of a true conclusion, in cases in which we have but limited means

of effecting, by artificial experiments, a separation of circumstances usually

conjoined. The principle of the method is, that facts which increase or

diminish together, and disappear together, are either cause and effect, or

effects of a common cause. When it has been ascertained that this relation

really subsists between the variations, a connection between the facts

themselves may be confidently laid down, either as a law of nature or only as

an empirical law, according to circumstances.

              That the application of this Method must be preceded by the

formation of such a series as we have described, is too obvious to need being

pointed out; and the mere arrangement of a set of objects in a series,

according to the degrees in which they exhibit some fact of which we are

seeking the law, is too naturally suggested by the necessities of our inductive

operations, to require any lengthened illustration here. But there are cases in

which the arrangement required for the special purpose becomes the

determining principle of the classification of the same objects for general

purposes. This will naturally and properly happen, when those laws of the

objects which are sought in the special inquiry enact so principal a part in the

general character and history of those objects — exercise so much influence

in determining all the phenomena of which they are either the agents or the

theatre — that all other differences existing among the objects are fittinglyregarded as mere modifications of the one phenomenon sought; effects

determined by the co-operation of some incidental circumstance with the

laws of that phenomenon. Thus in the case of animated beings, the

differences between one class of animals and another may reasonably be

considered as mere modifications of the general phenomenon, animal life;

modifications arising either from the different degrees in which that

phenomenon is manifested in different animals, or from the intermixture of

the effects of incidental causes peculiar to the nature of each, with the effects

produced by the general laws of life; those laws still exercising a

predominant influence over the result. Such being the case, no other inductive

inquiry respecting animals can be successfully carried on, except in

subordination to the great inquiry into the universal laws of animal life; and

the classification of animals best suited to that one purpose, is the most

suitable to all the other purposes of zoological science.

              § 3. To establish a classification of this sort, or even to apprehend it

when established, requires the power of recognizing the essential similarity of

a phenomenon, in its minuter degrees and obscurer forms, with what is called

the same phenomenon in the greatest perfection of its development; that is, of

identifying with each other all phenomena which differ only in degree, and in

properties which we suppose to be caused by difference of degree. In order to

recognize this identity, or, in other words, this exact similarity of quality, the

assumption of a type-species is indispensable. We must consider as the type

of the class, that among the Kinds included in it, which exhibits the properties

constitutive of the class, in the highest degree; conceiving the other varieties

as instances of degeneracy, as it were, from that type; deviations from it by

inferior intensity of the characteristic property or properties. For every

phenomenon is best studied (cæteris paribus ) where it exists in the greatest

intensity. It is there that the effects which either depend on it, or depend on

the same causes with it, will also exist in the greatest degree. It is there,

consequently, and only there, that those effects of it, or joint effects with it,

can become fully known to us, so that we may learn to recognize their

smaller degrees, or even their mere rudiments, in cases in which the direct

study would have been difficult or even impossible. Not to mention that the

phenomenon in its higher degrees may be attended by effects or collateral

circumstances which in its smaller degrees do not occur at all, requiring for

their production in any sensible amount a greater degree of intensity of the

cause than is there met with. In man, for example (the species in which boththe phenomenon of animal and that of organic life exist in the highest

degree), many subordinate phenomena develop themselves in the course of

his animated existence, which the inferior varieties of animals do not show.

The knowledge of these properties may nevertheless be of great avail toward

the discovery of the conditions and laws of the general phenomenon of life,

which is common to man with those inferior animals. And they are, even,

rightly considered as properties of animated nature itself; because they may

evidently be affiliated to the general laws of animated nature; because we

may fairly presume that some rudiments or feeble degrees of those properties

would be recognized in all animals by more perfect organs, or even by more

perfect instruments, than ours; and because those may be correctly termed

properties of a class, which a thing exhibits exactly in proportion as it

belongs to the class, that is, in proportion as it possesses the main attributes

constitutive of the class.

              § 4. It remains to consider how the internal distribution of the series

may most properly take place; in what manner it should be divided into

Orders, Families, and Genera.

              The main principle of division must of course be natural affinity; the

classes formed must be natural groups; and the formation of these has already

been sufficiently treated of. But the principles of natural grouping must be

applied in subordination to the principle of a natural series. The groups must

not be so constituted as to place in the same group things which ought to

occupy different points of the general scale. The precaution necessary to be

observed for this purpose is, that the primary divisions must be grounded not

on all distinctions indiscriminately, but on those which correspond to

variations in the degree of the main phenomenon. The series of Animated

Nature should be broken into parts at the points where the variation in the

degree of intensity of the main phenomenon (as marked by its principal

characters, Sensation, Thought, Voluntary Motion, etc.) begins to be attended

by conspicuous changes in the miscellaneous properties of the animal. Such

well-marked changes take place, for example, where the class Mammalia

ends; at the points where Fishes are separated from Insects, Insects from

Mollusca, etc. When so formed, the primary natural groups will compose the

series by mere juxtaposition, without redistribution; each of them

corresponding to a definite portion of the scale. In like manner each family

should, if possible, be so subdivided, that one portion of it shall stand higherand the other lower, though of course contiguous, in the general scale; and

only when this is impossible is it allowable to ground the remaining

subdivisions on characters having no determinable connection with the main

phenomenon.

              Where the principal phenomenon so far transcends in importance all

other properties on which a classification could be grounded, as it does in the

case of animated existence, any considerable deviation from the rule last laid

down is in general sufficiently guarded against by the first principle of a

natural arrangement, that of forming the groups according to the most

important characters. All attempts at a scientific classification of animals,

since first their anatomy and physiology were successfully studied, have been

framed with a certain degree of instinctive reference to a natural series, and

have accorded in many more points than they have differed, with the

classification which would most naturally have been grounded on such a

series. But the accordance has not always been complete; and it still is often a

matter of discussion, which of several classifications best accords with the

true scale of intensity of the main phenomenon. Cuvier, for example, has

been justly criticised for having formed his natural groups, with an undue

degree of reference to the mode of alimentation, a circumstance directly

connected only with organic life, and not leading to the arrangement most

appropriate for the purposes of an investigation of the laws of animal life,

since both carnivorous and herbivorous or frugivorous animals are found at

almost every degree in the scale of animal perfection. Blainville’s

classification has been considered by high authorities to be free from this

defect; as representing correctly, by the mere order of the principal groups,

the successive degeneracy of animal nature from its highest to its most

imperfect exemplification.

              § 5. A classification of any large portion of the field of nature in

conformity to the foregoing principles, has hitherto been found practicable

only in one great instance, that of animals. In the case even of vegetables, the

natural arrangement has not been carried beyond the formation of natural

groups. Naturalists have found, and probably will continue to find it

impossible to form those groups into any series, the terms of which

correspond to real gradations in the phenomenon of vegetative or organic life.

Such a difference of degree may be traced between the class of Vascular

Plants and that of Cellular, which includes lichens, algæ, and othersubstances whose organization is simpler and more rudimentary than that of

the higher order of vegetables, and which therefore approach nearer to mere

inorganic nature. But when we rise much above this point, we do not find any

sufficient difference in the degree in which different plants possess the

properties of organization and life. The dicotyledons are of more complex

structure, and somewhat more perfect organization, than the monocotyledons;

and some dicotyledonous families, such as the Compositæ, are rather more

complex in their organization than the rest. But the differences are not of a

marked character, and do not promise to throw any particular light upon the

conditions and laws of vegetable life and development. If they did, the

classification of vegetables would have to be made, like that of animals, with

reference to the scale or series indicated.

              Although the scientific arrangements of organic nature afford as yet

the only complete example of the true principles of rational classification,

whether as to the formation of groups or of series, those principles are

applicable to all cases in which mankind are called upon to bring the various

parts of any extensive subject into mental co-ordination. They are as much to

the point when objects are to be classed for purposes of art or business, as for

those of science. The proper arrangement, for example, of a code of laws,

depends on the same scientific conditions as the classifications in natural

history; nor could there be a better preparatory discipline for that important

function, than the study of the principles of a natural arrangement, not only in

the abstract, but in their actual application to the class of phenomena for

which they were first elaborated, and which are still the best school for

learning their use. Of this the great authority on codification, Bentham, was

perfectly aware; and his early Fragment on Government , the admirable

introduction to a series of writings unequaled in their department, contains

clear and just views (as far as they go) on the meaning of a natural

arrangement, such as could scarcely have occurred to any one who lived

anterior to the age of Linnæus and Bernard de Jussieu.

 

 

                               Book V: On fallacies.

 

 

              “Errare non modo affirmando et negando, sed etiam sentiendo, et in

tacitâ hominum cogitatione contingit.” — HOBBES, Computatio sive Logica

, chap. v.

              “Il leur semble qu’il n’y a qu’à douter par fantaisie, et qu’il n’y a

qu’à dire en général que notre nature est infirme; que notre esprit est plein

d’aveuglement: qu’il faut avoir un grand soin de se défaire de ses préjugés, et

autres choses semblables. Ils pensent que cela suffit pour ne plus se laisser

séduire à ses sens, et pour ne plus se tromper du tout. Il ne suffit pas de dire

que l’esprit est foible, il faut lui faire sentir ses foiblesses. Ce n’est pas assez

de dire qu’il est sujet à l’erreur, il faut lui découvrir en quoi consistent ses

erreurs.” — MALEBRANCHE, Recherche de la Vérité .

 

 

                       Chapter I. – Of Fallacies In General.

 

 

              § 1. It is a maxim of the school-men, that “contrariorum eadem est

scientia:” we never really know what a thing is, unless we are also able to

give a sufficient account of its opposite. Conformably to this maxim, one

considerable section, in most treatises on Logic, is devoted to the subject of

Fallacies; and the practice is too well worthy of observance, to allow of our

departing from it. The philosophy of reasoning, to be complete, ought to

comprise the theory of bad as well as of good reasoning.

              We have endeavored to ascertain the principles by which the

sufficiency of any proof can be tested, and by which the nature and amount of

evidence needful to prove any given conclusion can be determined

beforehand. If these principles were adhered to, then although the number

and value of the truths ascertained would be limited by the opportunities, or

by the industry, ingenuity, and patience, of the individual inquirer, at least

error would not be embraced instead of truth. But the general consent of

mankind, founded on their experience, vouches for their being far indeed

from even this negative kind of perfection in the employment of their

reasoning powers.

              In the conduct of life — in the practical business of mankind —

wrong inferences, incorrect interpretations of experience, unless after much

culture of the thinking faculty, are absolutely inevitable; and with most

people, after the highest degree of culture they ever attain, such erroneous

inferences, producing corresponding errors in conduct, are lamentably

frequent. Even in the speculations to which eminent intellects have

systematically devoted themselves, and in reference to which the collective

mind of the scientific world is always at hand to aid the efforts and correct

the aberrations of individuals, it is only from the more perfect sciences, from

those of which the subject-matter is the least complicated, that opinions not

resting on a correct induction have at length, generally speaking, been

expelled. In the departments of inquiry relating to the more complex

phenomena of nature, and especially those of which the subject is man,

whether as a moral and intellectual, a social, or even as a physical being; the

diversity of opinions still prevalent among instructed persons, and the equalconfidence with which those of the most contrary ways of thinking cling to

their respective tenets, are proof not only that right modes of philosophizing

are not yet generally adopted on those subjects, but that wrong ones are; that

inquirers have not only in general missed the truth, but have often embraced

error; that even the most cultivated portion of our species have not yet

learned to abstain from drawing conclusions which the evidence does not

warrant.

              The only complete safeguard against reasoning ill, is the habit of

reasoning well; familiarity with the principles of correct reasoning, and

practice in applying those principles. It is, however, not unimportant to

consider what are the most common modes of bad reasoning; by what

appearances the mind is most likely to be seduced from the observance of

true principles of induction; what, in short, are the most common and most

dangerous varieties of Apparent Evidence, whereby persons are misled into

opinions for which there does not exist evidence really conclusive.

              A catalogue of the varieties of apparent evidence which are not real

evidence, is an enumeration of Fallacies. Without such an enumeration,

therefore, the present work would be wanting in an essential point. And while

writers who included in their theory of reasoning nothing more than

ratiocination, have in consistency with this limitation, confined their remarks

to the fallacies which have their seat in that portion of the process of

investigation; we, who profess to treat of the whole process, must add to our

directions for performing it rightly, warnings against performing it wrongly

in any of its parts: whether the ratiocinative or the experimental portion of it

be in fault, or the fault lie in dispensing with ratiocination and induction

altogether.

              § 2. In considering the sources of unfounded inference, it is

unnecessary to reckon the errors which arise, not from a wrong method, nor

even from ignorance of the right one, but from a casual lapse, through hurry

or inattention, in the application of the true principles of induction. Such

errors, like the accidental mistakes in casting up a sum, do not call for

philosophical analysis or classification; theoretical considerations can throw

no light upon the means of avoiding them. In the present treatise our attention

is required, not to mere inexpertness in performing the operation in the right

way (the only remedies for which are increased attention and more sedulous

practice), but to the modes of performing it in a way fundamentally wrong;the conditions under which the human mind persuades itself that it has

sufficient grounds for a conclusion which it has not arrived at by any of the

legitimate methods of induction — which it has not, even carelessly or

overhastily, endeavored to test by those legitimate methods.

              § 3. There is another branch of what may be called the Philosophy of

Error, which must be mentioned here, though only to be excluded from our

subject. The sources of erroneous opinions are twofold, moral and

intellectual. Of these, the moral do not fall within the compass of this work.

They may be classed under two general heads: Indifference to the attainment

of truth, and Bias; of which last the most common case is that in which we

are biased by our wishes; but the liability is almost as great to the undue

adoption of a conclusion which is disagreeable to us, as of one which is

agreeable, if it be of a nature to bring into action any of the stronger passions.

Persons of timid character are the more predisposed to believe any statement,

the more it is calculated to alarm them. Indeed it is a psychological law,

deducible from the most general laws of the mental constitution of man, that

any strong passion renders us credulous as to the existence of objects suitable

to excite it.

              But the moral causes of opinions, though with most persons the most

powerful of all, are but remote causes; they do not act directly, but by means

of the intellectual causes; to which they bear the same relation that the

circumstances called, in the theory of medicine, predisposing causes, bear to

exciting causes. Indifference to truth can not, in and by itself, produce

erroneous belief; it operates by preventing the mind from collecting the

proper evidences, or from applying to them the test of a legitimate and rigid

induction; by which omission it is exposed unprotected to the influence of

any species of apparent evidence which offers itself spontaneously, or which

is elicited by that smaller quantity of trouble which the mind may be willing

to take. As little is Bias a direct source of wrong conclusions. We can not

believe a proposition only by wishing, or only by dreading, to believe it. The

most violent inclination to find a set of propositions true, will not enable the

weakest of mankind to believe them without a vestige of intellectual grounds

— without any, even apparent, evidence. It acts indirectly, by placing the

intellectual grounds of belief in an incomplete or distorted shape before his

eyes. It makes him shrink from the irksome labor of a rigorous induction,

when he has a misgiving that its result may be disagreeable; and in suchexamination as he does institute, it makes him exert that which is in a certain

measure voluntary, his attention, unfairly, giving a larger share of it to the

evidence which seems favorable to the desired conclusion, a smaller to that

which seems unfavorable. It operates, too, by making him look out eagerly

for reasons, or apparent reasons, to support opinions which are conformable,

or resist those which are repugnant, to his interests or feelings; and when the

interests or feelings are common to great numbers of persons, reasons are

accepted and pass current, which would not for a moment be listened to in

that character if the conclusion had nothing more powerful than its reasons to

speak in its behalf. The natural or acquired partialities of mankind are

continually throwing up philosophical theories, the sole recommendation of

which consists in the premises they afford for proving cherished doctrines, or

justifying favorite feelings; and when any one of these theories has been so

thoroughly discredited as no longer to serve the purpose, another is always

ready to take its place. This propensity, when exercised in favor of any

widely-spread persuasion or sentiment, is often decorated with

complimentary epithets; and the contrary habit of keeping the judgment in

complete subordination to evidence, is stigmatized by various hard names, as

skepticism, immorality, coldness, hard-heartedness, and similar expressions

according to the nature of the case. But though the opinions of the generality

of mankind, when not dependent on mere habit and inculcation, have their

root much more in the inclinations than in the intellect, it is a necessary

condition to the triumph of the moral bias that it should first pervert the

understanding. Every erroneous inference, though originating in moral

causes, involves the intellectual operation of admitting insufficient evidence

as sufficient; and whoever was on his guard against all kinds of inconclusive

evidence which can be mistaken for conclusive, would be in no danger of

being led into error even by the strongest bias. There are minds so strongly

fortified on the intellectual side, that they could not blind themselves to the

light of truth, however really desirous of doing so; they could not, with all the

inclination in the world, pass off upon themselves bad arguments for good

ones. If the sophistry of the intellect could be rendered impossible, that of the

feelings, having no instrument to work with, would be powerless. A

comprehensive classification of all those things which, not being evidence,

are liable to appear such to the understanding, will, therefore, of itself include

all errors of judgment arising from moral causes, to the exclusion only of

errors of practice committed against better knowledge.              To examine, then, the various kinds of apparent evidence which are

not evidence at all, and of apparently conclusive evidence which do not really

amount to conclusiveness, is the object of that part of our inquiry into which

we are about to enter.

              The subject is not beyond the compass of classification and

comprehensive survey. The things, indeed, which are not evidence of any

given conclusion, are manifestly endless, and this negative property, having

no dependence on any positive ones, can not be made the groundwork of a

real classification. But the things which, not being evidence, are susceptible

of being mistaken for it, are capable of a classification having reference to the

positive property which they possess of appearing to be evidence. We may

arrange them, at our choice, on either of two principles; according to the

cause which makes them appear to be evidence, not being so; or according to

the particular kind of evidence which they simulate. The Classification of

Fallacies which will be attempted in the ensuing chapter, is founded on these

considerations jointly.

 

 

                     Chapter II. – Classification Of Fallacies.

 

 

              § 1. In attempting to establish certain general distinctions which

shall mark out from one another the various kinds of Fallacious Evidence, we

propose to ourselves an altogether different aim from that of several eminent

thinkers, who have given, under the name of Political or other Fallacies, a

mere enumeration of a certain number of erroneous opinions; false general

propositions which happen to be often met with; loci communes of bad

arguments on some particular subject. Logic is not concerned with the false

opinions which people happen to entertain, but with the manner in which they

come to entertain them. The question is not, what facts have at any time been

erroneously supposed to be proof of certain other facts, but what property in

the facts it was which led any one to this mistaken supposition.

              When a fact is supposed, though incorrectly, to be evidentiary of, or

a mark of, some other fact, there must be a cause of the error; the supposed

evidentiary fact must be connected in some particular manner with the fact of

which it is deemed evidentiary — must stand in some particular relation to it,

without which relation it would not be regarded in that light. The relation

may either be one resulting from the simple contemplation of the two facts

side by side with one another, or it may depend on some process of mind, by

which a previous association has been established between them. Some

peculiarity of relation, however, there must be; the fact which can, even by

the wildest aberration, be supposed to prove another fact, must stand in some

special position with regard to it; and if we could ascertain and define that

special position, we should perceive the origin of the error.

              We can not regard one fact as evidentiary of another, unless we

believe that the two are always, or in the majority of cases, conjoined. If we

believe A to be evidentiary of B, if when we see A we are inclined to infer B

from it, the reason is because we believe that wherever A is, B also either

always or for the most part exists, either as an antecedent, a consequent, or a

concomitant. If when we see A we are inclined not to expect B— if we

believe A to be evidentiary of the absence of B— it is because we believe

that where A is, B either is never, or at least seldom, found. Erroneous

conclusions, in short, no less than correct conclusions, have an invariablerelation to a general formula, either expressed or tacitly implied. When we

infer some fact from some other fact which does not really prove it, we either

have admitted, or, if we maintained consistency, ought to admit, some

groundless general proposition respecting the conjunction of the two

phenomena.

              For every property, therefore, in facts, or in our mode of considering

facts, which leads us to believe that they are habitually conjoined when they

are not, or that they are not when in reality they are, there is a corresponding

kind of Fallacy; and an enumeration of fallacies would consist in a

specification of those properties in facts, and those peculiarities in our mode

of considering them, which give rise to this erroneous opinion.

              § 2. To begin, then; the supposed connection, or repugnance,

between the two facts, may either be a conclusion from evidence (that is,

from some other proposition or propositions), or may be admitted without

any such ground; admitted, as the phrase is, on its own evidence; embraced as

self-evident, as an axiomatic truth. This gives rise to the first great

distinction, that between Fallacies of Inference and Fallacies of Simple

Inspection. In the latter division must be included not only all cases in which

a proposition is believed and held for true, literally without any extrinsic

evidence, either of specific experience or general reasoning; but those more

frequent cases in which simple inspection creates a presumption in favor of a

proposition; not sufficient for belief, but sufficient to cause the strict

principles of a regular induction to be dispensed with, and creating a

predisposition to believe it on evidence which would be seen to be

insufficient if no such presumption existed. This class, comprehending the

whole of what may be termed Natural Prejudices, and which I shall call

indiscriminately Fallacies of Simple Inspection or Fallacies a priori , shall be

placed at the head of our list.

              Fallacies of Inference, or erroneous conclusions from supposed

evidence, must be subdivided according to the nature of the apparent

evidence from which the conclusions are drawn; or (what is the same thing)

according to the particular kind of sound argument which the fallacy in

question simulates. But there is a distinction to be first drawn, which does not

answer to any of the divisions of sound arguments, but arises out of the

nature of bad ones. We may know exactly what our evidence is, and yet draw

a false conclusion from it; we may conceive precisely what our premises are,what alleged matters of fact, or general principles, are the foundation of our

inference; and yet, because the premises are false, or because we have

inferred from them what they will not support, our conclusion may be

erroneous. But a case, perhaps even more frequent, is that in which the error

arises from not conceiving our premises with due clearness, that is (as shown
                        229
in the preceding Book ), with due fixity: forming one conception of our

evidence when we collect or receive it, and another when we make use of it;

or unadvisedly, and in general unconsciously, substituting, as we proceed,

different premises in the place of those with which we set out, or a different

conclusion for that which we undertook to prove. This gives existence to a

class of fallacies which may be justly termed (in a phrase borrowed from

Bentham) Fallacies of Confusion; comprehending, among others, all those

which have their source in language, whether arising from the vagueness or

ambiguity of our terms, or from casual associations with them.

              When the fallacy is not one of Confusion, that is, when the

proposition believed, and the evidence on which it is believed, are steadily

apprehended and unambiguously expressed, there remain to be made two

cross divisions. The Apparent Evidence may be either particular facts, or

foregone generalizations; that is, the process may simulate either simple

Induction or Deduction; and again, the evidence, whether consisting of

supposed facts or of general propositions, may be false in itself, or, being

true, may fail to bear out the conclusion attempted to be founded on it. This

gives us first, Fallacies of Induction and Fallacies of Deduction, and then a

subdivision of each of these, according as the supposed evidence is false, or

true but inconclusive.

              Fallacies of Induction, where the facts on which the induction

proceeds are erroneous, may be termed Fallacies of Observation. The term is

not strictly accurate, or, rather, not accurately co-extensive with the class of

fallacies which I propose to designate by it. Induction is not always grounded

on facts immediately observed, but sometimes on facts inferred; and when

these last are erroneous, the error may not be, in the literal sense of the term,

an instance of bad observation, but of bad inference. It will be convenient,

however, to make only one class of all the inductions of which the error lies

in not sufficiently ascertaining the facts on which the theory is grounded;

whether the cause of failure be malobservation, or simple non-observation,

and whether the malobservation be direct, or by means of intermediate markswhich do not prove what they are supposed to prove. And in the absence of

any comprehensive term to denote the ascertainment, by whatever means, of

the facts on which an induction is grounded, I will venture to retain for this

class of fallacies, under the explanation now given, the title of Fallacies of

Observation.

              The other class of inductive fallacies, in which the facts are correct,

but the conclusion not warranted by them, are properly denominated Fallacies

of Generalization; and these, again, fall into various subordinate classes or

natural groups, some of which will be enumerated in their proper place.

              When we now turn to Fallacies of Deduction, namely those modes

of incorrect argumentation in which the premises, or some of them, are

general propositions, and the argument a ratiocination; we may of course

subdivide these also into two species similar to the two preceding, namely,

those which proceed on false premises, and those of which the premises,

though true, do not support the conclusion. But of these species, the first must

necessarily fall under some one of the heads already enumerated. For the

error must be either in those premises which are general propositions, or in

those which assert individual facts. In the former case it is an Inductive

Fallacy, of one or the other class; in the latter it is a Fallacy of Observation;

unless, in either case, the erroneous premise has been assumed on simple

inspection, in which case the fallacy is a priori . Or, finally, the premises, of

whichever kind they are, may never have been conceived in so distinct a

manner as to produce any clear consciousness by what means they were

arrived at; as in the case of what is called reasoning in a circle; and then the

fallacy is one of Confusion.

              There remain, therefore, as the only class of fallacies having

properly their seat in deduction, those in which the premises of the

ratiocination do not bear out its conclusion; the various cases, in short, of

vicious argumentation, provided against by the rules of the syllogism. We

shall call these, Fallacies of Ratiocination.

              § 3. We must not, however, expect to find that men’s actual errors

always, or even commonly, fall so unmistakably under some one of these

classes, as to be incapable of being referred to any other. Erroneous

arguments do not admit of such a sharply cut division as valid arguments do.

An argument fully stated, with all its steps distinctly set out, in language notsusceptible of misunderstanding, must, if it be erroneous, be so in some one

of these five modes unequivocally; or indeed of the first four, since the fifth,

on such a supposition, would vanish. But it is not in the nature of bad

reasoning to express itself thus unambiguously. When a sophist, whether he

is imposing on himself or attempting to impose on others, can be constrained

to throw his sophistry into so distinct a form, it needs, in a large proportion of

cases, no further exposure.

              In all arguments, everywhere but in the schools, some of the links

are suppressed; a fortiori when the arguer either intends to deceive, or is a

lame and inexpert thinker, little accustomed to bring his reasoning processes

to any test; and it is in those steps of the reasoning which are made in this

tacit and half-conscious, or even wholly unconscious manner, that the error

oftenest lurks. In order to detect the fallacy, the proposition thus silently

assumed must be supplied; but the reasoner, most likely, has never really

asked himself what he was assuming; his confuter, unless permitted to extort

it from him by the Socratic mode of interrogation, must himself judge what

the suppressed premise ought to be in order to support the conclusion. And

hence, in the words of Archbishop Whately, “it must be often a matter of

doubt, or, rather, of arbitrary choice, not only to which genus each kind of

fallacy should be referred, but even to which kind to refer any one individual

fallacy; for since, in any course of argument, one premise is usually

suppressed, it frequently happens in the case of a fallacy, that the hearers are

left to the alternative of supplying either a premise which is not true , or else ,

one which does not prove the conclusion; e.g. , if a man expatiates on the

distress of the country, and thence argues that the government is tyrannical,

we must suppose him to assume either that ‘every distressed country is under

a tyranny,’ which is a manifest falsehood, or merely that ‘every country

under a tyranny is distressed,’ which, however true, proves nothing, the

middle term being undistributed.” The former would be ranked, in our

distribution, among fallacies of generalization, the latter among those of

ratiocination. “Which are we to suppose the speaker meant us to understand?

Surely” (if he understood himself) “just whichever each of his hearers might

happen to prefer: some might assent to the false premise; others allow the

unsound syllogism.”

              Almost all fallacies, therefore, might in strictness be brought under

our fifth class, Fallacies of Confusion. A fallacy can seldom be absolutelyreferred to any of the other classes; we can only say, that if all the links were

filled up which should be capable of being supplied in a valid argument, it

would either stand thus (forming a fallacy of one class), or thus (a fallacy of

another); or at furthest we may say, that the conclusion is most likely to have

originated in a fallacy of such and such a class. Thus, in the illustration just

quoted, the error committed may be traced with most probability to a fallacy

of generalization; that of mistaking an uncertain mark, or piece of evidence,

for a certain one; concluding from an effect to some one of its possible

causes, when there are others which would have been equally capable of

producing it.

              Yet, though the five classes run into each other, and a particular

error often seems to be arbitrarily assigned to one of them rather than to any

of the rest, there is considerable use in so distinguishing them. We shall find

it convenient to set apart, as Fallacies of Confusion, those of which confusion

is the most obvious characteristic; in which no other cause can be assigned

for the mistake committed, than neglect or inability to state the question

properly, and to apprehend the evidence with definiteness and precision. In

the remaining four classes I shall place not only the cases in which the

evidence is clearly seen to be what it is, and yet a wrong conclusion drawn

from it, but also those in which, although there be confusion, the confusion is

not the sole cause of the error, but there is some shadow of a ground for it in

the nature of the evidence itself. And in distributing these cases of partial

confusion among the four classes, I shall, when there can be any hesitation as

to the precise seat of the fallacy, suppose it to be in that part of the process in

which, from the nature of the case, and the tendencies of the human mind, an

error would in the particular circumstances be the most probable.

              After these observations we shall proceed, without further preamble,

to consider the five classes in their order.

 

 

   Chapter III. – Fallacies Of Simple Inspection; Or A Priori Fallacies.

 

 

              § 1. The tribe of errors of which we are to treat in the first instance,

are those in which no actual inference takes place at all; the proposition (it

can not in such cases be called a conclusion) being embraced, not as proved,

but as requiring no proof; as a self-evident truth; or else as having such

intrinsic verisimilitude, that external evidence not in itself amounting to

proof, is sufficient in aid of the antecedent presumption.

              An attempt to treat this subject comprehensively would be a

transgression of the bounds prescribed to this work, since it would necessitate

the inquiry which, more than any other, is the grand question of what is

called metaphysics, viz., What are the propositions which may reasonably be

received without proof? That there must be some such propositions all are

agreed, since there can not be an infinite series of proof, a chain suspended

from nothing. But to determine what these propositions are, is the opus

magnum of the more recondite mental philosophy. Two principal divisions of

opinion on the subject have divided the schools of philosophy from its first

dawn. The one recognizes no ultimate premises but the facts of our subjective

consciousness; our sensations, emotions, intellectual states of mind, and

volitions. These, and whatever by strict rules of induction can be derived

from these, it is possible, according to this theory, for us to know; of all else

we must remain in ignorance. The opposite school hold that there are other

existences, suggested indeed to our minds by these subjective phenomena,

but not inferable from them, by any process either of deduction or of

induction; which, however, we must, by the constitution of our mental nature,

recognize as realities; and realities, too, of a higher order than the phenomena

of our consciousness, being the efficient causes and necessary substrata of all

Phenomena. Among these entities they reckon Substances, whether matter or

spirit; from the dust under our feet to the soul, and from that to Deity. All

these, according to them, are preternatural or supernatural beings, having no

likeness in experience, though experience is entirely a manifestation of their

agency. Their existence, together with more or less of the laws to which they

conform in their operations, are, on this theory, apprehended and recognized

as real by the mind itself intuitively; experience (whether in the form ofsensation or of mental feeling) having no other part in the matter than as

affording facts which are consistent with these necessary postulates of reason,

and which are explained and accounted for by them.

              As it is foreign to the purpose of the present treatise to decide

between these conflicting theories, we are precluded from inquiring into the

existence, or defining the extent and limits, of knowledge a priori , and from

characterizing the kind of correct assumption which the fallacy of incorrect

assumption, now under consideration, simulates. Yet since it is allowed on

both sides that such assumptions are often made improperly, we may find it

practicable, without entering into the ultimate metaphysical grounds of the

discussion, to state some speculative propositions, and suggest some practical

cautions, respecting the forms in which such unwarranted assumptions are

most likely to be made.

              § 2. In the cases in which, according to the thinkers of the

ontological school, the mind apprehends, by intuition, things, and the laws of

things, not cognizable by our sensitive faculty; those intuitive, or supposed

intuitive, perceptions are undistinguishable from what the opposite school are

accustomed to call ideas of the mind. When they themselves say that they

perceive the things by an immediate act of a faculty given for that purpose by

their Creator, it would be said of them by their opponents that they find an

idea or conception in their own minds, and from the idea or conception, infer

the existence of a corresponding objective reality. Nor would this be an unfair

statement, but a mere version into other words of the account given by many

of themselves; and one to which the more clear-sighted of them might, and

generally do, without hesitation, subscribe. Since, therefore, in the cases

which lay the strongest claims to be examples of knowledge a priori , the

mind proceeds from the idea of a thing to the reality of the thing itself, we

can not be surprised by finding that illicit assumptions a priori consist in

doing the same thing erroneously; in mistaking subjective facts for objective,

laws of the percipient mind for laws of the perceived object, properties of the

ideas or conceptions for properties of the things conceived.

              Accordingly, a large proportion of the erroneous thinking which

exists in the world proceeds on a tacit assumption, that the same order must

obtain among the objects in nature which obtains among our ideas of them.

That if we always think of two things together, the two things must always

exist together. That if one thing makes us think of another as preceding orfollowing it, that other must precede it or follow it in actual fact. And

conversely, that when we can not conceive two things together they can not

exist together, and that their combination may, without further evidence, be

rejected from the list of possible occurrences.

              Few persons, I am inclined to think, have reflected on the great

extent to which this fallacy has prevailed, and prevails, in the actual beliefs

and actions of mankind. For a first illustration of it we may refer to a large

class of popular superstitions. If any one will examine in what circumstances

most of those things agree, which in different ages and by different portions

of the human race have been considered as omens or prognostics of some

interesting event, whether calamitous or fortunate; they will be found very

generally characterized by this peculiarity, that they cause the mind to think

of that, of which they are therefore supposed to forbode the actual

occurrence. “Talk of the devil and he will appear,” has passed into a proverb.

Talk of the devil, that is, raise the idea, and the reality will follow. In times

when the appearance of that personage in a visible form was thought to be no

unfrequent occurrence, it has doubtless often happened to persons of vivid

imagination and susceptible nerves, that talking of the devil has caused them

to fancy they saw him; as even in our more incredulous days, listening to

ghost stories predisposes us to see ghosts; and thus, as a prop to the a priori

fallacy, there might come to be added an auxiliary fallacy of malobservation,

with one of false generalization grounded on it. Fallacies of different orders

often herd or cluster together in this fashion, one smoothing the way for

another. But the origin of the superstition is evidently that which we have

assigned. In like manner, it has been universally considered unlucky to speak

of misfortune.

              The day on which any calamity happened has been considered an

unfortunate day, and there has been a feeling everywhere, and in some

nations a religious obligation, against transacting any important business on

that day. For on such a day our thoughts are likely to be of misfortune. For a

similar reason, any untoward occurrence in commencing an undertaking has

been considered ominous of failure; and often, doubtless, has really

contributed to it by putting the persons engaged in the enterprise more or less

out of spirits; but the belief has equally prevailed where the disagreeable

circumstance was, independently of superstition, too insignificant to depress

the spirits by any influence of its own. All know the story of Cæsar’saccidentally stumbling in the act of landing on the African coast; and the

presence of mind with which he converted the direful presage into a favorable

one by exclaiming, “Africa, I embrace thee.” Such omens, it is true, were

often conceived as warnings of the future, given by a friendly or a hostile

deity; but this very superstition grew out of a pre-existing tendency; the god

was supposed to send, as an indication of what was to come, something

which people were already disposed to consider in that light. So in the case of

lucky or unlucky names. Herodotus tells us how the Greeks, on the way to

Mycale, were encouraged in their enterprise by the arrival of a deputation

from Samos, one of the members of which was named Hegesistratus, the

leader of armies.

              Cases may be pointed out in which something which could have no

real effect but to make persons think of misfortune, was regarded not merely

as a prognostic, but as something approaching to an actual cause of it. The

εὐφήμει of the Greeks, and favete linguis , or bona verba quæso , of the

Romans, evince the care with which they endeavored to repress the utterance

of any word expressive or suggestive of ill fortune; not from notions of

delicate politeness, to which their general mode of conduct and feeling had

very little reference, but from bona fide alarm lest the event so suggested to

the imagination should in fact occur. Some vestige of a similar superstition

has been known to exist among uneducated persons even in our own day: it is

thought an unchristian thing to talk of, or suppose, the death of any person

while he is alive. It is known how careful the Romans were to avoid, by an

indirect mode of speech, the utterance of any word directly expressive of

death or other calamity; how instead of mortuus est they said vixit ; and “be

the event fortunate or otherwise ” instead of adverse . The name

Maleventum, of which Salmasius so sagaciously detected the Thessalian

origin (Μαλόεις, Μαλοέντος), they changed into the highly propitious

denomination, Beneventum; Egesta into Segesta; and Epidamnus, a name so

interesting in its associations to the reader of Thucydides, they exchanged for

Dyrrhachium, to escape the perils of a word suggestive of damnum or

detriment.

                                                                            230
              “If a hare cross the highway,” says Sir Thomas Browne, “there are

few above threescore that are not perplexed thereat; which notwithstanding is

but an augurial terror, according to that received expression, Inauspicatum

dat iter oblatus lepus . And the ground of the conceit was probably no greaterthan this, that a fearful animal passing by us portended unto us something to

be feared; as upon the like consideration the meeting of a fox presaged some

future imposture.” Such superstitions as these last must be the result of study;

they are too recondite for natural or spontaneous growth. But when the

attempt was once made to construct a science of predictions, any association,

though ever so faint or remote, by which an object could be connected in

however far-fetched a manner with ideas either of prosperity or of danger and

misfortune, was enough to determine its being classed among good or evil

omens.

              An example of rather a different kind from any of these, but falling

under the same principle, is the famous attempt on which so much labor and

ingenuity were expended by the alchemists, to make gold potable. The

motive to this was a conceit that potable gold could be no other than the

universal medicine; and why gold? Because it was so precious. It must have

all marvelous properties as a physical substance, because the mind was

already accustomed to marvel at it.

                                                                              231
              From a similar feeling, “every substance,” says Dr. Paris, “whose

origin is involved in mystery, has at different times been eagerly applied to

the purposes of medicine. Not long since, one of those showers which are

now known to consist of the excrements of insects, fell in the north of Italy;

the inhabitants regarded it as manna, or some supernatural panacea, and they

swallowed it with such avidity, that it was only by extreme address that a

small quantity was obtained for a chemical examination.” The superstition, in

this instance, though doubtless partly of a religious character, probably in part

also arose from the prejudice that a wonderful thing must of course have

wonderful properties.

              § 3. The instances of a priori fallacy which we have hitherto cited

belong to the class of vulgar errors, and do not now, nor in any but a rude age

ever could, impose upon minds of any considerable attainments. But those to

which we are about to proceed, have been, and still are, all but universally

prevalent among thinkers. The same disposition to give objectivity to a law of

the mind — to suppose that what is true of our ideas of things must be true of

the things themselves — exhibits itself in many of the most accredited modes

of philosophical investigation, both on physical and on metaphysical subjects.

In one of its most undisguised manifestations, it embodies itself in two

maxims, which lay claim to axiomatic truth: Things which we can not thinkof together, can not co-exist; and Things which we can not help thinking of

together, must co-exist. I am not sure that the maxims were ever expressed in

these precise words, but the history both of philosophy and of popular

opinions abounds with exemplifications of both forms of the doctrine.

              To begin with the latter of them: Things which we can not think of

except together, must exist together. This is assumed in the generally

received and accredited mode of reasoning which concludes that A must

accompany B in point of fact, because “it is involved in the idea.” Such

thinkers do not reflect that the idea, being a result of abstraction, ought to

conform to the facts, and can not make the facts conform to it. The argument

is at most admissible as an appeal to authority; a surmise, that what is now

part of the idea, must, before it became so, have been found by previous

inquirers in the facts. Nevertheless, the philosopher who more than all others

made professions of rejecting authority, Descartes, constructed his system on

this very basis. His favorite device for arriving at truth, even in regard to

outward things, was by looking into his own mind for it. “Credidi me,” says

his celebrated maxim, “pro regulâ generali sumere posse, omne id quod valdè

dilucidè et distinctè concipiebam, verum esse;” whatever can be very clearly

conceived must certainly exist; that is, as he afterward explains it, if the idea

includes existence. And on this ground he infers that geometrical figures

really exist, because they can be distinctly conceived. Whenever existence is

“involved in an idea,” a thing conformable to the idea must really exist;

which is as much as to say, whatever the idea contains must have its

equivalent in the thing; and what we are not able to leave out of the idea can
                                  232
not be absent from the reality. This assumption pervades the philosophy

not only of Descartes, but of all the thinkers who received their impulse

mainly from him, in particular the two most remarkable among them,

Spinoza and Leibnitz, from whom the modern German metaphysical

philosophy is essentially an emanation. I am indeed disposed to think that the

fallacy now under consideration has been the cause of two-thirds of the bad

philosophy, and especially of the bad metaphysics, which the human mind

has never ceased to produce. Our general ideas contain nothing but what has

been put into them, either by our passive experience, or by our active habits

of thought; and the metaphysicians in all ages, who have attempted to

construct the laws of the universe by reasoning from our supposed necessities

of thought, have always proceeded, and only could proceed, by laboriously

finding in their own minds what they themselves had formerly put there, andevolving from their ideas of things what they had first involved in those

ideas. In this way all deeply-rooted opinions and feelings are enabled to

create apparent demonstrations of their truth and reasonableness, as it were,

out of their own substance.

              The other form of the fallacy: Things which we can not think of

together can not exist together — including as one of its branches, that what

we can not think of as existing can not exist at all — may thus be briefly

expressed: Whatever is inconceivable must be false.

              Against this prevalent doctrine I have sufficiently argued in a former
      233
Book, and nothing is required in this place but examples. It was long held

that Antipodes were impossible because of the difficulty which was found in

conceiving persons with their heads in the same direction as our feet. And it

was one of the received arguments against the Copernican system, that we

can not conceive so great a void space as that system supposes to exist in the

celestial regions. When men’s imaginations had always been used to

conceive the stars as firmly set in solid spheres, they naturally found much

difficulty in imagining them in so different, and, as it doubtless appeared to

them, so precarious a situation. But they had no right to mistake the limitation

(whether natural, or, as it in fact proved, only artificial) of their own faculties,

for an inherent limitation of the possible modes of existence in the universe.

              It may be said in objection, that the error in these cases was in the

minor premise, not the major; an error of fact, not of principle; that it did not

consist in supposing that what is inconceivable can not be true, but in

supposing antipodes to be inconceivable, when present experience proves

that they can be conceived. Even if this objection were allowed, and the

proposition that what is inconceivable can not be true were suffered to remain

unquestioned as a speculative truth, it would be a truth on which no practical

consequence could ever be founded, since, on this showing, it is impossible

to affirm of any proposition, not being a contradiction in terms, that it is

inconceivable. Antipodes were really, not fictitiously, inconceivable to our

ancestors: they are indeed conceivable to us; and as the limits of our power of

conception have been so largely extended, by the extension of our experience

and the more varied exercise of our imagination, so may posterity find many

combinations perfectly conceivable to them which are inconceivable to us.

But, as beings of limited experience, we must always and necessarily have

limited conceptive powers; while it does not by any means follow that thesame limitation obtains in the possibilities of Nature, nor even in her actual

manifestations.

              Rather more than a century and a half ago it was a scientific maxim,

disputed by no one, and which no one deemed to require any proof, that “a
                                      234
thing can not act where it is not.” With this weapon the Cartesians waged a

formidable war against the theory of gravitation, which, according to them,

involving so obvious an absurdity, must be rejected in limine : the sun could

not possibly act upon the earth, not being there. It was not surprising that the

adherents of the old systems of astronomy should urge this objection against

the new; but the false assumption imposed equally on Newton himself, who,

in order to turn the edge of the objection, imagined a subtle ether which filled

up the space between the sun and the earth, and by its intermediate agency

was the proximate cause of the phenomena of gravitation. “It is
                                                                            235
inconceivable,” said Newton, in one of his letters to Dr. Bentley, “that

inanimate brute matter should, without the mediation of something else,

which is not material, operate upon and affect other matter without mutual

contact .... That gravity should be innate, inherent, and essential to matter, so

that one body may act on another, at a distance, through a vacuum, without

the mediation of any thing else, by and through which their action and force

may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity, that I

believe no man, who in philosophical matters has a competent faculty of

thinking, can ever fall into it.” This passage should be hung up in the cabinet

of every cultivator of science who is ever tempted to pronounce a fact

impossible because it appears to him inconceivable. In our own day one

would be more tempted, though with equal injustice, to reverse the

concluding observation, and consider the seeing any absurdity at all in a thing

so simple and natural, to be what really marks the absence of “a competent

faculty of thinking.” No one now feels any difficulty in conceiving gravity to

be, as much as any other property is, “inherent and essential to matter,” nor

finds the comprehension of it facilitated in the smallest degree by the

supposition of an ether (though some recent inquirers do give this as an

explanation of it); nor thinks it at all incredible that the celestial bodies can

and do act where they, in actual bodily presence, are not. To us it is not more

wonderful that bodies should act upon one another “without mutual contact,”

than that they should do so when in contact; we are familiar with both these

facts, and we find them equally inexplicable, but equally easy to believe. To

Newton, the one, because his imagination was familiar with it, appearednatural and a matter of course, while the other, for the contrary reason,

seemed too absurd to be credited.

              It is strange that any one, after such a warning, should rely implicitly

on the evidence a priori of such propositions as these, that matter can not

think; that space, or extension, is infinite; that nothing can be made out of

nothing (ex nihilo nihil fit ). Whether these propositions are true or not this is

not the place to determine, nor even whether the questions are soluble by the

human faculties. But such doctrines are no more self-evident truths, than the

ancient maxim that a thing can not act where it is not, which probably is not
                                                        236
now believed by any educated person in Europe. Matter can not think;

why? because we can not conceive thought to be annexed to any arrangement

of material particles. Space is infinite, because having never known any part

of it which had not other parts beyond it, we can not conceive an absolute

termination. Ex nihilo nihil fit , because having never known any physical

product without a pre-existing physical material, we can not , or think we can

not, imagine a creation out of nothing. But these things may in themselves be

as conceivable as gravitation without an intervening medium, which Newton

thought too great an absurdity for any person of a competent faculty of

philosophical thinking to admit: and even supposing them not conceivable,

this, for aught we know, may be merely one of the limitations of our very

limited minds, and not in nature at all.

              No writer has more directly identified himself with the fallacy now

under consideration, or has embodied it in more distinct terms, than Leibnitz.

In his view, unless a thing was not merely conceivable, but even explainable,

it could not exist in nature. All natural phenomena, according to him, must

be susceptible of being accounted for a priori . The only facts of which no

explanation could be given but the will of God, were miracles properly so
                                  237
called. “Je reconnais,” says he, “qu’il n’est pas permis de nier ce qu’on

n’entend pas; mais j’ajoute qu’on a droit de nier (au moins dans l’ordre

naturel) ce que absolument n’est point intelligible ni explicable. Je soutiens

aussi ... qu’enfin la conception des créatures n’est pas la mesure du pouvoir

de Dieu, mais que leur conceptivité, ou force de concevoir, est la mesure du

pouvoir de la nature, tout ce qui est conforme à l’ordre naturel pouvant être

conçu ou entendu par quelque créature.”

              Not content with assuming that nothing can be true which we are

unable to conceive, scientific inquirers have frequently given a still furtherextension to the doctrine, and held that, even of things not altogether

inconceivable, that which we can conceive with the greatest ease is likeliest

to be true. It was long an admitted axiom, and is not yet entirely discredited,

that “nature always acts by the simplest means,” i.e. , by those which are
                            238
most easily conceivable. A large proportion of all the errors ever

committed in the investigation of the laws of nature, have arisen from the

assumption that the most familiar explanation or hypothesis must be the

truest.

              One of the most instructive facts in scientific history is the

pertinacity with which the human mind clung to the belief that the heavenly

bodies must move in circles, or be carried round by the revolution of spheres;

merely because those were in themselves the simplest suppositions: though,

to make them accord with the facts which were ever contradicting them more

and more, it became necessary to add sphere to sphere and circle to circle,

until the original simplicity was converted into almost inextricable

complication.

              § 4. We pass to another a priori fallacy or natural prejudice, allied to

the former, and originating, as that does, in the tendency to presume an exact

correspondence between the laws of the mind and those of things external to

it. The fallacy may be enunciated in this general form — Whatever can be

thought of apart exists apart: and its most remarkable manifestation consists

in the personification of abstractions. Mankind in all ages have had a strong

propensity to conclude that wherever there is a name, there must be a

distinguishable separate entity corresponding to the name; and every complex

idea which the mind has formed for itself by operating upon its conceptions

of individual things, was considered to have an outward objective reality

answering to it. Fate, Chance, Nature, Time, Space, were real beings, nay,

even gods. If the analysis of qualities in the earlier part of this work be

correct, names of qualities and names of substances stand for the very same

sets of facts or phenomena; whiteness and a white thing are only different

phrases, required by convenience for speaking of the same external fact under

different relations. Not such, however, was the notion which this verbal

distinction suggested of old, either to the vulgar or to the scientific.

Whiteness was an entity, inhering or sticking in the white substance: and so

of all other qualities. So far was this carried, that even concrete general terms

were supposed to be, not names of indefinite numbers of individualsubstances, but names of a peculiar kind of entities termed Universal

Substances. Because we can think and speak of man in general, that is, of all

persons in so far as possessing the common attributes of the species, without

fastening our thoughts permanently on some one individual person; therefore

man in general was supposed to be, not an aggregate of individual persons,

but an abstract or universal man, distinct from these.

              It may be imagined what havoc metaphysicians trained in these

habits made with philosophy, when they came to the largest generalizations

of all. Substantiæ Secundæ of any kind were bad enough, but such Substantiæ

Secundæ as τὸ ὄν, for example, and τὸ ἔν, standing for peculiar entities

supposed to be inherent in all things which exist , or in all which are said to

be one , were enough to put an end to all intelligible discussion; especially

since, with a just perception that the truths which philosophy pursues are

general truths, it was soon laid down that these general substances were the

only subjects of science, being immutable, while individual substances

cognizable by the senses, being in a perpetual flux, could not be the subject

of real knowledge. This misapprehension of the import of general language

constitutes Mysticism, a word so much oftener written and spoken than

understood. Whether in the Vedas, in the Platonists, or in the Hegelians,

mysticism is neither more nor less than ascribing objective existence to the

subjective creations of our own faculties, to ideas or feelings of the mind; and

believing that by watching and contemplating these ideas of its own making,

it can read in them what takes place in the world without.

              § 5. Proceeding with the enumeration of a priori fallacies, and

endeavoring to arrange them with as much reference as possible to their

natural affinities, we come to another, which is also nearly allied to the

fallacy preceding the last, standing in the same relation to one variety of it as

the fallacy last mentioned does to the other. This, too, represents nature as

under incapacities corresponding to those of our intellect; but instead of only

asserting that nature can not do a thing because we can not conceive it done,

goes the still greater length of averring that nature does a particular thing, on

the sole ground that we can see no reason why she should not. Absurd as this

seems when so plainly stated, it is a received principle among scientific

authorities for demonstrating a priori the laws of physical phenomena. A

phenomenon must follow a certain law, because we see no reason why it

should deviate from that law in one way rather than in another. This is called                                            239
the Principle of the Sufficient Reason; and by means of it philosophers

often flatter themselves that they are able to establish, without any appeal to

experience, the most general truths of experimental physics.

              Take, for example, two of the most elementary of all laws, the law of

inertia and the first law of motion. A body at rest can not, it is affirmed, begin

to move unless acted upon by some external force; because, if it did, it must

either move up or down, forward or backward, and so forth; but if no outward

force acts upon it, there can be no reason for its moving up rather than down,

or down rather than up, etc., ergo , it will not move at all.

              This reasoning I conceive to be entirely fallacious, as indeed Dr.

Brown, in his treatise on Cause and Effect, has shown with great acuteness

and justness of thought. We have before remarked, that almost every fallacy

may be referred to different genera by different modes of filling up the

suppressed steps; and this particular one may, at our option, be brought under

petitio principii . It supposes that nothing can be a “sufficient reason” for a

body’s moving in one particular direction, except some external force. But

this is the very thing to be proved. Why not some internal force? Why not the

law of the thing’s own nature? Since these philosophers think it necessary to

prove the law of inertia, they of course do not suppose it to be self-evident;

they must, therefore, be of opinion that previously to all proof, the

supposition of a body’s moving by internal impulse is an admissible

hypothesis; but if so, why is not the hypothesis also admissible, that the

internal impulse acts naturally in some one particular direction, not in

another? If spontaneous motion might have been the law of matter, why not

spontaneous motion toward the sun, toward the earth, or toward the zenith?

Why not, as the ancients supposed, toward a particular place in the universe,

appropriated to each particular kind of substance? Surely it is not allowable to

say that spontaneity of motion is credible in itself, but not credible if

supposed to take place in any determinate direction.

              Indeed, if any one chose to assert that all bodies when uncontrolled

set out in a direct line toward the North Pole, he might equally prove his

point by the principle of the Sufficient Reason. By what right is it assumed

that a state of rest is the particular state which can not be deviated from

without special cause? Why not a state of motion, and of some particular sort

of motion? Why may we not say that the natural state of a horse left to

himself is to amble, because otherwise he must either trot, gallop, or standstill, and because we know no reason why he should do one of these rather

than another? If this is to be called an unfair use of the “sufficient reason,”

and the other a fair one, there must be a tacit assumption that a state of rest is

more natural to a horse than a state of ambling. If this means that it is the

state which the animal will assume when left to himself, that is the very point

to be proved; and if it does not mean this, it can only mean that a state of rest

is the simplest state, and therefore the most likely to prevail in nature, which

is one of the fallacies or natural prejudices we have already examined.

              So again of the First Law of Motion; that a body once moving will,

if left to itself, continue to move uniformly in a straight line. An attempt is

made to prove this law by saying, that if not, the body must deviate either to

the right or to the left, and that there is no reason why it should do one more

than the other. But who could know, antecedently to experience, whether

there was a reason or not? Might it not be the nature of bodies, or of some

particular bodies, to deviate toward the right? or if the supposition is

preferred, toward the east, or south? It was long thought that bodies,

terrestrial ones at least, had a natural tendency to deflect downward; and there

is no shadow of any thing objectionable in the supposition, except that it is

not true. The pretended proof of the law of motion is even more manifestly

untenable than that of the law of inertia, for it is flagrantly inconsistent; it

assumes that the continuance of motion in the direction first taken is more

natural than deviation either to the right or to the left, but denies that one of

these can possibly be more natural than the other. All these fancies of the

possibility of knowing what is natural or not natural by any other means than

experience, are, in truth, entirely futile. The real and only proof of the laws of

motion, or of any other law of the universe, is experience; it is simply that no

other suppositions explain or are consistent with the facts of universal nature.

              Geometers have, in all ages, been open to the imputation of

endeavoring to prove the most general facts of the outward world by

sophistical reasoning, in order to avoid appeals to the senses. Archimedes,
                          240
says Professor Playfair, established some of the elementary propositions of

statics by a process in which he “borrows no principle from experiment, but

establishes his conclusion entirely by reasoning a priori . He assumes,

indeed, that equal bodies, at the ends of the equal arms of a lever, will

balance one another; and also that a cylinder or parallelopiped of

homogeneous matter, will be balanced about its centre of magnitude. These,however, are not inferences from experience; they are, properly speaking,

conclusions deduced from the principle of the Sufficient Reason.” And to this

day there are few geometers who would not think it far more scientific to

establish these or any other premises in this way, than to rest their evidence

on that familiar experience which in the case in question might have been so

safely appealed to.

              § 6. Another natural prejudice, of most extensive prevalence, and

which had a great share in producing the errors fallen into by the ancients in

their physical inquiries, was this: That the differences in nature must

correspond to our received distinctions: that effects which we are

accustomed, in popular language, to call by different names, and arrange in

different classes, must be of different natures, and have different causes. This

prejudice, so evidently of the same origin with those already treated of, marks

more especially the earliest stage of science, when it has not yet broken loose

from the trammels of every-day phraseology. The extraordinary prevalence of

the fallacy among the Greek philosophers may be accounted for by their

generally knowing no other language than their own; from which it was a

consequence that their ideas followed the accidental or arbitrary

combinations of that language, more completely than can happen among the

moderns to any but illiterate persons. They had great difficulty in

distinguishing between things which their language confounded, or in putting

mentally together things which it distinguished; and could hardly combine

the objects in nature, into any classes but those which were made for them by

the popular phrases of their own country; or at least could not help fancying

those classes to be natural and all others arbitrary and artificial. Accordingly,

scientific investigation among the Greek schools of speculation and their

followers in the Middle Ages, was little more than a mere sifting and

analyzing of the notions attached to common language. They thought that by

determining the meaning of words, they could become acquainted with facts.
                                                  241
“They took for granted,” says Dr. Whewell, “that philosophy must result

from the relations of those notions which are involved in the common use of

language, and they proceeded to seek it by studying such notions.” In his next

chapter, Dr. Whewell has so well illustrated and exemplified this error, that I

shall take the liberty of quoting him at some length.

              “The propensity to seek for principles in the common usages of

language may be discerned at a very early period. Thus we have an exampleof it in a saying which is reported of Thales, the founder of Greek

philosophy. When he was asked, ‘What is the greatest thing?’ he replied

‘Place ; for all other things are in the world, but the world is in it.’ In

Aristotle we have the consummation of this mode of speculation. The usual

point from which he starts in his inquiries is, that we say thus or thus in

common language. Thus, when he has to discuss the question whether there

be, in any part of the universe, a void, or space in which there is nothing, he

inquires first in how many senses we say that one thing is in another. He

enumerates many of these; we say the part is in the whole, as the finger is in

the hand; again we say, the species is in the genus, as man is included in

animal; again, the government of Greece is in the king; and various other

senses are described and exemplified, but of all these the most proper is when

we say a thing is in a vessel, and generally in place . He next examines what

place is, and comes to this conclusion, that ‘if about a body there be another

body including it, it is in place, and if not, not.’ A body moves when it

changes its place; but he adds, that if water be in a vessel, the vessel being at

rest, the parts of the water may still move, for they are included by each

other; so that while the whole does not change its place, the parts may change

their place in a circular order. Proceeding then to the question of a void , he as

usual examines the different senses in which the term is used, and adopts as

the most proper, place without matter , with no useful result.

              “Again, in a question concerning mechanical action, he says, ‘When

a man moves a stone by pushing it with a stick, we say both that the man

moves the stone, and that the stick moves the stone, but the latter more

properly .’

              “Again, we find the Greek philosophers applying themselves to

extract their dogmas from the most general and abstract notions which they

could detect; for example, from the conception of the Universe as One or as

Many things. They tried to determine how far we may, or must, combine with

these conceptions that of a whole, of parts, of number, of limits, of place, of

beginning or end, of full or void, of rest or motion, of cause and effect, and

the like. The analysis of such conceptions with such a view, occupies, for

instance, almost the whole of Aristotle’s Treatise on the Heavens.”

              The following paragraph merits particular attention: “Another mode

of reasoning, very widely applied in these attempts, was the doctrine of

contrarieties , in which it was assumed that adjectives or substances whichare in common language, or in some abstract mode of conception, opposed to

each other, must point at some fundamental antithesis in nature, which it is

important to study. Thus Aristotle says that the Pythagoreans, from the

contrasts which number suggests, collected ten principles — Limited and

Unlimited, Odd and Even, One and Many, Right and Left, Male and Female,

Rest and Motion, Straight and Curved, Light and Darkness, Good and Evil,

Square and Oblong.... Aristotle himself deduced the doctrine of four elements

and other dogmas by oppositions of the same kind.”

              Of the manner in which, from premises obtained in this way, the

ancients attempted to deduce laws of nature, an example is given in the same

work a few pages further on. “Aristotle decides that there is no void on such

arguments as this. In a void there could be no difference of up and down; for

as in nothing there are no differences, so there are none in a privation or

negation; but a void is merely a privation or negation of matter; therefore, in

a void, bodies could not move up and down, which it is in their nature to do.

It is easily seen” (Dr. Whewell very justly adds) “that such a mode of

reasoning elevates the familiar forms of language, and the intellectual

connections of terms, to a supremacy over facts; making truth depend upon

whether terms are or are not privative, and whether we say that bodies fall

naturally .”

              The propensity to assume that the same relations obtain between

objects themselves, which obtain between our ideas of them, is here seen in

the extreme stage of its development. For the mode of philosophizing,

exemplified in the foregoing instances, assumes no less than that the proper

way of arriving at knowledge of nature, is to study nature itself subjectively;

to apply our observation and analysis not to the facts, but to the common

notions entertained of the facts.

              Many other equally striking examples may be given of the tendency

to assume that things which for the convenience of common life are placed in

different classes, must differ in every respect. Of this nature was the universal

and deeply-rooted prejudice of antiquity and the Middle Ages, that celestial

and terrestrial phenomena must be essentially different, and could in no

manner or degree depend on the same laws. Of the same kind, also, was the

prejudice against which Bacon contended, that nothing produced by nature

could be successfully imitated by man: “Calorem solis et ignis toto genere

differre; ne scilicet homines putent se per opera ignis, aliquid simile iis quæin Natura fiunt, educere et formare posse;” and again, “Compositionem

tantum opus Hominis, Mistionem vero opus solius Naturæ esse: ne scilicet

homines sperent aliquam ex arte Corporum naturalium generationem aut
                      242
transformationem.” The grand distinction in the ancient scientific

speculations, between natural and violent motions, though not without a

plausible foundation in the appearances themselves, was doubtless greatly

recommended to adoption by its conformity to this prejudice.

              § 7. From the fundamental error of the scientific inquirers of

antiquity, we pass, by a natural association, to a scarcely less fundamental

one of their great rival and successor, Bacon. It has excited the surprise of

philosophers that the detailed system of inductive logic, which this

extraordinary man labored to construct, has been turned to so little direct use

by subsequent inquirers, having neither continued, except in a few of its

generalities, to be recognized as a theory, nor having conducted in practice to

any great scientific results. But this, though not unfrequently remarked, has

scarcely received any plausible explanation; and some, indeed, have preferred

to assert that all rules of induction are useless, rather than suppose that

Bacon’s rules are grounded on an insufficient analysis of the inductive

process. Such, however, will be seen to be the fact, as soon as it is

considered, that Bacon entirely overlooked Plurality of Causes. All his rules

tacitly imply the assumption, so contrary to all we now know of nature, that a

phenomenon can not have more than one cause.

              When he is inquiring into what he terms the forma calidi aut frigidi,

gravis aut levis, sicci aut humidi , and the like, he never for an instant doubts

that there is some one thing, some invariable condition or set of conditions,

which is present in all cases of heat, or cold, or whatever other phenomenon

he is considering; the only difficulty being to find what it is; which

accordingly he tries to do by a process of elimination, rejecting or excluding,

by negative instances, whatever is not the forma or cause, in order to arrive at

what is. But, that this forma or cause is one thing, and that it is the same in all

hot objects, he has no more doubt of, than another person has that there is

always some cause or other . In the present state of knowledge it could not be

necessary, even if we had not already treated so fully of the question, to point

out how widely this supposition is at variance with the truth. It is particularly

unfortunate for Bacon that, falling into this error, he should have fixed almost

exclusively upon a class of inquiries in which it was especially fatal; namely,inquiries into the causes of the sensible qualities of objects. For his

assumption, groundless in every case, is false in a peculiar degree with

respect to those sensible qualities. In regard to scarcely any of them has it

been found possible to trace any unity of cause, any set of conditions

invariably accompanying the quality. The conjunctions of such qualities with

one another constitute the variety of Kinds, in which, as already remarked, it

has not been found possible to trace any law. Bacon was seeking for what did

not exist. The phenomenon of which he sought for the one cause has oftenest

no cause at all, and when it has, depends (as far as hitherto ascertained) on an

unassignable variety of distinct causes.

              And on this rock every one must split, who represents to himself as

the first and fundamental problem of science to ascertain what is the cause of

a given effect, rather than what are the effects of a given cause. It was shown,
                                                                      243
in an early stage of our inquiry into the nature of Induction, how much

more ample are the resources which science commands for the latter than for

the former inquiry, since it is upon the latter only that we can throw any

direct light by means of experiment; the power of artificially producing an

effect, implying a previous knowledge of at least one of its causes. If we

discover the causes of effects, it is generally by having previously discovered

the effects of causes; the greatest skill in devising crucial instances for the

former purpose may only end, as Bacon’s physical inquiries did, in no result

at all. Was it that his eagerness to acquire the power of producing for man’s

benefit effects of practical importance to human life, rendering him impatient

of pursuing that end by a circuitous route, made even him, the champion of

experiment, prefer the direct mode, though one of mere observation, to the

indirect, in which alone experiment was possible? Or had even Bacon not

entirely cleared his mind from the notion of the ancients, that “rerum

cognoscere causas ” was the sole object of philosophy, and that to inquire

into the effects of things belonged to servile and mechanical arts?

              It is worth remarking that, while the only efficient mode of

cultivating speculative science was missed from an undue contempt of

manual operations, the false speculative views thus engendered gave in their

turn a false direction to such practical and mechanical aims as were suffered

to exist. The assumption universal among the ancients and in the Middle

Ages, that there were principles of heat and cold, dryness and moisture, etc.,

led directly to a belief in alchemy; in a transmutation of substances, a changefrom one Kind into another. Why should it not be possible to make gold?

Each of the characteristic properties of gold has its forma , its essence, its set

of conditions, which if we could discover, and learn how to realize, we could

superinduce that particular property upon any other substance, upon wood, or

iron, or lime, or clay. If, then, we could effect this with respect to every one

of the essential properties of the precious metal, we should have converted

the other substance into gold. Nor did this, if once the premises were granted,

appear to transcend the real powers of mankind. For daily experience showed

that almost every one of the distinctive sensible properties of any object, its

consistence, its color, its taste, its smell, its shape, admitted of being totally

changed by fire, or water, or some other chemical agent. The formæ of all

those qualities seeming, therefore, to be within human power either to

produce or to annihilate, not only did the transmutation of substances appear

abstractedly possible, but the employment of the power, at our choice, for
                                                    244
practical ends, seemed by no means hopeless.

              A prejudice, universal in the ancient world, and from which Bacon

was so far from being free, that it pervaded and vitiated the whole practical

part of his system of logic, may with good reason be ranked high in the order

of Fallacies of which we are now treating.

              § 8. There remains one a priori fallacy or natural prejudice, the most

deeply-rooted, perhaps, of all which we have enumerated; one which not only

reigned supreme in the ancient world, but still possesses almost undisputed

dominion over many of the most cultivated minds; and some of the most

remarkable of the numerous instances by which I shall think it necessary to

exemplify it, will be taken from recent thinkers. This is, that the conditions of

a phenomenon must, or at least probably will, resemble the phenomenon

itself.

              Conformably to what we have before remarked to be of frequent

occurrence, this fallacy might without much impropriety have been placed in

a different class, among Fallacies of Generalization; for experience does

afford a certain degree of countenance to the assumption. The cause does, in

very many cases, resemble its effect; like produces like. Many phenomena

have a direct tendency to perpetuate their own existence, or to give rise to

other phenomena similar to themselves. Not to mention forms actually

moulded on one another, as impressions on wax and the like, in which the

closest resemblance between the effect and its cause is the very law of thephenomenon; all motion tends to continue itself, with its own velocity, and in

its own original direction; and the motion of one body tends to set others in

motion, which is indeed the most common of the modes in which the motions

of bodies originate. We need scarcely refer to contagion, fermentation, and

the like; or to the production of effects by the growth or expansion of a germ

or rudiment resembling on a smaller scale the completed phenomenon, as in

the growth of a plant or animal from an embryo, that embryo itself deriving

its origin from another plant or animal of the same kind. Again, the thoughts

or reminiscences, which are effects of our past sensations, resemble those

sensations; feelings produce similar feelings by way of sympathy; acts

produce similar acts by involuntary or voluntary imitation. With so many

appearances in its favor, no wonder if a presumption naturally grew up, that

causes must necessarily resemble their effects, and that like could only be

produced by like.

              This principle of fallacy has usually presided over the fantastical

attempts to influence the course of nature by conjectural means, the choice of

which was not directed by previous observation and experiment. The guess

almost always fixed upon some means which possessed features of real or

apparent resemblance to the end in view. If a charm was wanted, as by

Ovid’s Medea, to prolong life, all long-lived animals, or what were esteemed

such, were collected and brewed into a broth:

                     nec defuit illic

Squamea Cinyphii tenuis membrana chelydri

Vivacisque jecur cervi: quibus insuper addit

Ora caputque novem cornicis sæcula passæ.

              A similar notion was embodied in the celebrated medical theory
                                                                                  245
called the “Doctrine of Signatures,” “which is no less,” says Dr. Paris,

“than a belief that every natural substance which possesses any medicinal

virtue indicates by an obvious and well-marked external character the disease

for which it is a remedy, or the object for which it should be employed.” This

outward character was generally some feature of resemblance, real or

fantastical, either to the effect it was supposed to produce, or to the

phenomenon over which its power was thought to be exercised. “Thus the

lungs of a fox must be a specific for asthma, because that animal is

remarkable for its strong powers of respiration. Turmeric has a brilliant

yellow color, which indicates that it has the power of curing the jaundice; forthe same reason, poppies must relieve diseases of the head; Agaricus those of

the bladder; Cassia fistula the affections of the intestines, and Aristolochia

the disorders of the uterus: the polished surface and stony hardness which so

eminently characterize the seeds of the Lithospermum officinale (common

gromwell) were deemed a certain indication of their efficacy in calculous and

gravelly disorders; for a similar reason, the roots of the Saxifraga granulata

(white saxifrage) gained reputation in the cure of the same disease; and the

Euphrasia (eye-bright) acquired fame, as an application in complaints of the

eye, because it exhibits a black spot in its corolla resembling the pupil. The

blood-stone, the Heliotropium of the ancients, from the occasional small

specks or points of a blood-red color exhibited on its green surface, is even at

this very day employed in many parts of England and Scotland to stop a

bleeding from the nose; and nettle tea continues a popular remedy for the

cure of Urticaria . It is also asserted that some substances bear the signatures

of the humors, as the petals of the red rose that of the blood, and the roots of

rhubarb and the flowers of saffron that of the bile.”

              The early speculations respecting the chemical composition of

bodies were rendered abortive by no circumstance more than by their

invariably taking for granted that the properties of the elements must

resemble those of the compounds which were formed from them.

              To descend to more modern instances; it was long thought, and was

stoutly maintained by the Cartesians and even by Leibnitz against the

Newtonian system (nor did Newton himself, as we have seen, contest the

assumption, but eluded it by an arbitrary hypothesis), that nothing (of a

physical nature at least) could account for motion, except previous motion;

the impulse or impact of some other body. It was very long before the

scientific world could prevail upon itself to admit attraction and repulsion

(i.e. , spontaneous tendencies of particles to approach or recede from one

another) as ultimate laws, no more requiring to be accounted for than impulse

itself, if indeed the latter were not, in truth, resolvable into the former. From

the same source arose the innumerable hypotheses devised to explain those

classes of motion which appeared more mysterious than others because there

was no obvious mode of attributing them to impulse, as for example the

voluntary motions of the human body. Such were the interminable systems of

vibrations propagated along the nerves, or animal spirits rushing up and down

between the muscles and the brain; which, if the facts could have beenproved, would have been an important addition to our knowledge of

physiological laws; but the mere invention, or arbitrary supposition of them,

could not unless by the strongest delusion be supposed to render the

phenomena of animal life more comprehensible, or less mysterious. Nothing,

however, seemed satisfactory, but to make out that motion was caused by

motion; by something like itself. If it was not one kind of motion, it must be

another. In like manner it was supposed that the physical qualities of objects

must arise from some similar quality, or perhaps only some quality bearing

the same name, in the particles or atoms of which the objects were composed;

that a sharp taste, for example, must arise from sharp particles. And reversing

the inference, the effects produced by a phenomenon must, it was supposed,

resemble in their physical attributes the phenomenon itself. The influences of

the planets were supposed to be analogous to their visible peculiarities: Mars,

being of a red color, portended fire and slaughter; and the like.

              Passing from physics to metaphysics, we may notice among the most

remarkable fruits of this a priori fallacy two closely analogous theories,

employed in ancient and modern times to bridge over the chasm between the

world of mind and that of matter; the species sensibiles of the Epicureans,

and the modern doctrine of perception by means of ideas. These theories are

indeed, probably, indebted for their existence not solely to the fallacy in

question, but to that fallacy combined with another natural prejudice already

adverted to, that a thing can not act where it is not. In both doctrines it is

assumed that the phenomenon which takes place in us when we see or touch

an object, and which we regard as an effect of that object, or rather of its

presence to our organs, must of necessity resemble very closely the outward

object itself. To fulfill this condition, the Epicureans supposed that objects

were constantly projecting in all directions impalpable images of themselves,

which entered at the eyes and penetrated to the mind; while modern

metaphysicians, though they rejected this hypothesis, agreed in deeming it

necessary to suppose that not the thing itself, but a mental image or

representation of it, was the direct object of perception. Dr. Reid had to

employ a world of argument and illustration to familiarize people with the

truth, that the sensations or impressions on our minds need not necessarily be

copies of, or bear any resemblance to, the causes which produce them; in

opposition to the natural prejudice which led people to assimilate the action

of bodies upon our senses, and through them upon our minds, to the transfer

of a given form from one object to another by actual moulding. The works ofDr. Reid are even now the most effectual course of study for detaching the

mind from the prejudice of which this was an example. And the value of the

service which he thus rendered to popular philosophy is not much

diminished, although we may hold, with Brown, that he went too far in

imputing the “ideal theory” as an actual tenet, to the generality of the

philosophers who preceded him, and especially to Locke and Hume; for if

they did not themselves consciously fall into the error, unquestionably they

often led their readers into it.

              The prejudice, that the conditions of a phenomenon must resemble

the phenomenon, is occasionally exaggerated, at least verbally, into a still

more palpable absurdity; the conditions of the thing are spoken of as if they

were the very thing itself. In Bacon’s model inquiry, which occupies so great

a space in the Novum Organum , the inquisitio in formam calidi , the

conclusion which he favors is that heat is a kind of motion; meaning of

course not the feeling of heat, but the conditions of the feeling; meaning,

therefore, only that wherever there is heat, there must first be a particular

kind of motion; but he makes no distinction in his language between these

two ideas, expressing himself as if heat, and the conditions of heat, were one

and the same thing. So the elder Darwin, in the beginning of his Zoonomia ,

says, “The word idea has various meanings in the writers of metaphysics; it is

here used simply for those notions of external things which our organs of

sense bring us acquainted with originally” (thus far the proposition, though

vague, is unexceptionable in meaning), “and is defined a contraction, a

motion, or configuration, of the fibres which constitute the immediate organ

of sense.” Our notions , a configuration of the fibres! What kind of logician

must he be who thinks that a phenomenon is defined to be the condition on

which he supposes it to depend? Accordingly he says soon after, not that our

ideas are caused by, or consequent on, certain organic phenomena, but “our

ideas are animal motions of the organs of sense.” And this confusion runs

through the four volumes of the Zoonomia ; the reader never knows whether

the writer is speaking of the effect, or of its supposed cause; of the idea, a

state of mental consciousness, or of the state of the nerves and brain which he

considers it to presuppose.

              I have given a variety of instances in which the natural prejudice,

that causes and their effects must resemble one another, has operated in

practice so as to give rise to serious errors. I shall now go further, andproduce from writings even of the present or very recent times, instances in

which this prejudice is laid down as an established principle. M. Victor

Cousin, in the last of his celebrated lectures on Locke, enunciates the maxim

in the following unqualified terms: “Tout ce qui est vrai de l’effet, est vrai de

la cause.” A doctrine to which, unless in some peculiar and technical

meaning of the words cause and effect, it is not to be imagined that any

person would literally adhere; but he who could so write must be far enough

from seeing that the very reverse might be the effect; that there is nothing

impossible in the supposition that no one property which is true of the effect

might be true of the cause. Without going quite so far in point of expression,
                                              246
Coleridge, in his Biographia Literaria , affirms as an “evident truth,” that

“the law of causality holds only between homogeneous things, i.e. , things

having some common property,” and therefore “can not extend from one

world into another, its opposite;” hence, as mind and matter have no common

property, mind can not act upon matter, nor matter upon mind. What is this

but the a priori fallacy of which we are speaking? The doctrine, like many

others of Coleridge, is taken from Spinoza, in the first book of whose Ethica

(De Deo ) it stands as the Third Proposition, “Quæ res nihil commune inter se

habent, earum una alterius causa esse non potest,” and is there proved from

two so-called axioms, equally gratuitous with itself; but Spinoza ever

systematically consistent, pursued the doctrine to its inevitable consequence,

the materiality of God.

              The same conception of impossibility led the ingenious and subtle

mind of Leibnitz to his celebrated doctrine of a pre-established harmony. He,

too, thought that mind could not act upon matter, nor matter upon mind, and

that the two, therefore, must have been arranged by their Maker like two

clocks, which, though unconnected with one another, strike simultaneously,

and always point to the same hour. Malebranche’s equally famous theory of

Occasional Causes was another form of the same conception; instead of

supposing the clocks originally arranged to strike together, he held that when

the one strikes, God interposes, and makes the other strike in correspondence

with it.

              Descartes, in like manner, whose works are a rich mine of almost

every description of a priori fallacy, says that the Efficient Cause must at

least have all the perfections of the effect, and for this singular reason: “Si

enim ponamus aliquid in ideâ reperiri quod non fuerit in ejus causâ, hoc igiturhabet a nihilo;” of which it is scarcely a parody to say, that if there be pepper

in the soup there must be pepper in the cook who made it, since otherwise the

pepper would be without a cause. A similar fallacy is committed by Cicero,

in his second book De Finibus , where, speaking in his own person against

the Epicureans, he charges them with inconsistency in saying that the

pleasures of the mind had their origin from those of the body, and yet that the

former were more valuable, as if the effect could surpass the cause. “Animi

voluptas oritur propter voluptatem corporis, et major est animi voluptas quam

corporis? ita fit ut gratulator, lætior sit quam is cui gratulatur.” Even that,

surely, is not an impossibility; a person’s good fortune has often given more

pleasure to others than it gave to the person himself.

              Descartes, with no less readiness, applies the same principle the

converse way, and infers the nature of the effects from the assumption that

they must, in this or that property or in all their properties, resemble their

cause. To this class belong his speculations, and those of so many others after

him, tending to infer the order of the universe, not from observation, but by a

priori reasoning from supposed qualities of the Godhead. This sort of

inference was probably never carried to a greater length than it was in one

particular instance by Descartes, when, as a proof of one of his physical

principles, that the quantity of motion in the universe is invariable, he had

recourse to the immutability of the Divine Nature. Reasoning of a very

similar character is, however, nearly as common now as it was in his time,

and does duty largely as a means of fencing off disagreeable conclusions.

Writers have not yet ceased to oppose the theory of divine benevolence to the

evidence of physical facts, to the principle of population for example. And

people seem in general to think that they have used a very powerful

argument, when they have said, that to suppose some proposition true, would

be a reflection on the goodness or wisdom of the Deity. Put into the simplest

possible terms, their argument is, “If it had depended on me, I would not have

made the proposition true, therefore it is not true.” Put into other words, it

stands thus: “God is perfect, therefore (what I think) perfection must obtain in

nature.” But since in reality every one feels that nature is very far from

perfect, the doctrine is never applied consistently. It furnishes an argument

which (like many others of a similar character) people like to appeal to when

it makes for their own side. Nobody is convinced by it, but each appears to

think that it puts religion on his side of the question, and that it is a useful

weapon of offense for wounding an adversary.              Although several other varieties of a priori fallacy might probably

be added to those here specified, these are all against which it seems

necessary to give any special caution. Our object is to open, without

attempting or affecting to exhaust, the subject. Having illustrated, therefore,

this first class of Fallacies at sufficient length, I shall proceed to the second.

 

 

                     Chapter IV. – Fallacies Of Observation.

 

 

              § 1. From the Fallacies which are properly Prejudices, or

presumptions antecedent to, and superseding, proof, we pass to those which

lie in the incorrect performance of the proving process. And as Proof, in its

widest extent, embraces one or more, or all, of three processes, Observation,

Generalization, and Deduction, we shall consider in their order the errors

capable of being committed in these three operations. And first, of the first

mentioned.

              A fallacy of misobservation may be either negative or positive;

either Non-observation or Mal-observation. It is non-observation, when all

the error consists in overlooking, or neglecting, facts or particulars which

ought to have been observed. It is mal-observation, when something is not

simply unseen, but seen wrong; when the fact or phenomenon, instead of

being recognized for what it is in reality, is mistaken for something else.

              § 2. Non-observation may either take place by overlooking

instances, or by overlooking some of the circumstances of a given instance. If

we were to conclude that a fortune-teller was a true prophet, from not

adverting to the cases in which his predictions had been falsified by the

event, this would be non-observation of instances; but if we overlooked or

remained ignorant of the fact that in cases where the predictions had been

fulfilled, he had been in collusion with some one who had given him the

information on which they were grounded, this would be non-observation of

circumstances.

              The former case, in so far as the act of induction from insufficient

evidence is concerned, does not fall under this second class of Fallacies, but

under the third, Fallacies of Generalization. In every such case, however,

there are two defects or errors instead of one; there is the error of treating the

insufficient evidence as if it were sufficient, which is a Fallacy of the third

class; and there is the insufficiency itself; the not having better evidence;

which, when such evidence, or, in other words, when other instances, were to

be had, is Non-observation; and the erroneous inference, so far as it is to be

attributed to this cause, is a Fallacy of the second class.              It belongs not to our purpose to treat of non-observation as arising

from casual inattention, from general slovenliness of mental habits, want of

due practice in the use of the observing faculties, or insufficient interest in the

subject. The question pertinent to logic is — Granting the want of complete

competency in the observer, on what point is that insufficiency on his part

likely to lead him wrong? or rather, what sorts of instances, or of

circumstances in any given instance, are most likely to escape the notice of

observers generally; of mankind at large.

              § 3. First, then, it is evident that when the instances on one side of a

question are more likely to be remembered and recorded than those on the

other; especially if there be any strong motive to preserve the memory of the

first, but not of the latter; these last are likely to be overlooked, and escape

the observation of the mass of mankind. This is the recognized explanation of

the credit given, in spite of reason and evidence, to many classes of

impostors; to quack-doctors, and fortune-tellers in all ages; to the “cunning

man” of modern times, and the oracles of old. Few have considered the extent

to which this fallacy operates in practice, even in the teeth of the most

palpable negative evidence. A striking example of it is the faith which the

uneducated portion of the agricultural classes, in this and other countries,

continue to repose in the prophecies as to weather supplied by almanac-

makers; though every season affords to them numerous cases of completely

erroneous prediction; but as every season also furnishes some cases in which

the prediction is fulfilled, this is enough to keep up the credit of the prophet,

with people who do not reflect on the number of instances requisite for what

we have called, in our inductive terminology, the Elimination of Chance;

since a certain number of casual coincidences not only may but will happen,

between any two unconnected events.

              Coleridge, in one of the essays in the Friend , has illustrated the

matter we are now considering, in discussing the origin of a proverb, “which,

differently worded, is to be found in all the languages of Europe,” viz.,

“Fortune favors fools.” He ascribes it partly to the “tendency to exaggerate all

effects that seem disproportionate to their visible cause, and all circumstances

that are in any way strongly contrasted with our notions of the persons under

them.” Omitting some explanations which would refer the error to mal-

observation, or to the other species of non-observation (that of

circumstances), I take up the quotation further on. “Unforeseen coincidencesmay have greatly helped a man, yet if they have done for him only what

possibly from his own abilities he might have effected for himself, his good

luck will excite less attention, and the instances be less remembered. That

clever men should attain their objects seems natural, and we neglect the

circumstances that perhaps produced that success of themselves without the

intervention of skill or foresight; but we dwell on the fact and remember it, as

something strange, when the same happens to a weak or ignorant man. So

too, though the latter should fail in his undertakings from concurrences that

might have happened to the wisest man, yet his failure being no more than

might have been expected and accounted for from his folly, it lays no hold on

our attention, but fleets away among the other undistinguished waves in

which the stream of ordinary life murmurs by us, and is forgotten. Had it

been as true as it was notoriously false, that those all-embracing discoveries,

which have shed a dawn of science on the art of chemistry, and give no

obscure promise of some one great constitutive law, in the light of which

dwell dominion and the power of prophecy; if these discoveries, instead of

having been, as they really were, preconcerted by meditation, and evolved

out of his own intellect, had occurred by a set of lucky accidents to the

illustrious father and founder of philosophic alchemy; if they had presented

themselves to Professor Davy exclusively in consequence of his luck in

possessing a particular galvanic battery; if this battery, as far as Davy was

concerned, had itself been an accident , and not (as in point of fact it was)

desired and obtained by him for the purpose of insuring the testimony of

experience to his principles, and in order to bind down material nature under

the inquisition of reason, and force from her, as by torture, unequivocal

answers to prepared and preconceived questions — yet still they would not

have been talked of or described as instances of luck , but as the natural

results of his admitted genius and known skill. But should an accident have

disclosed similar discoveries to a mechanic at Birmingham or Sheffield, and

if the man should grow rich in consequence, and partly by the envy of his

neighbors and partly with good reason, be considered by them as a man

below par in the general powers of his understanding; then, ‘Oh, what a lucky

fellow! Well, Fortune does favor fools — that’s for certain! It is always so!’

And forthwith the exclaimer relates half a dozen similar instances. Thus

accumulating the one sort of facts and never collecting the other, we do, as

poets in their diction, and quacks of all denominations do in their reasoning,

put a part for the whole.”              This passage very happily sets forth the manner in which, under the

loose mode of induction which proceeds per enumerationem simplicem , not

seeking for instances of such a kind as to be decisive of the question, but

generalizing from any which occur, or rather which are remembered,

opinions grow up with the apparent sanction of experience, which have no

foundation in the laws of nature at all. “Itaque recte respondit ille” (we may
                247
say with Bacon ), “qui cum suspensa tabula in templo ei monstraretur

eorum, qui vota solverant, quod naufragii periculo elapsi sint, atque

interrogando premeretur, anne tum quidem Deorum numen agnosceret,

quæsivit denuo, At ubi sunt illi depicti qui post vota nuncupata perierunt ?

Eadem ratio est fere omnis superstitionis, ut in Astrologicis, in Somniis,

Ominibus, Nemesibus, et hujusmodi; in quibus, homines delectati hujusmodi

vanitatibus, advertunt eventus, ubi implentur; ast ubi fallunt, licet multo

frequentius, tamen negligunt, et prætereunt.” And he proceeds to say that,

independently of the love of the marvelous, or any other bias in the

inclinations, there is a natural tendency in the intellect itself to this kind of

fallacy; since the mind is more moved by affirmative instances, though

negative ones are of most use in philosophy: “Is tamen humano intellectui

error est proprius et perpetuus, ut magis moveatur et excitetur Affirmativis

quam Negativis; cum rite et ordine æquum se utrique præbere debeat; quin

contra, in omni Axiomate vero constituendo, major vis est instantiæ

negativæ.”

              But the greatest of all causes of non-observation is a preconceived

opinion. This it is which, in all ages, has made the whole race of mankind,

and every separate section of it, for the most part unobservant of all facts,

however abundant, even when passing under their own eyes, which are

contradictory to any first appearance, or any received tenet. It is worth while

to recall occasionally to the oblivious memory of mankind some of the

striking instances in which opinions that the simplest experiment would have

shown to be erroneous, continued to be entertained because nobody ever

thought of trying that experiment. One of the most remarkable of these was

exhibited in the Copernican controversy. The opponents of Copernicus

argued that the earth did not move, because if it did, a stone let fall from the

top of a high tower would not reach the ground at the foot of the tower, but at

a little distance from it, in a contrary direction to the earth’s course; in the

same manner (said they) as, if a ball is let drop from the mast-head while the

ship is in full sail, it does not fall exactly at the foot of the mast, but nearer tothe stern of the vessel. The Copernicans would have silenced these objectors

at once if they had tried dropping a ball from the mast-head, since they would

have found that it does fall exactly at the foot, as the theory requires; but no;

they admitted the spurious fact, and struggled vainly to make out a difference

between the two cases. “The ball was no part of the ship — and the motion

forward was not natural , either to the ship or to the ball. The stone, on the

other hand, let fall from the top of the tower, was a part of the earth; and

therefore, the diurnal and annular revolutions which were natural to the earth,

were also natural to the stone; the stone would, therefore, retain the same
                                                                                        248
motion with the tower, and strike the ground precisely at the bottom of it.”

              Other examples, scarcely less striking, are recorded by Dr.
          249
Whewell, where imaginary laws of nature have continued to be received as

real, merely because no person had steadily looked at facts which almost

every one had the opportunity of observing. “A vague and loose mode of

looking at facts very easily observable, left men for a long time under the

belief that a body ten times as heavy as another falls ten times as fast; that

objects immersed in water are always magnified, without regard to the form

of the surface; that the magnet exerts an irresistible force; that crystal is

always found associated with ice; and the like. These and many others are

examples how blind and careless man can be even in observation of the

plainest and commonest appearances; and they show us that the mere

faculties of perception, although constantly exercised upon innumerable

objects, may long fail in leading to any exact knowledge.”

              If even on physical facts, and these of the most obvious character,

the observing faculties of mankind can be to this degree the passive slaves of

their preconceived impressions, we need not be surprised that this should be

so lamentably true as all experience attests it to be, on things more nearly

connected with their stronger feelings — on moral, social, and religious

subjects. The information which an ordinary traveler brings back from a

foreign country, as the result of the evidence of his senses, is almost always

such as exactly confirms the opinions with which he set out. He has had eyes

and ears for such things only as he expected to see. Men read the sacred

books of their religion, and pass unobserved therein multitudes of things

utterly irreconcilable with even their own notions of moral excellence. With

the same authorities before them, different historians, alike innocent of

intentional misrepresentation, see only what is favorable to Protestants orCatholics, royalists or republicans, Charles I. or Cromwell; while others,

having set out with the preconception that extremes must be in the wrong, are

incapable of seeing truth and justice when these are wholly on one side.

              The influence of a preconceived theory is well exemplified in the

superstitions of barbarians respecting the virtues of medicaments and charms.

The negroes, among whom coral, as of old among ourselves, is worn as an
                                            250
amulet, affirm, according to Dr. Paris, that its color “is always affected by

the state of health of the wearer, it becoming paler in disease.” On a matter

open to universal observation, a general proposition which has not the

smallest vestige of truth is received as a result of experience; the

preconceived opinion preventing, it would seem, any observation whatever

on the subject.

              § 4. For illustration of the first species of non-observation, that of

Instances, what has now been stated may suffice. But there may also be non-

observation of some material circumstances, in instances which have not

been altogether overlooked — nay, which may be the very instances on

which the whole superstructure of a theory has been founded. As, in the cases

hitherto examined, a general proposition was too rashly adopted, on the

evidence of particulars, true indeed, but insufficient to support it; so in the

cases to which we now turn, the particulars themselves have been imperfectly

observed, and the singular propositions on which the generalization is

grounded, or some at least of those singular propositions, are false.

              Such, for instance, was one of the mistakes committed in the

celebrated phlogistic theory; a doctrine which accounted for combustion by

the extrication of a substance called phlogiston, supposed to be contained in

all combustible matter. The hypothesis accorded tolerably well with

superficial appearances; the ascent of flame naturally suggests the escape of a

substance; and the visible residuum of ashes, in bulk and weight, generally

falls extremely short of the combustible material. The error was, non-

observation of an important portion of the actual residue, namely, the gaseous

products of combustion. When these were at last noticed and brought into

account, it appeared to be a universal law, that all substances gain instead of

losing weight by undergoing combustion; and after the usual attempt to

accommodate the old theory to the new fact by means of an arbitrary

hypothesis (that phlogiston had the quality of positive levity instead of

gravity), chemists were conducted to the true explanation, namely, thatinstead of a substance separated, there was, on the contrary, a substance

absorbed.

              Many of the absurd practices which have been deemed to possess

medicinal efficacy, have been indebted for their reputation to non-observance

of some accompanying circumstance which was the real agent in the cures

ascribed to them. Thus, of the sympathetic powder of Sir Kenelm Digby:

“Whenever any wound had been inflicted, this powder was applied to the

weapon that had inflicted it, which was, moreover, covered with ointment,

and dressed two or three times a day. The wound itself, in the mean time, was

directed to be brought together, and carefully bound up with clean linen rags,

but, above all, to be let alone for seven days, at the end of which period the

bandages were removed, when the wound was generally found perfectly

united. The triumph of the cure was decreed to the mysterious agency of the

sympathetic powder which had been so assiduously applied to the weapon,

whereas it is hardly necessary to observe that the promptness of the cure

depended on the total exclusion of air from the wound, and upon the sanative

operations of nature not having received any disturbance from the officious

interference of art. The result, beyond all doubt, furnished the first hint which

led surgeons to the improved practice of healing wounds by what is
                                            251
technically called the first intention .” “In all records,” adds Dr. Paris, of

“extraordinary cures performed by mysterious agents, there is a great desire

to conceal the remedies and other curative means which were simultaneously

administered with them; thus Oribasius commends in high terms a necklace

of Pæony root for the cure of epilepsy; but we learn that he always took care

to accompany its use with copious evacuations, although he assigns to them

no share of credit in the cure. In later times we have a good specimen of this

species of deception, presented to us in a work on scrofula by Mr. Morley,

written, as we are informed, for the sole purpose of restoring the much-

injured character and use of the Vervain; in which the author directs the root

of this plant to be tied with a yard of white satin ribbon around the neck,

where it is to remain until the patient is cured; but mark — during this

interval he calls to his aid the most active medicines in the materia
        252
medica.”

              In other cases, the cures really produced by rest, regimen, and

amusement have been ascribed to the medicinal, or occasionally to the

supernatural, means which were put in requisition. “The celebrated JohnWesley, while he commemorates the triumph of sulphur and supplication

over his bodily infirmity, forgets to appreciate the resuscitating influence of

four months’ repose from his apostolic labors; and such is the disposition of

the human mind to place confidence in the operation of mysterious agents,

that we find him more disposed to attribute his cure to a brown paper plaster

of egg and brimstone, than to Dr. Fothergill’s salutary prescription of country
                                                253
air, rest, asses’ milk, and horse exercise.”

              In the following example, the circumstance overlooked was of a

somewhat different character. “When the yellow fever raged in America, the

practitioners trusted exclusively to the copious use of mercury; at first this

plan was deemed so universally efficacious, that, in the enthusiasm of the

moment, it was triumphantly proclaimed that death never took place after the

mercury had evinced its effect upon the system: all this was very true, but it

furnished no proof of the efficacy of that metal, since the disease in its

aggravated form was so rapid in its career, that it swept away its victims long

before the system could be brought under mercurial influence, while in its
                                                                                    254
milder shape it passed off equally well without any assistance from art.”

              In these examples the circumstance overlooked was cognizable by

the senses. In other cases, it is one the knowledge of which could only be

arrived at by reasoning; but the fallacy may still be classed under the head to

which, for want of a more appropriate name, we have given the appellation

Fallacies of Non-observation. It is not the nature of the faculties which ought

to have been employed, but the non-employment of them, which constitutes

this Natural Order of Fallacies. Wherever the error is negative, not positive;

wherever it consists especially in overlooking , in being ignorant or

unmindful of some fact which, if known and attended to, would have made a

difference in the conclusion arrived at; the error is properly placed in the

Class which we are considering. In this Class, there is not, as in all other

fallacies there is, a positive misestimate of evidence actually had. The

conclusion would be just, if the portion which is seen of the case were the

whole of it; but there is another portion overlooked, which vitiates the result.

              For instance, there is a remarkable doctrine which has occasionally

found a vent in the public speeches of unwise legislators, but which only in

one instance that I am aware of has received the sanction of a philosophical

writer, namely, M. Cousin, who in his preface to the Gorgias of Plato,

contending that punishment must have some other and higher justificationthan the prevention of crime, makes use of this argument — that if

punishment were only for the sake of example, it would be indifferent

whether we punished the innocent or the guilty, since the punishment,

considered as an example, is equally efficacious in either case. Now we must,

in order to go along with this reasoning, suppose, that the person who feels

himself under temptation, observing somebody punished, concludes himself

to be in danger of being punished likewise, and is terrified accordingly. But it

is forgotten that if the person punished is supposed to be innocent, or even if

there be any doubt of his guilt, the spectator will reflect that his own danger,

whatever it may be, is not contingent on his guiltiness, but threatens him

equally if he remains innocent, and how, therefore, is he deterred from guilt

by the apprehension of such punishment? M. Cousin supposes that people

will be dissuaded from guilt by whatever renders the condition of the guilty

more perilous, forgetting that the condition of the innocent (also one of the

elements in the calculation) is, in the case supposed, made perilous in

precisely an equal degree. This is a fallacy of overlooking; or of non-

observation, within the intent of our classification.

              Fallacies of this description are the great stumbling-block to correct

thinking in political economy. The economical workings of society afford

numerous cases in which the effects of a cause consist of two sets of

phenomena: the one immediate, concentrated, obvious to all eyes, and

passing, in common apprehension, for the whole effect; the other widely

diffused, or lying deeper under the surface, and which is exactly contrary to

the former. Take, for instance, the common notion so plausible at the first

glance, of the encouragement given to industry by lavish expenditure. A, who

spends his whole income, and even his capital, in expensive living, is

supposed to give great employment to labor. B, who lives on a small portion,

and invests the remainder in the funds, is thought to give little or no

employment. For every body sees the gains which are made by A’s

tradesmen, servants, and others, while his money is spending. B’s savings, on

the contrary, pass into the hands of the person whose stock he purchased,

who with it pays a debt he owed to some banker, who lends it again to some

merchant or manufacturer; and the capital being laid out in hiring spinners

and weavers, or carriers and the crews of merchant vessels, not only gives

immediate employment to at least as much industry as A employs during the

whole of his career, but coming back with increase by the sale of the goods

which have been manufactured or imported, forms a fund for the employmentof the same and perhaps a greater quantity of labor in perpetuity. But the

observer does not see, and therefore does not consider, what becomes of B’s

money; he does see what is done with A’s; he observes the amount of

industry which A’s profusion feeds; he observes not the far greater quantity

which it prevents from being fed; and thence the prejudice, universal to the

time of Adam Smith, that prodigality encourages industry, and parsimony is a

discouragement to it.

              The common argument against free trade was a fallacy of the same

nature. The purchaser of British silk encourages British industry; the

purchaser of Lyons silk encourages only French; the former conduct is

patriotic, the latter ought to be prevented by law. The circumstance is

overlooked, that the purchaser of any foreign commodity necessarily causes,

directly or indirectly, the export of an equivalent value of some article of

home production (beyond what would otherwise be exported), either to the

same foreign country or to some other; which fact, though from the

complication of the circumstances it can not always be verified by specific

observation, no observation can possibly be brought to contradict, while the

evidence of reasoning on which it rests is irrefragable. The fallacy is,

therefore, the same as in the preceding case, that of seeing a part only of the

phenomena, and imagining that part to be the whole; and may be ranked

among Fallacies of Non-observation.

              § 5. To complete the examination of the second of our five classes,

we have now to speak of Mal-observation; in which the error does not lie in

the fact that something is unseen, but that something seen is seen wrong.

              Perception being infallible evidence of whatever is really perceived,

the error now under consideration can be committed no otherwise than by

mistaking for conception what is, in fact, inference. We have formerly shown

how intimately the two are blended in almost every thing which is called
                                                        255
observation, and still more in every Description. What is actually on any

occasion perceived by our senses being so minute in amount, and generally

so unimportant a portion of the state of facts which we wish to ascertain or to

communicate; it would be absurd to say that either in our observations, or in

conveying their result to others, we ought not to mingle inference with fact;

all that can be said is, that when we do so we ought to be aware of what we

are doing, and to know what part of the assertion rests on consciousness, and

is therefore indisputable, what part on inference, and is thereforequestionable.

              One of the most celebrated examples of a universal error produced

by mistaking an inference for the direct evidence of the senses, was the

resistance made, on the ground of common sense, to the Copernican system.

People fancied they saw the sun rise and set, the stars revolve in circles round

the pole. We now know that they saw no such thing; what they really saw

was a set of appearances, equally reconcilable with the theory they held and

with a totally different one. It seems strange that such an instance as this of

the testimony of the senses pleaded with the most entire conviction in favor

of something which was a mere inference of the judgment, and, as it turned

out, a false inference, should not have opened the eyes of the bigots of

common sense, and inspired them with a more modest distrust of the

competency of mere ignorance to judge the conclusions of cultivated thought.

              In proportion to any person’s deficiency of knowledge and mental

cultivation is, generally, his inability to discriminate between his inferences

and the perceptions on which they were grounded. Many a marvelous tale,

many a scandalous anecdote, owes its origin to this incapacity. The narrator

relates, not what he saw or heard, but the impression which he derived from

what he saw or heard, and of which perhaps the greater part consisted of

inference, though the whole is related, not as inference but as matter of fact.

The difficulty of inducing witnesses to restrain within any moderate limits the

intermixture of their inferences with the narrative of their perceptions, is well

known to experienced cross-examiners; and still more is this the case when

ignorant persons attempt to describe any natural phenomenon. “The simplest
                                    256
narrative,” says Dugald Stewart, “of the most illiterate observer involves

more or less of hypothesis; nay, in general, it will be found that, in proportion

to his ignorance, the greater is the number of conjectural principles involved

in his statements. A village apothecary (and, if possible, in a still greater

degree, an experienced nurse) is seldom able to describe the plainest case,

without employing a phraseology of which every word is a theory: whereas a

simple and genuine specification of the phenomena which mark a particular

disease; a specification unsophisticated by fancy, or by preconceived

opinions, may be regarded as unequivocal evidence of a mind trained by long

and successful study to the most difficult of all arts, that of the faithful

interpretation of nature.”

              The universality of the confusion between perceptions and theinferences drawn from them, and the rarity of the power to discriminate the

one from the other, ceases to surprise us when we consider that in the far

greater number of instances the actual perceptions of our senses are of no

importance or interest to us except as marks from which we infer something

beyond them. It is not the color and superficial extension perceived by the

eye that are important to us, but the object, of which those visible

appearances testify the presence; and where the sensation itself is indifferent,

as it generally is, we have no motive to attend particularly to it, but acquire a

habit of passing it over without distinct consciousness, and going on at once

to the inference. So that to know what the sensation actually was, is a study in

itself, to which painters, for example, have to train themselves by special and

long-continued discipline and application. In things farther removed from the

dominion of the outward senses, no one who has not great experience in

psychological analysis is competent to break this intense association; and

when such analytic habits do not exist in the requisite degree, it is hardly

possible to mention any of the habitual judgments of mankind on subjects of

a high degree of abstraction, from the being of a God and the immortality of

the soul down to the multiplication table, which are not, or have not been,

considered as matter of direct intuition. So strong is the tendency to ascribe

an intuitive character to judgments which are mere inferences, and often false

ones. No one can doubt that many a deluded visionary has actually believed

that he was directly inspired from Heaven, and that the Almighty had

conversed with him face to face; which yet was only, on his part, a

conclusion drawn from appearances to his senses, or feelings in his internal

consciousness, which afforded no warrant for any such belief. A caution,

therefore, against this class of errors, is not only needful but indispensable;

though to determine whether, on any of the great questions of metaphysics,

such errors are actually committed, belongs not to this place, but, as I have so

often said, to a different science.

 

 

                   Chapter V. – Fallacies Of Generalization.

 

 

              § 1. The class of Fallacies of which we are now to speak, is the most

extensive of all; embracing a greater number and variety of unfounded

inferences than any of the other classes, and which it is even more difficult to

reduce to sub-classes or species. If the attempt made in the preceding books

to define the principles of well-grounded generalization has been successful,

all generalizations not conformable to those principles might, in a certain

sense, be brought under the present class; when, however, the rules are

known and kept in view, but a casual lapse committed in the application of

them, this is a blunder, not a fallacy. To entitle an error of generalization to

the latter epithet, it must be committed on principle; there must lie in it some

erroneous general conception of the inductive process; the legitimate mode of

drawing conclusions from observation and experiment must be

fundamentally misconceived.

              Without attempting any thing so chimerical as an exhaustive

classification of all the misconceptions which can exist on the subject, let us

content ourselves with noting, among the cautions which might be suggested,

a few of the most useful and needful.

              § 2. In the first place, there are certain kinds of generalization which,

if the principles already laid down be correct, must be groundless; experience

can not afford the necessary conditions for establishing them by a correct

induction. Such, for instance, are all inferences from the order of nature

existing on the earth, or in the solar system, to that which may exist in remote

parts of the universe; where the phenomena, for aught we know, may be

entirely different, or may succeed one another according to different laws, or

even according to no fixed law at all. Such, again, in matters dependent on

causation, are all universal negatives, all propositions that assert

impossibility. The non-existence of any given phenomenon, however

uniformly experience may as yet have testified to the fact, proves at most that

no cause, adequate to its production, has yet manifested itself; but that no

such causes exist in nature can only be inferred if we are so foolish as to

suppose that we know all the forces in nature. The supposition would at least

be premature while our acquaintance with some even of those which we doknow is so extremely recent. And however much our knowledge of nature

may hereafter be extended, it is not easy to see how that knowledge could

ever be complete, or how, if it were, we could ever be assured of its being so.

              The only laws of nature which afford sufficient warrant for

attributing impossibility (even with reference to the existing order of nature,

and to our own region of the universe) are, first, those of number and

extension, which are paramount to the laws of the succession of phenomena,

and not exposed to the agency of counteracting causes; and, secondly, the

universal law of causality itself. That no valuation in any effect or consequent

will take place while the whole of the antecedents remain the same, may be

affirmed with full assurance. But, that the addition of some new antecedent

might not entirely alter and subvert the accustomed consequent, or that

antecedents competent to do this do not exist in nature, we are in no case

empowered positively to conclude.

              § 3. It is next to be remarked that all generalizations which profess,

like the theories of Thales, Democritus, and others of the early Greek

speculators, to resolve all things into some one element, or like many modern

theories, to resolve phenomena radically different into the same, are

necessarily false. By radically different phenomena I mean impressions on

our senses which differ in quality, and not merely in degree. On this subject

what appeared necessary was said in the chapter on the Limits to the

Explanation of Laws of Nature; but as the fallacy is even in our own times a

common one, I shall touch on it somewhat further in this place.

              When we say that the force which retains the planets in their orbits is

resolved into gravity, or that the force which makes substances combine

chemically is resolved into electricity, we assert in the one case what is, and

in the other case what might, and probably will ultimately, be a legitimate

result of induction. In both these cases motion is resolved into motion. The

assertion is, that a case of motion, which was supposed to be special, and to

follow a distinct law of its own, conforms to and is included in the general

law which regulates another class of motions. But, from these and similar

generalizations, countenance and currency have been given to attempts to

resolve, not motion into motion, but heat into motion, light into motion,

sensation itself into motion; states of consciousness into states of the nervous

system, as in the ruder forms of the materialist philosophy; vital phenomena

into mechanical or chemical processes, as in some schools of physiology.              Now I am far from pretending that it may not be capable of proof, or

that it is not an important addition to our knowledge if proved, that certain

motions in the particles of bodies are the conditions of the production of heat

or light; that certain assignable physical modifications of the nerves may be

the conditions not only of our sensations or emotions, but even of our

thoughts; that certain mechanical and chemical conditions may, in the order

of nature, be sufficient to determine to action the physiological laws of life.

All I insist upon, in common with every thinker who entertains any clear idea

of the logic of science, is, that it shall not be supposed that by proving these

things one step would be made toward a real explanation of heat, light, or

sensation; or that the generic peculiarity of those phenomena can be in the

least degree evaded by any such discoveries, however well established. Let it

be shown, for instance, that the most complex series of physical causes and

effects succeed one another in the eye and in the brain to produce a sensation

of color; rays falling on the eye, refracted, converging, crossing one another,

making an inverted image on the retina, and after this a motion — let it be a

vibration, or a rush of nervous fluid, or whatever else you are pleased to

suppose, along the optic nerve — a propagation of this motion to the brain

itself, and as many more different motions as you choose; still, at the end of

these motions, there is something which is not motion, there is a feeling or

sensation of color. Whatever number of motions we may be able to

interpolate, and whether they be real or imaginary, we shall still find, at the

end of the series, a motion antecedent and a color consequent. The mode in

which any one of the motions produces the next, may possibly be susceptible

of explanation by some general law of motion: but the mode in which the last

motion produces the sensation of color, can not be explained by any law of

motion; it is the law of color: which is, and must always remain, a peculiar

thing. Where our consciousness recognizes between two phenomena an

inherent distinction; where we are sensible of a difference which is not

merely of degree, and feel that no adding one of the phenomena to itself

would produce the other; any theory which attempts to bring either under the

laws of the other must be false; though a theory which merely treats the one

as a cause or condition of the other, may possibly be true.

              § 4. Among the remaining forms of erroneous generalization, several

of those most worthy of and most requiring notice have fallen under our

examination in former places, where, in investigating the rules of correct

induction, we have had occasion to advert to the distinction between it andsome common mode of the incorrect. In this number is what I have formerly

called the natural Induction of uninquiring minds, the induction of the

ancients, which proceeds per enumerationem simplicem : “This, that, and the

other A are B, I can not think of any A which is not B, therefore every A is

B.” As a final condemnation of this rude and slovenly mode of

generalization, I will quote Bacon’s emphatic denunciation of it; the most

important part, as I have more than once ventured to assert, of the permanent

service rendered by him to philosophy. “Inductio quæ procedit per

enumerationem simplicem, res puerilis est, et precario concludit” (concludes

only by your leave , or provisionally), “et periculo exponitur ab instantiâ

contradictoriâ, et plerumque secundum pauciora quam par est, et ex his

tantummodo quæ præsto sunt pronunciat . At Inductio quæ ad inventionem et

demonstrationem Scientiarum et Artium erit utilis, Naturam separare debet,

per rejectiones et exclusiones debitas; ac deinde post negativas tot quot

sufficiunt, super affirmativas concludere.”

              I have already said that the mode of Simple Enumeration is still the

common and received method of Induction in whatever relates to man and

society. Of this a very few instances, more by way of memento than of

instruction, may suffice. What, for example, is to be thought of all the

“common-sense” maxims for which the following may serve as the universal

formula, “Whatsoever has never been, will never be.” As for example:

negroes have never been as civilized as whites sometimes are, therefore it is

impossible they should be so. Women, as a class, are supposed not to have

hitherto been equal in intellect to men, therefore they are necessarily inferior.

Society can not prosper without this or the other institution; e.g. , in

Aristotle’s time, without slavery; in later times, without an established

priesthood, without artificial distinctions of rank, etc. One poor person in a

thousand, educated, while the nine hundred and ninety-nine remain

uneducated, has usually aimed at raising himself out of his class, therefore

education makes people dissatisfied with the condition of a laborer. Bookish

men, taken from speculative pursuits and set to work on something they

know nothing about, have generally been found or thought to do it ill;

therefore philosophers are unfit for business, etc., etc. All these are inductions

by simple enumeration. Reasons having some reference to the canons of

scientific investigation have been attempted to be given, however

unsuccessfully, for some of these propositions; but to the multitude of those

who parrot them, the enumeratio simplex, ex his tantummodo quæ præstosunt pronuncians , is the sole evidence. Their fallacy consists in this, that

they are inductions without elimination: there has been no real comparison of

instances, nor even ascertainment of the material facts in any given instance.

There is also the further error, of forgetting that such generalizations, even if

well established, could not be ultimate truths, but must be results of laws

much more elementary; and therefore, until deduced from such, could at most

be admitted as empirical laws, holding good within the limits of space and

time by which the particular observations that suggested the generalization

were bounded.

              This error, of placing mere empirical laws, and laws in which there

is no direct evidence of causation, on the same footing of certainty as laws of

cause and effect, an error which is at the root of perhaps the greater number

of bad inductions, is exemplified only in its grossest form in the kind of

generalizations to which we have now referred. These, indeed, do not possess

even the degree of evidence which pertains to a well-ascertained empirical

law; but admit of refutation on the empirical ground itself, without ascending

to casual laws. A little reflection, indeed, will show that mere negations can

only form the ground of the lowest and least valuable kind of empirical law.

A phenomenon has never been noticed; this only proves that the conditions of

that phenomenon have not yet occurred in experience, but does not prove that

they may not occur hereafter. There is a better kind of empirical law than this,

namely, when a phenomenon which is observed presents within the limits of

observation a series of gradations, in which a regularity, or something like a

mathematical law, is perceptible; from which, therefore, something may be

rationally presumed as to those terms of the series which are beyond the

limits of observation. But in negation there are no gradations, and no series;

the generalizations, therefore, which deny the possibility of any given

condition of man and society merely because it has never yet been witnessed,

can not possess this higher degree of validity even as empirical laws. What is

more, the minuter examination which that higher order of empirical laws

presupposes, being applied to the subject-matter of these, not only does not

confirm but actually refutes them. For in reality the past history of Man and

Society, instead of exhibiting them as immovable, unchangeable, incapable

of ever presenting new phenomena, shows them, on the contrary, to be, in

many most important particulars, not only changeable, but actually

undergoing a progressive change. The empirical law, therefore, best

expressive, in most cases, of the genuine result of observation, would be, notthat such and such a phenomenon will continue unchanged, but that it will

continue to change in some particular manner.

              Accordingly, while almost all generalizations relating to Man and

Society, antecedent to the last fifty or sixty years, have erred in the gross way

which we have attempted to characterize, namely, by implicitly assuming that

nature and society will forever revolve in the same orbit, and exhibit

essentially the same phenomena; which is also the vulgar error of the

ostentatiously practical, the votaries of so-called common sense, in our day,

especially in Great Britain; the more thinking minds of the present age,

having applied a more minute analysis to the past records of our race, have

for the most part adopted a contrary opinion, that the human species is in a

state of necessary progression, and that from the terms of the series which are

past we may infer positively those which are yet to come. Of this doctrine,

considered as a philosophical tenet, we shall have occasion to speak more

fully in the concluding Book. If not, in all its forms, free from error, it is at

least free from the gross and error which we previously exemplified. But, in

all except the most eminently philosophical minds, it is infected with

precisely the same kind of fallacy as that is. For we must remember that even

this other and better generalization, the progressive change in the condition of

the human species, is, after all, but an empirical law; to which, too, it is not

difficult to point out exceedingly large exceptions; and even if these could be

got rid of, either by disputing the facts or by explaining and limiting the

theory, the general objection remains valid against the supposed law, as

applicable to any other than what, in our third book, were termed Adjacent

Cases. For not only is it no ultimate, but not even a causal law. Changes do

indeed take place in human affairs, but every one of those changes depends

on determinate causes; the “progressiveness of the species” is not a cause, but

a summary expression for the general result of all the causes. So soon as, by a

quite different sort of induction, it shall be ascertained what causes have

produced these successive changes, from the beginning of history, in so far as

they have really taken place, and by what causes of a contrary tendency they

have been occasionally checked or entirely counteracted, we may then be

prepared to predict the future with reasonable foresight; we may be in

possession of the real law of the future; and may be able to declare on what

circumstances the continuance of the same onward movement will eventually

depend. But this it is the error of many of the more advanced thinkers, in the

present age, to overlook; and to imagine that the empirical law collected froma mere comparison of the condition of our species at different past times, is a

real law, is the law of its changes, not only past but also to come. The truth is,

that the causes on which the phenomena of the moral world depend, are in

every age, and almost in every country, combined in some different

proportion; so that it is scarcely to be expected that the general result of them

all should conform very closely, in its details at least, to any uniformly

progressive series. And all generalizations which affirm that mankind have a

tendency to grow better or worse, richer or poorer, more cultivated or more

barbarous, that population increases faster than subsistence, or subsistence

than population, that inequality of fortune has a tendency to increase or to

break down, and the like, propositions of considerable value as empirical

laws within certain (but generally rather narrow) limits, are in reality true or

false according to times and circumstances.

              What we have said of empirical generalizations from times past to

times still to come, holds equally true of similar generalizations from present

times to times past; when persons whose acquaintance with moral and social

facts is confined to their own age, take the men and the things of that age for

the type of men and things in general, and apply without scruple to the

interpretation of the events of history, the empirical laws which represent

sufficiently for daily guidance the common phenomena of human nature at

that time and in that particular state of society. If examples are wanted,

almost every historical work, until a very recent period, abounded in them.

The same may be said of those who generalize empirically from the people of

their own country to the people of other countries, as if human beings felt,

judged, and acted everywhere in the same manner.

              § 5. In the foregoing instances, the distinction is confounded

between empirical laws, which express merely the customary order of the

succession of effects, and the laws of causation on which the effects depend.

There may, however, be incorrect generalization when this mistake is not

committed; when the investigation takes its proper direction, that of causes,

and the result erroneously obtained purports to be a really causal law.

              The most vulgar form of this fallacy is that which is commonly

called post hoc, ergo propter hoc , or, cum hoc, ergo propter hoc . As when it

was inferred that England owed her industrial pre-eminence to her restrictions

on commerce; as when the old school of financiers, and some speculative

writers, maintained that the national debt was one of the causes of nationalprosperity; as when the excellence of the Church, of the Houses of Lords and

Commons, of the procedure of the law courts, etc., were inferred from the

mere fact that the country had prospered under them. In such cases as these,

if it can be rendered probable by other evidence that the supposed causes

have some tendency to produce the effect ascribed to them, the fact of its

having been produced, though only in one instance, is of some value as a

verification by specific experience; but in itself it goes scarcely any way at all

toward establishing such a tendency, since, admitting the effect, a hundred

other antecedents could show an equally strong title of that kind to be

considered as the cause.

              In these examples we see bad generalization a posteriori , or

empiricism properly so called; causation inferred from casual conjunction,

without either due elimination, or any presumption arising from known

properties of the supposed agent. But bad generalization a priori is fully as

common; which is properly called false theory; conclusions drawn, by way of

deduction, from properties of some one agent which is known or supposed to

be present, all other co-existing agents being overlooked. As the former is the

error of sheer ignorance, so the latter is especially that of semi-instructed

minds; and is mainly committed in attempting to explain complicated

phenomena by a simpler theory than their nature admits of. As when one

school of physicians sought for the universal principle of all disease in

“lentor and morbid viscidity of the blood,” and imputing most bodily

derangements to mechanical obstructions, thought to cure them by
                        257
mechanical remedies; while another, the chemical school, “acknowledged

no source of disease but the presence of some hostile acid or alkali, or some

deranged condition in the chemical composition of the fluid or solid parts,”

and conceived, therefore, that “all remedies must act by producing chemical

changes in the body.” We find Tournefort busily engaged in testing every

vegetable juice, in order to discover in it some traces of an acid or alkaline

ingredient, which might confer upon it medicinal activity. The fatal errors

into which such an hypothesis was liable to betray the practitioner, received

an awful illustration in the history of the memorable fever that raged at

Leyden in the year 1699, and which consigned two-thirds of the population of

that city to an untimely grave; an event which in a great measure depended

upon the Professor Sylvius de la Boe, who having just embraced the chemical

doctrines of Van Helmont, assigned the origin of the distemper to a

prevailing acid, and declared that its cure could alone [only] be effected by                                                                              258
the copious administration of absorbent and testaceous medicines.

              These aberrations in medical theory have their exact parallels in

politics. All the doctrines which ascribe absolute goodness to particular forms

of government, particular social arrangements, and even to particular modes

of education, without reference to the state of civilization and the various

distinguishing characters of the society for which they are intended, are open

to the same objection — that of assuming one class of influencing

circumstances to be the paramount rulers of phenomena which depend in an

equal or greater degree on many others. But on these considerations it is the

less necessary that we should now dwell, as they will occupy our attention

more largely in the concluding Book.

              § 6. The last of the modes of erroneous generalization to which I

shall advert, is that to which we may give the name of False Analogies. This

Fallacy stands distinguished from those already treated of by the peculiarity

that it does not even simulate a complete and conclusive induction, but

consists in the misapplication of an argument which is at best only admissible

as an inconclusive presumption, where real proof is unattainable.

              An argument from analogy, is an inference that what is true in a

certain case is true in a case known to be somewhat similar, but not known to

be exactly parallel, that is, to be similar in all the material circumstances. An

object has the property B: another object is not known to have that property,

but resembles the first in a property A, not known to be connected with B;

and the conclusion to which the analogy points, is that this object has the

property B also. As, for example, that the planets are inhabited, because the

earth is so. The planets resemble the earth in describing elliptical orbits round

the sun, in being attracted by it and by one another, in being nearly spherical,

revolving on their axes, etc.; and, as we have now reason to believe from the

revelations of the spectroscope, are composed, in great part at least, of similar

materials; but it is not known that any of these properties, or all of them

together, are the conditions on which the possession of inhabitants is

dependent, or are marks of those conditions. Nevertheless, so long as we do

not know what the conditions are, they may be connected by some law of

nature with those common properties; and to the extent of that possibility the

planets are more likely to be inhabited than if they did not resemble the earth

at all. This non-assignable and generally small increase of probability,

beyond what would otherwise exist, is all the evidence which a conclusioncan derive from analogy. For if we have the slightest reason to suppose any

real connection between the two properties A and B, the argument is no

longer one of analogy. If it had been ascertained (I purposely put an absurd

supposition) that there was a connection by causation between the fact of

revolving on an axis and the existence of animated beings, or if there were

any reasonable ground for even suspecting such a connection, a probability

would arise of the existence of inhabitants in the planets, which might be of

any degree of strength, up to a complete induction; but we should then infer

the fact from the ascertained or presumed law of causation, and not from the

analogy of the earth.

              The name analogy, however, is sometimes employed by extension to

denote those arguments of an inductive character but not amounting to a real

induction, which are employed to strengthen the argument drawn from a

simple resemblance. Though A, the property common to the two cases, can

not be shown to be the cause or effect of B, the analogical reasoner will

endeavor to show that there is some less close degree of connection between

them; that A is one of a set of conditions from which, when all united, B

would result; or is an occasional effect of some cause which has been known

also to produce B; and the like. Any of which things, if shown, would render

the existence of B by so much more probable, than if there had not been even

that amount of known connection between B and A.

              Now an error or fallacy of analogy may occur in two ways.

Sometimes it consists in employing an argument of either of the above kinds

with correctness indeed, but overrating its probative force. This very common

aberration is sometimes supposed to be particularly incident to persons

distinguished for their imagination; but in reality it is the characteristic

intellectual vice of those whose imaginations are barren, either from want of

exercise, natural defect, or the narrowness of their range of ideas. To such

minds objects present themselves clothed in but few properties; and as,

therefore, few analogies between one object and another occur to them, they

almost invariably overrate the degree of importance of those few: while one

whose fancy takes a wider range, perceives and remembers so many

analogies tending to conflicting conclusions, that he is much less likely to lay

undue stress on any of them. We always find that those are the greatest slaves

to metaphorical language who have but one set of metaphors.

              But this is only one of the modes of error in the employment ofarguments of analogy. There is another, more properly deserving the name of

fallacy; namely, when resemblance in one point is inferred from resemblance

in another point, though there is not only no evidence to connect the two

circumstances by way of causation, but the evidence tends positively to

disconnect them. This is properly the Fallacy of False Analogies.

              As a first instance, we may cite that favorite argument in defense of

absolute power, drawn from the analogy of paternal government in a family,

which government, however much in need of control, is not and can not be

controlled by the children themselves, while they remain children. Paternal

government, says the argument, works well; therefore, despotic government

in a state will work well. I waive, as not pertinent in this place, all that could

be said in qualification of the alleged excellence of paternal government.

However this might be, the argument from the family to the state would not

the less proceed on a false analogy; implying that the beneficial working of

parental government depends, in the family, on the only point which it has in

common with political despotism, namely, irresponsibility. Whereas it

depends, when real, not on that but on two other circumstances of the case,

the affection of the parent for the children, and the superiority of the parent in

wisdom and experience; neither of which properties can be reckoned on, or

are at all likely to exist, between a political despot and his subjects; and when

either of these circumstances fails even in the family, and the influence of the

irresponsibility is allowed to work uncorrected, the result is any thing but

good government. This, therefore, is a false analogy.

              Another example is the not uncommon dictum that bodies politic

have youth, maturity, old age, and death, like bodies natural; that after a

certain duration of prosperity, they tend spontaneously to decay. This also is

a false analogy, because the decay of the vital powers in an animated body

can be distinctly traced to the natural progress of those very changes of

structure which, in their earlier stages, constitutes its growth to maturity;

while in the body politic the progress of those changes can not, generally

speaking, have any effect but the still further continuance of growth: it is the

stoppage of that progress, and the commencement of retrogression, that alone

would constitute decay. Bodies politic die, but it is of disease, or violent

death; they have no old age.

              The following sentence from Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity is an

instance of a false analogy from physical bodies to what are called bodiespolitic. “As there could be in natural bodies no motion of any thing unless

there were some which moveth all things, and continueth immovable; even so

in politic societies there must be some unpunishable, or else no man shall

suffer punishment.” There is a double fallacy here, for not only the analogy,

but the premise from which it is drawn, is untenable. The notion that there

must be something immovable which moves all other things, is the old

scholastic error of a primum mobile .

              The following instance I quote from Archbishop Whately’s Rhetoric

: “It would be admitted that a great and permanent diminution in the quantity

of some useful commodity, such as corn, or coal, or iron, throughout the

world, would be a serious and lasting loss; and again, that if the fields and

coal-mines yielded regularly double quantities, with the same labor, we

should be so much the richer; hence it might be inferred, that if the quantity

of gold and silver in the world were diminished one-half, or were doubled,

like results would follow; the utility of these metals, for the purposes of coin,

being very great. Now there are many points of resemblance and many of

difference, between the precious metals on the one hand, and corn, coal, etc.,

on the other; but the important circumstance to the supposed argument is, that

the utility of gold and silver (as coin, which is far the chief) depends on their

value , which is regulated by their scarcity; or rather, to speak strictly, by the

difficulty of obtaining them; whereas, if corn and coal were ten times as

abundant (i.e. , more easily obtained), a bushel of either would still be as

useful as now. But if it were twice as easy to procure gold as it is, a sovereign

would be twice as large; if only half as easy, it would be of the size of a half-

sovereign, and this (besides the trifling circumstance of the cheapness or

dearness of gold ornaments) would be all the difference. The analogy,

therefore, fails in the point essential to the argument.”

              The same author notices, after Bishop Copleston, the case of False

Analogy which consists in inferring from the similarity in many respects

between the metropolis of a country and the heart of the animal body, that the

increased size of the metropolis is a disease.

              Some of the false analogies on which systems of physics were

confidently grounded in the time of the Greek philosophers, are such as we

now call fanciful, not that the resemblances are not often real, but that it is

long since any one has been inclined to draw from them the inferences which

were then drawn. Such, for instance, are the curious speculations of thePythagoreans on the subject of numbers. Finding that the distances of the

planets bore, or seemed to bear, to one another a proportion not varying much

from that of the divisions of the monochord, they inferred from it the

existence of an inaudible music, that of the spheres; as if the music of a harp

had depended solely on the numerical proportions, and not on the material,

nor even on the existence of any material, any strings at all. It has been

similarly imagined that certain combinations of numbers, which were found

to prevail in some natural phenomena, must run through the whole of nature:

as that there must be four elements, because there are four possible

combinations of hot and cold, wet and dry; that there must be seven planets,

because there were seven metals, and even because there were seven days of

the week. Kepler himself thought that there could be only six planets,

because there were only five regular solids. With these we may class the

reasonings, so common in the speculations of the ancients, founded on a

supposed perfection in nature; meaning by nature the customary order of

events as they take place of themselves without human interference. This also

is a rude guess at an analogy supposed to pervade all phenomena, however

dissimilar. Since what was thought to be perfection appeared to obtain in

some phenomena, it was inferred (in opposition to the plainest evidence) to

obtain in all. “We always suppose that which is better to take place in nature,

if it be possible,” says Aristotle; and the vaguest and most heterogeneous

qualities being confounded together under the notion of being better , there

was no limit to the wildness of the inferences. Thus, because the heavenly

bodies were “perfect,” they must move in circles and uniformly. For “they”
                                                              259
(the Pythagoreans) “would not allow,” says Geminus, “of any such

disorder among divine and eternal things, as that they should sometimes

move quicker and sometimes slower, and sometimes stand still; for no one

would tolerate such anomaly in the movements even of a man, who was

decent and orderly. The occasions of life, however, are often reasons for men

going quicker or slower; but in the incorruptible nature of the stars, it is not

possible that any cause can be alleged of quickness or slowness.” It is seeking

an argument of analogy very far, to suppose that the stars must observe the

rules of decorum in gait and carriage prescribed for themselves by the long-

bearded philosophers satirized by Lucian.

              As late as the Copernican controversy it was urged as an argument in

favor of the true theory of the solar system, that it placed the fire, the noblest

element, in the centre of the universe. This was a remnant of the notion thatthe order of nature must be perfect, and that perfection consisted in

conformity to rules of precedency in dignity, either real or conventional.

Again, reverting to numbers: certain numbers were perfect , therefore those

numbers must obtain in the great phenomena of nature. Six was a perfect

number, that is, equal to the sum of all its factors; an additional reason why

there must be exactly six planets. The Pythagoreans, on the other hand,

attributed perfection to the number ten; but agreed in thinking that the perfect

number must be somehow realized in the heavens; and knowing only of nine

heavenly bodies, to make up the enumeration, they asserted “that there was

an antichthon , or counter-earth, on the other side of the sun, invisible to
  260
us.” Even Huygens was persuaded that when the number of the heavenly

bodies had reached twelve, it could not admit of any further increase.

Creative power could not go beyond that sacred number.

              Some curious instances of false analogy are to be found in the

arguments of the Stoics to prove the equality of all crimes, and the equal

wretchedness of all who had not realized their idea of perfect virtue. Cicero,

toward the end of his Fourth Book, De Finibus , states some of these as

follows: “Ut, inquit, in fidibus plurimis, si nulla earum ita contenta numeris

sit, ut concentum servare possit, omnes æque incontentæ sunt; sic peccata,

quia discrepant, æque discrepant; paria sunt igitur.” To which Cicero himself

aptly answers, “æque contingit omnibus fidibus, ut incontentæ sint; illud non

continuo, ut æque incontentæ.” The Stoic resumes: “Ut enim, inquit,

gubernator æque peccat, si palearum navem evertit, et si auri; item æque

peccat qui parentem, et qui servum, injuriâ verberat;” assuming, that because

the magnitude of the interest at stake makes no difference in the mere defect

of skill, it can make none in the moral defect: a false analogy. Again, “Quis

ignorat, si plures ex alto emergere velint, propius fore eos quidem ad

respirandum, qui ad summam jam aquam appropinquant, sed nihilo magis

respirare posse, quam eos, qui sunt in profundo? Nihil ergo adjuvat

procedere, et progredi in virtute, quominus miserrimus sit, antequam ad eam

pervenerit, quoniam in aquâ nihil adjuvat: et quoniam catuli, qui jam

despecturi sunt, cæci æque, et ii qui modo nati; Platonem quoque necesse est,

quoniam nondum videbat sapientiam, æque cæcum animo, ac Phalarim

fuisse.” Cicero, in his own person, combats these false analogies by other

analogies tending to an opposite conclusion. “Ista similia non sunt, Cato....

Illa sunt similia; hebes acies est cuipiam oculorum: corpore alius languescit:

hi curatione adhibitâ levantur in dies: alter valet plus quotidie: alter videt. Hisimiles sunt omnibus, qui virtuti student; levantur vitiis, levantur erroribus.”

              § 7. In these and all other arguments drawn from remote analogies,

and from metaphors, which are cases of analogy, it is apparent (especially

when we consider the extreme facility of raising up contrary analogies and

conflicting metaphors) that, so far from the metaphor or analogy proving any

thing, the applicability of the metaphor is the very thing to be made out. It has

to be shown that in the two cases asserted to be analogous, the same law is

really operating; that between the known resemblance and the inferred one

there is some connection by means of causation. Cicero and Cato might have

bandied opposite analogies forever; it rested with each of them to prove by

just induction, or at least to render probable, that the case resembled the one

set of analogous cases and not the other, in the circumstances on which the

disputed question really hinged. Metaphors, for the most part, therefore,

assume the proposition which they are brought to prove: their use is, to aid

the apprehension of it; to make clearly and vividly comprehended what it is

that the person who employs the metaphor is proposing to make out; and

sometimes also, by what media he proposes to do so. For an apt metaphor,

though it can not prove, often suggests the proof.

              For instance, when D’Alembert (I believe) remarked that in certain

governments only two creatures find their way to the highest places, the eagle

and the serpent, the metaphor not only conveys with great vividness the

assertion intended, but contributes toward substantiating it, by suggesting, in

a lively manner, the means by which the two opposite characters thus typified

effect their rise. When it is said that a certain person misunderstands another

because the lesser of two objects can not comprehend the greater, the

application of what is true in the literal sense of the word comprehend , to its

metaphorical sense, points to the fact which is the ground and justification of

the assertion, viz., that one mind can not thoroughly understand another

unless it can contain it in itself, that is, unless it possesses all that is contained

in the other. When it is urged as an argument for education, that if the soil is

left uncultivated, weeds will spring up, the metaphor, though no proof, but a

statement of the thing to be proved, states it in terms which, by suggesting a

parallel case, put the mind upon the track of the real proof. For, the reason

why weeds grow in an uncultivated soil, is that the seeds of worthless

products exist everywhere, and can germinate and grow in almost all

circumstances, while the reverse is the case with those which are valuable;and this being equally true of mental products, this mode of conveying an

argument, independently of its rhetorical advantages, has a logical value;

since it not only suggests the grounds of the conclusion, but points to another

case in which those grounds have been found, or at least deemed to be,

sufficient.

              On the other hand, when Bacon, who is equally conspicuous in the

use and abuse of figurative illustration, says that the stream of time has

brought down to us only the least valuable part of the writings of the ancients,

as a river carries froth and straws floating on its surface, while more weighty

objects sink to the bottom; this, even if the assertion illustrated by it were

true, would be no good illustration, there being no parity of cause. The levity

by which substances float on a stream, and the levity which is synonymous

with worthlessness, have nothing in common except the name; and (to show

how little value there is in the metaphor) we need only change the word into

buoyancy , to turn the semblance of argument involved in Bacon’s illustration

against himself.

              A metaphor, then, is not to be considered as an argument, but as an

assertion that an argument exists; that a parity subsists between the case from

which the metaphor is drawn and that to which it is applied. This parity may

exist though the two cases be apparently very remote from one another; the

only resemblance existing between them may be a resemblance of relations,

an analogy in Ferguson’s and Archbishop Whately’s sense: as in the

preceding instance, in which an illustration from agriculture was applied to

mental cultivation.

              § 8. To terminate the subject of Fallacies of Generalization, it

remains to be said, that the most fertile source of them is bad classification:

bringing together in one group, and under one name, things which have no

common properties, or none but such as are too unimportant to allow general

propositions of any considerable value to be made respecting the class. The

misleading effect is greatest, when a word which in common use expresses

some definite fact, is extended by slight links of connection to cases in which

that fact does not exist, but some other or others, only slightly resembling it.
              261
Thus Bacon, in speaking of the Idola or Fallacies arising from notions

temere et inæqualiter à rebus abstractæ , exemplifies them by the notion of

Humidum or Wet, so familiar in the physics of antiquity and of the Middle

Ages. “Invenietur verbum istud, Humidum, nihil aliud quam nota confusadiversarum actionum, quæ nullam constantiam aut reductionem patiuntur.

Significat enim, et quod circa aliud corpus facile se circumfundit; et quod in

se est indeterminabile, nec consistere potest; et quod facile cedit undique; et

quod facile se dividit et dispergit; et quod facile se unit et colligit; et quod

facile fluit, et in motu ponitur; et quod alteri corpori facile adhæret, idque

madefacit; et quod facile reducitur in liquidum, sive colliquatur, cum antea

consisteret. Itaque quum ad hujus nominis prædicationem et impositionem

ventum sit; si alia accipias, flamma humida est; si alia accipias, aer humidus

non est; si alia, pulvis minutus humidus est; si alia, vitrum humidum est: ut

facile appareat, istam notionem ex aquâ tantum, et communibus et vulgaribus

liquoribus, absque ullâ debitâ verificatione, temere abstractam esse.”

              Bacon himself is not exempt from a similar accusation when

inquiring into the nature of heat: where he occasionally proceeds like one

who, seeking for the cause of hardness, after examining that quality in iron,

flint, and diamond, should expect to find that it is something which can be

traced also in hard water, a hard knot, and a hard heart.

              The word κίνησις in the Greek philosophy, and the words

Generation and Corruption, both then and long afterward, denoted such a

multitude of heterogeneous phenomena, that any attempt at philosophizing in

which those words were used was almost as necessarily abortive as if the

word hard had been taken to denote a class including all the things mentioned

above. Κίνησις, for instance, which properly signified motion, was taken to

denote not only all motion but even all change: ἀλλοίωσις being recognized

as one of the modes of κίνησις. The effect was, to connect with every form of

ἀλλοίωσις or change, ideas drawn from motion in the proper and literal sense,

and which had no real connection with any other kind of κίνησις than that.

Aristotle and Plato labored under a continual embarrassment from this misuse

of terms. But if we proceed further in this direction we shall encroach upon

the Fallacy of Ambiguity, which belongs to a different class, the last in order

of our classification, Fallacies of Confusion.

 

 

                     Chapter VI. – Fallacies Of Ratiocination.

 

 

              § 1. We have now, in our progress through the classes of Fallacies,

arrived at those to which, in the common books of logic, the appellation is in

general exclusively appropriated; those which have their seat in the

ratiocinative or deductive part of the investigation of truth. Of these fallacies

it is the less necessary for us to insist at any length, as they have been most

satisfactorily treated in a work familiar to almost all, in this country at least,

who feel any interest in these speculations, Archbishop Whately’s Logic .

Against the more obvious forms of this class of fallacies, the rules of the

syllogism are a complete protection. Not (as we have so often said) that

ratiocination can not be good unless it be in the form of a syllogism; but that,

by showing it in that form, we are sure to discover if it be bad, or at least if it

contain any fallacy of this class.

              § 2. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination, we ought perhaps to include

the errors committed in processes which have the appearance only, not the

reality, of an inference from premises; the fallacies connected with the

conversion and æquipollency of propositions. I believe errors of this

description to be far more frequently committed than is generally supposed,

or than their extreme obviousness might seem to admit of. For example, the

simple conversion of a universal affirmative proposition, All A are B,

therefore all B are A, I take to be a very common form of error: though

committed, like many other fallacies, oftener in the silence of thought than in

express words, for it can scarcely be clearly enunciated without being

detected. And so with another form of fallacy, not substantially different from

the preceding: the erroneous conversion of an hypothetical proposition. The

proper converse of an hypothetical proposition is this: If the consequent be

false, the antecedent is false; but this, If the consequent be true, the

antecedent is true, by no means holds good, but is an error corresponding to

the simple conversion of a universal affirmative. Yet hardly any thing is more

common than for people, in their private thoughts, to draw this inference. As

when the conclusion is accepted, which it so often is, for proof of the

premises. That the premises can not be true if the conclusion is false, is the

unexceptionable foundation of the legitimate mode of reasoning calledreductio ad absurdum . But people continually think and express themselves,

as if they also believed that the premises can not be false if the conclusion is

true. The truth, or supposed truth, of the inferences which follow from a

doctrine, often enables it to find acceptance in spite of gross absurdities in it.

How many philosophical systems which had scarcely any intrinsic

recommendation, have been received by thoughtful men because they were

supposed to lend additional support to religion, morality, some favorite view

of politics, or some other cherished persuasion: not merely because their

wishes were thereby enlisted on its side, but because its leading to what they

deemed sound conclusions appeared to them a strong presumption in favor of

its truth: though the presumption, when viewed in its true light, amounted

only to the absence of that particular evidence of falsehood, which would

have resulted from its leading by correct inference to something already

known to be false.

              Again, the very frequent error in conduct, of mistaking reverse of

wrong for right, is the practical form of a logical error with respect to the

Opposition of Propositions. It is committed for want of the habit of

distinguishing the contrary of a proposition from the contradictory of it, and

of attending to the logical canon, that contrary propositions, though they can

not both be true, may both be false. If the error were to express itself in

words, it would run distinctly counter to this canon. It generally, however,

does not so express itself, and to compel it to do so is the most effectual

method of detecting and exposing it.

              § 3. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination are to be ranked, in the first

place, all the cases of vicious syllogism laid down in the books. These

generally resolve themselves into having more than three terms to the

syllogism, either avowedly, or in the covert mode of an undistributed middle

term, or an illicit process of one of the two extremes. It is not, indeed, very

easy fully to convict an argument of falling under any one of these vicious

cases in particular; for the reason already more than once referred to, that the

premises are seldom formally set out: if they were, the fallacy would impose

upon nobody; and while they are not, it is almost always to a certain degree

optional in what manner the suppressed link shall be filled up. The rules of

the syllogism are rules for compelling a person to be aware of the whole of

what he must undertake to defend if he persists in maintaining his conclusion.

He has it almost always in his power to make his syllogism good byintroducing a false premise; and hence it is scarcely ever possible decidedly

to affirm that any argument involves a bad syllogism: but this detracts

nothing from the value of the syllogistic rules, since it is by them that a

reasoner is compelled distinctly to make his election what premises he is

prepared to maintain. The election made, there is generally so little difficulty

in seeing whether the conclusion follows from the premises set out, that we

might without much logical impropriety have merged this fourth class of

fallacies in the fifth, or Fallacies of Confusion.

              § 4. Perhaps, however, the commonest, and certainly the most

dangerous fallacies of this class, are those which do not lie in a single

syllogism, but slip in between one syllogism and another in a chain of

argument, and are committed by changing the premises . A proposition is

proved, or an acknowledged truth laid down, in the first part of an

argumentation, and in the second a further argument is founded not on the

same proposition, but on some other, resembling it sufficiently to be mistaken

for it. Instances of this fallacy will be found in almost all the argumentative

discourses of unprecise thinkers; and we need only here advert to one of the

obscurer forms of it, recognized by the school-men as the fallacy à dicto

secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter . This is committed when, in the

premises, a proposition is asserted with a qualification, and the qualification

lost sight of in the conclusion; or oftener, when a limitation or condition,

though not asserted, is necessary to the truth of the proposition, but is

forgotten when that proposition comes to be employed as a premise. Many of

the bad arguments in vogue belong to this class of error. The premise is some

admitted truth, some common maxim, the reasons or evidence for which have

been forgotten, or are not thought of at the time, but if they had been thought

of would have shown the necessity of so limiting the premise that it would no

longer have supported the conclusion drawn from it.

              Of this nature is the fallacy in what is called, by Adam Smith and

others, the Mercantile Theory in Political Economy. That theory sets out from

the common maxim, that whatever brings in money enriches; or that every

one is rich in proportion to the quantity of money he obtains. From this it is

concluded that the value of any branch of trade, or of the trade of the country

altogether, consists in the balance of money it brings in; that any trade which

carries more money out of the country than it draws into it is a losing trade;

that therefore money should be attracted into the country and kept there, byprohibitions and bounties; and a train of similar corollaries. All for want of

reflecting that if the riches of an individual are in proportion to the quantity of

money he can command, it is because that is the measure of his power of

purchasing money’s worth; and is therefore subject to the proviso that he is

not debarred from employing his money in such purchases. The premise,

therefore, is only true secundum quid ; but the theory assumes it to be true

absolutely, and infers that increase of money is increase of riches, even when

produced by means subversive of the condition under which alone money can

be riches.

              A second instance is, the argument by which it used to be contended,

before the commutation of tithe, that tithes fell on the landlord, and were a

deduction from rent; because the rent of tithe-free land was always higher

than that of land of the same quality, and the same advantages of situation,

subject to tithe. Whether it be true or not that a tithe falls on rent, a treatise on

Logic is not the place to examine; but it is certain that this is no proof of it.

Whether the proposition be true or false, tithe-free land must, by the necessity

of the case, pay a higher rent. For if tithes do not fall on rent, it must be

because they fall on the consumer; because they raise the price of agricultural

produce. But if the produce be raised in price, the farmer of tithe-free as well

as the farmer of tithed land gets the benefit. To the latter the rise is but a

compensation for the tithe he pays; to the first, who pays none, it is clear

gain, and therefore enables him, and if there be freedom of competition,

forces him, to pay so much more rent to his landlord. The question remains,

to what class of fallacies this belongs. The premise is, that the owner of tithed

land receives less rent than the owner of tithe-free land; the conclusion is, that

therefore he receives less than he himself would receive if tithe were

abolished. But the premise is only true conditionally; the owner of tithed land

receives less than what the owner of tithe-free land is enabled to receive when

other lands are tithed ; while the conclusion is applied to a state of

circumstances in which that condition fails, and in which, by consequence,

the premise will not be true. The fallacy, therefore, is à dicto secundum quid

ad dictum simpliciter .

              A third example is the opposition sometimes made to legitimate

interferences of government in the economical affairs of society, grounded on

a misapplication of the maxim, that an individual is a better judge than the

government of what is for his own pecuniary interest. This objection wasurged to Mr. Wakefield’s principle of colonization; the concentration of the

settlers, by fixing such a price on unoccupied land as may preserve the most

desirable proportion between the quantity of land in culture and the laboring

population. Against this it was argued, that if individuals found it for their

advantage to occupy extensive tracts of land, they, being better judges of

their own interest than the legislature (which can only proceed on general

rules), ought not to be restrained from doing so. But in this argument it was

forgotten that the fact of a person’s taking a large tract of land is evidence

only that it is his interest to take as much as other people, but not that it might

not be for his interest to content himself with less, if he could be assured that

other people would do so too; an assurance which nothing but a government

regulation can give. If all other people took much, and he only a little, he

would reap none of the advantages derived from the concentration of the

population and the consequent possibility of procuring labor for hire, but

would have placed himself, without equivalent, in a situation of voluntary

inferiority. The proposition, therefore, that the quantity of land which people

will take when left to themselves is that which is most for their interest to

take, is true only secundum quid : it is only their interest while they have no

guarantee for the conduct of one another. But the arrangement disregards the

limitation, and takes the proposition for true simpliciter .

              One of the conditions oftenest dropped, when what would otherwise

be a true proposition is employed as a premise for proving others, is the

condition of time . It is a principle of political economy that prices, profits,

wages, etc., “always find their level;” but this is often interpreted as if it

meant that they are always, or generally, at their level, while the truth is, as

Coleridge epigrammatically expresses it, that they are always finding their

level, “which might be taken as a paraphrase or ironical definition of a

storm.”

              Under the same head of fallacy (à dicto secundum quid ad dictum

simpliciter ) might be placed all the errors which are vulgarly called

misapplications of abstract truths; that is, where a principle, true (as the

common expression is) in the abstract , that is, all modifying causes being

supposed absent, is reasoned on as if it were true absolutely, and no

modifying circumstance could ever by possibility exist. This very common

form of error it is not requisite that we should exemplify here, as it will be

particularly treated of hereafter in its application to the subjects on which it is                                                                    262
most frequent and most fatal, those of politics and society.

 

 

                     Chapter VII. – Fallacies Of Confusion.

 

 

              § 1. Under this fifth and last class it is convenient to arrange all those

fallacies in which the source of error is not so much a false estimate of the

probative force of known evidence, as an indistinct, indefinite, and

fluctuating conception of what the evidence is.

              At the head of these stands that multitudinous body of fallacious

reasonings in which the source of error is the ambiguity of terms: when

something which is true if a word be used in a particular sense, is reasoned on

as if it were true in another sense. In such a case there is not a mal-estimation

of evidence, because there is not properly any evidence to the point at all;

there is evidence, but to a different point, which from a confused

apprehension of the meaning of the terms used, is supposed to be the same.

This error will naturally be oftener committed in our ratiocinations than in

our direct inductions, because in the former we are deciphering our own or

other people’s notes, while in the latter we have the things themselves

present, either to the senses or to the memory. Except, indeed, when the

induction is not from individual cases to a generality, but from generalities to

a still higher generalization; in that case the fallacy of ambiguity may affect

the inductive process as well as the ratiocinative. It occurs in ratiocination in

two ways: when the middle term is ambiguous, or when one of the terms of

the syllogism is taken in one sense in the premises, and in another sense in

the conclusion.

              Some good exemplifications of this fallacy are given by Archbishop

Whately. “One case,” says he, “which may be regarded as coming under the

head of Ambiguous Middle, is (what I believe logical writers mean by

‘Fallacia Figuræ Dictionis ’) the fallacy built on the grammatical structure of

language, from men’s usually taking for granted that paronymous (or

conjugate ) words, i.e. , those belonging to each other, as the substantive,

adjective, verb, etc., of the same root, have a precisely corresponding

meaning; which is by no means universally the case. Such a fallacy could not

indeed be even exhibited in strict logical form, which would preclude even

the attempt at it, since it has two middle terms in sound as well as sense. But

nothing is more common in practice than to vary continually the termsemployed, with a view to grammatical convenience; nor is there any thing

unfair in such a practice, as long as the meaning is preserved unaltered; e.g. ,

‘murder should be punished with death; this man is a murderer, therefore he

deserves to die,’ etc. Here we proceed on the assumption (in this case just)

that to commit murder, and to be a murderer — to deserve death, and to be

one who ought to die, are, respectively, equivalent expressions; and it would

frequently prove a heavy inconvenience to be debarred this kind of liberty;

but the abuse of it gives rise to the Fallacy in question; e.g. , projectors are

unfit to be trusted; this man has formed a project , therefore he is unfit to be

trusted: here the sophist proceeds on the hypothesis that he who forms a

project must be a projector : whereas the bad sense that commonly attaches

to the latter word, is not at all implied in the former. This fallacy may often

be considered as lying not in the Middle, but in one of the terms of the

Conclusion; so that the conclusion drawn shall not be, in reality, at all

warranted by the premises, though it will appear to be so, by means of the

grammatical affinity of the words; e.g. , to be acquainted with the guilty is a

presumption of guilt; this man is so acquainted, therefore we may presume

that he is guilty: this argument proceeds on the supposition of an exact

correspondence between presume and presumption , which, however, does

not really exist; for ‘presumption’ is commonly used to express a kind of

slight suspicion ; whereas, ‘to presume’ amounts to actual belief. There are

innumerable instances of a non-correspondence in paronymous words,

similar to that above instanced; as between art and artful , design and

designing , faith and faithful , etc.; and the more slight the variation of the

meaning, the more likely is the fallacy to be successful; for when the words

have become so widely removed in sense as ‘pity’ and ‘pitiful,’ every one
                                                                                263
would perceive such a fallacy, nor would it be employed but in jest.

              “The present Fallacy is nearly allied to, or rather, perhaps, may be

regarded as a branch of, that founded on etymology — viz., when a term is

used, at one time in its customary, and at another in its etymological sense.

Perhaps no example of this can be found that is more extensively and

mischievously employed than in the case of the word representative :

assuming that its right meaning must correspond exactly with the strict and

original sense of the verb ‘represent,’ the sophist persuades the multitude that

a member of the House of Commons is bound to be guided in all points by

the opinion of his constituents; and, in short, to be merely their spokesman ;

whereas law and custom, which in this case may be considered as fixing themeaning of the term, require no such thing, but enjoin the representative to

act according to the best of his own judgment, and on his own responsibility.”

              The following are instances of great practical importance, in which

arguments are habitually founded on a verbal ambiguity.

              The mercantile public are frequently led into this fallacy by the

phrase “scarcity of money.” In the language of commerce, “money” has two

meanings: currency , or the circulating medium; and capital seeking

investment , especially investment on loan. In this last sense the word is used

when the “money market” is spoken of, and when the “value of money” is

said to be high or low, the rate of interest being meant. The consequence of

this ambiguity is, that as soon as scarcity of money in the latter of these

senses begins to be felt — as soon as there is difficulty of obtaining loans,

and the rate of interest is high — it is concluded that this must arise from

causes acting upon the quantity of money in the other and more popular

sense; that the circulating medium must have diminished in quantity, or ought

to be increased. I am aware that, independently of the double meaning of the

term, there are in the facts themselves some peculiarities, giving an apparent

support to this error; but the ambiguity of the language stands on the very

threshold of the subject, and intercepts all attempts to throw light upon it.

              Another ambiguous expression which continually meets us in the

political controversies of the present time, especially in those which relate to

organic changes, is the phrase “influence of property” — which is sometimes

used for the influence of respect for superior intelligence or gratitude for the

kind offices which persons of large property have it so much in their power to

bestow; at other times for the influence of fear; fear of the worst sort of

power, which large property also gives to its possessor, the power of doing

mischief to dependents. To confound these two, is the standing fallacy of

ambiguity brought against those who seek to purify the electoral system from

corruption and intimidation. Persuasive influence, acting through the

conscience of the voter, and carrying his heart and mind with it, is beneficial

— therefore (it is pretended) coercive influence, which compels him to forget

that he is a moral agent, or to act in opposition to his moral convictions,

ought not to be placed under restraint.

              Another word which is often turned into an instrument of the fallacy

of ambiguity, is Theory. In its most proper acceptation, theory means thecompleted result of philosophical induction from experience. In that sense,

there are erroneous as well as true theories, for induction may be incorrectly

performed, but theory of some sort is the necessary result of knowing any

thing of a subject, and having put one’s knowledge into the form of general

propositions for the guidance of practice. In this, the proper sense of the

word, Theory is the explanation of practice. In another and a more vulgar

sense, theory means any mere fiction of the imagination, endeavoring to

conceive how a thing may possibly have been produced, instead of

examining how it was produced. In this sense only are theory and theorists

unsafe guides; but because of this, ridicule or discredit is attempted to be

attached to theory in its proper sense, that is, to legitimate generalization, the

end and aim of all philosophy; and a conclusion is represented as worthless,

just because that has been done which, if done correctly, constitutes the

highest worth that a principle for the guidance of practice can possess,

namely, to comprehend in a few words the real law on which a phenomenon

depends, or some property or relation which is universally true of it.

              “The Church” is sometimes understood to mean the clergy alone,

sometimes the whole body of believers, or at least of communicants. The

declamations respecting the inviolability of church property are indebted for

the greater part of their apparent force to this ambiguity. The clergy, being

called the church, are supposed to be the real owners of what is called church

property; whereas they are in truth only the managing members of a much

larger body of proprietors, and enjoy on their own part a mere usufruct, not

extending beyond a life interest.

              The following is a Stoical argument taken from Cicero, De Finibus ,

book the third: “Quod est bonum, omne laudabile est. Quod autem laudabile

est, omne honestum est. Bonum igitur quod est, honestum est.” Here the

ambiguous word is laudabile , which in the minor premise means any thing

which mankind are accustomed, on good grounds, to admire or value; as

beauty, for instance, or good fortune: but in the major, it denotes exclusively

moral qualities. In much the same manner the Stoics endeavored logically to

justify as philosophical truths, their figurative and rhetorical expressions of

ethical sentiment: as that the virtuous man is alone free, alone beautiful, alone

a king, etc. Whoever has virtue has Good (because it has been previously

determined not to call any thing else good); but, again, Good necessarily

includes freedom, beauty, and even kingship, all these being good things;therefore whoever has virtue has all these.

              The following is an argument of Descartes to prove, in his a priori

manner, the being of a God. The conception, says he, of an infinite Being

proves the real existence of such a being. For if there is not really any such

being, I must have made the conception; but if I could make it, I can also

unmake it; which evidently is not true; therefore there must be, externally to

myself, an archetype, from which the conception was derived. In this

argument (which, it may be observed, would equally prove the real existence

of ghosts and of witches) the ambiguity is in the pronoun I , by which, in one

place, is to be understood my will , in another the laws of my nature . If the

conception, existing as it does in my mind, had no original without, the

conclusion would unquestionably follow that I made it; that is, the laws of

my nature must have somehow evolved it: but that my will made it, would

not follow. Now when Descartes afterward adds that I can not unmake the

conception, he means that I can not get rid of it by an act of my will: which is

true, but is not the proposition required. I can as much unmake this

conception as I can any other: no conception which I have once had, can I

ever dismiss by mere volition; but what some of the laws of my nature have

produced, other laws, or those same laws in other circumstances, may, and

often do, subsequently efface.

              Analogous to this are some of the ambiguities in the free-will

controversy; which, as they will come under special consideration in the

concluding Book, I only mention memoriæ causâ . In that discussion, too, the

word I is often shifted from one meaning to another, at one time standing for

my volitions, at another time for the actions which are the consequences of

them, or the mental dispositions from which they proceed. The latter

ambiguity is exemplified in an argument of Coleridge (in his Aids to

Reflection ), in support of the freedom of the will. It is not true, he says, that a

man is governed by motives; “the man makes the motive, not the motive the

man;” the proof being that “what is a strong motive to one man is no motive

at all to another.” The premise is true, but only amounts to this, that different

persons have different degrees of susceptibility to the same motive; as they

have also to the same intoxicating liquid, which, however, does not prove that

they are free to be drunk or not drunk, whatever quantity of the fluid they

may drink. What is proved is, that certain mental conditions in the person

himself must co-operate, in the production of the act, with the externalinducement; but those mental conditions also are the effect of causes; and

there is nothing in the argument to prove that they can arise without a cause

— that a spontaneous determination of the will, without any cause at all, ever

takes place, as the free-will doctrine supposes.

              The double use, in the free-will controversy, of the word Necessity,

which sometimes stands only for Certainty, at other times for Compulsion;

sometimes for what can not be prevented, at other times only for what we

have reason to be assured will not; we shall have occasion hereafter to pursue

to some of its ulterior consequences.

              A most important ambiguity, both in common and in metaphysical

language, is thus pointed out by Archbishop Whately in the Appendix to his

Logic: “Same (as well as One , Identical , and other words derived from

them) is used frequently in a sense very different from its primary one, as

applicable to a single object; being employed to denote great similarity .

When several objects are undistinguishably alike, one single description will

apply equally to any of them; and thence they are said to be all of one and the

same nature, appearance, etc. As, e.g. , when we say ‘this house is built of the

same stone with such another,’ we only mean that the stones are

undistinguishable in their qualities; not that the one building was pulled

down, and the other constructed with the materials. Whereas sameness , in

the primary sense, does not even necessarily imply similarity; for if we say of

any man that he is greatly altered since such a time, we understand, and

indeed imply by the very expression, that he is one person , though different

in several qualities. It is worth observing also, that Same, in the secondary

sense, admits, according to popular usage, of degrees: we speak of two things

being nearly the same, but not entirely: personal identity does not admit of

degrees. Nothing, perhaps, has contributed more to the error of Realism than

inattention to this ambiguity. When several persons are said to have one and

the same opinion, thought, or idea, many men, overlooking the true simple

statement of the case, which is, that they are all thinking alike , look for

something more abstruse and mystical, and imagine there must be some One

Thing , in the primary sense, though not an individual which is present at

once in the mind of each of these persons; and thence readily sprung Plato’s

theory of Ideas, each of which was, according to him, one real, eternal object,

existing entire and complete in each of the individual objects that are known

by one name.”              It is, indeed, not a matter of inference, but of authentic history, that

Plato’s doctrine of Ideas, and the Aristotelian doctrine (in this respect similar

to the Platonic) of substantial forms and second substances, grew up in the

precise way here pointed out; from the supposed necessity of finding, in

things which were said to have the same nature, or the same qualities,

something which was the same in the very sense in which a man is the same

as himself. All the idle speculations respecting τὸ ὄν, τὸ ἕν, τὸ ὅμοιον, and

similar abstractions, so common in the ancient and in some modern schools

of thought, sprang from the same source. The Aristotelian logicians saw,

however, one case of the ambiguity, and provided against it with their

peculiar felicity in the invention of technical language, when they

distinguished things which differed both specie and numero , from those

which differed numero tantum , that is, which were exactly alike (in some

particular respect at least) but were distinct individuals. An extension of this

distinction to the two meanings of the word Same, namely, things which are

the same specie tantum , and a thing which is the same numero as well as

specie , would have prevented the confusion which has been a source of so

much darkness and such an abundance of positive error in metaphysical

philosophy.

              One of the most singular examples of the length to which a thinker

of eminence may be led away by an ambiguity of language, is afforded by

this very case. I refer to the famous argument by which Bishop Berkeley

flattered himself that he had forever put an end to “skepticism, atheism, and

irreligion.” It is briefly as follows: I thought of a thing yesterday; I ceased to

think of it; I think of it again to-day. I had, therefore, in my mind yesterday

an idea of the object; I have also an idea of it to-day; this idea is evidently not

another, but the very same idea. Yet an intervening time elapsed in which I

had it not. Where was the idea during this interval? It must have been

somewhere; it did not cease to exist; otherwise the idea I had yesterday could

not be the same idea; no more than the man I see alive to-day can be the same

whom I saw yesterday if the man has died in the mean while. Now an idea

can not be conceived to exist anywhere except in a mind; and hence there

must exist a Universal Mind, in which all ideas have their permanent

residence during the intervals of their conscious presence in our own minds.

              It is evident that Berkeley here confounded sameness numero with

sameness specie , that is, with exact resemblance, and assumed the formerwhere there was only the latter; not perceiving that when we say we have the

same thought to-day which we had yesterday, we do not mean the same

individual thought, but a thought exactly similar: as we say that we have the

same illness which we had last year, meaning only the same sort of illness.

              In one remarkable instance the scientific world was divided into two

furiously hostile parties by an ambiguity of language affecting a branch of

science which, more completely than most others, enjoys the advantage of a

precise and well-defined terminology. I refer to the famous dispute respecting

the vis viva, the history of which is given at large in Professor Playfair’s

Dissertation. The question was, whether the force of a moving body was

proportional (its mass being given) to its velocity simply, or to the square of

its velocity: and the ambiguity was in the word Force. “One of the effects,”

says Playfair, “produced by a moving body is proportional to the square of

the velocity, while another is proportional to the velocity simply:” from

whence clearer thinkers were subsequently led to establish a double measure

of the efficiency of a moving power, one being called vis viva , and the other

momentum . About the facts, both parties were from the first agreed: the only

question was, with which of the two effects the term force should be, or could

most conveniently be, associated. But the disputants were by no means aware

that this was all; they thought that force was one thing, the production of

effects another; and the question, by which set of effects the force which

produced both the one and the other should be measured, was supposed to be

a question not of terminology, but of fact.

              The ambiguity of the word Infinite is the real fallacy in the amusing

logical puzzle of Achilles and the Tortoise, a puzzle which has been too hard

for the ingenuity or patience of many philosophers, and which no less a

thinker than Sir William Hamilton considered as insoluble; as a sound

argument, though leading to a palpable falsehood. The fallacy, as Hobbes

hinted, lies in the tacit assumption that whatever is infinitely divisible is

infinite; but the following solution (to the invention of which I have no claim)

is more precise and satisfactory.

              The argument is, let Achilles run ten times as fast as the tortoise, yet

if the tortoise has the start, Achilles will never overtake him. For suppose

them to be at first separated by an interval of a thousand feet: when Achilles

has run these thousand feet, the tortoise will have got on a hundred; when

Achilles has run those hundred, the tortoise will have run ten, and so onforever: therefore Achilles may run forever without overtaking the tortoise.

              Now the “forever,” in the conclusion, means, for any length of time

that can be supposed; but in the premises, “ever” does not mean any length of

time; it means any number of subdivisions of time. It means that we may

divide a thousand feet by ten, and that quotient again by ten, and so on as

often as we please; that there never needs be an end to the subdivisions of the

distance, nor consequently to those of the time in which it is performed. But

an unlimited number of subdivisions may be made of that which is itself

limited. The argument proves no other infinity of duration than may be

embraced within five minutes. As long as the five minutes are not expired,

what remains of them may be divided by ten, and again by ten, as often as we

like, which is perfectly compatible with their being only five minutes

altogether. It proves, in short, that to pass through this finite space requires a

time which is infinitely divisible, but not an infinite time; the confounding of

which distinction Hobbes had already seen to be the gist of the fallacy.

              The following ambiguities of the word right (in addition to the

obvious and familiar one of a right and the adjective right) are extracted from

a forgotten paper of my own, in a periodical:

              “Speaking morally, you are said to have a right to do a thing, if all

persons are morally bound not to hinder you from doing it. But, in another

sense, to have a right to do a thing is the opposite of having no right to do it,

i.e. , of being under a moral obligation to forbear doing it. In this sense, to say

that you have a right to do a thing, means that you may do it without any

breach of duty on your part; that other persons not only ought not to hinder

you, but have no cause to think worse of you for doing it. This is a perfectly

distinct proposition from the preceding. The right which you have by virtue

of a duty incumbent upon other persons, is obviously quite a different thing

from a right consisting in the absence of any duty incumbent upon yourself.

Yet the two things are perpetually confounded. Thus, a man will say he has a

right to publish his opinions; which may be true in this sense, that it would be

a breach of duty in any other person to interfere and prevent the publication:

but he assumes thereupon that, in publishing his opinions, he himself violates

no duty; which may either be true or false, depending, as it does, on his

having taken due pains to satisfy himself, first, that the opinions are true, and

next, that their publication in this manner, and at this particular juncture, will

probably be beneficial to the interests of truth on the whole.              “The second ambiguity is that of confounding a right of any kind,

with a right to enforce that right by resisting or punishing a violation of it.

People will say, for example, that they have a right to good government,

which is undeniably true, it being the moral duty of their governors to govern

them well. But in granting this, you are supposed to have admitted their right

or liberty to turn out their governors, and perhaps to punish them, for having

failed in the performance of this duty; which, far from being the same thing,

is by no means universally true, but depends on an immense number of

varying circumstances,” requiring to be conscientiously weighed before

adopting or acting on such a resolution. This last example is (like others

which have been cited) a case of fallacy within fallacy; it involves not only

the second of the two ambiguities pointed out, but the first likewise.

              One not unusual form of the Fallacy of Ambiguous Terms is known

technically as the Fallacy of Composition and Division; when the same term

is collective in the premises, distributive in the conclusion, or vicè versa ; or

when the middle term is collective in one premise, distributive in the other.

As if one were to say (I quote from Archbishop Whately), “All the angles of

a triangle are equal to two right angles: A B C is an angle of a triangle;

therefore A B C is equal to two right angles.... There is no fallacy more

common, or more likely to deceive, than the one now before us. The form in

which it is most usually employed is to establish some truth, separately,

concerning each single member of a certain class, and thence to infer the

same of the whole collectively .” As in the argument one sometimes hears, to

prove that the world could do without great men. If Columbus (it is said) had

never lived, America would still have been discovered, at most only a few

years later; if Newton had never lived, some other person would have

discovered the law of gravitation; and so forth. Most true: these things would

have been done, but in all probability not till some one had again been found

with the qualities of Columbus or Newton. Because any one great man might

have had his place supplied by other great men, the argument concludes that

all great men could have been dispensed with. The term “great men” is

distributive in the premises and collective in the conclusion.

              “Such also is the fallacy which probably operates on most

adventurers in lotteries; e.g. , ‘the gaining of a high prize is no uncommon

occurrence; and what is no uncommon occurrence may reasonably be

expected; therefore the gaining of a high prize may reasonably be expected;’the conclusion, when applied to the individual (as in practice it is), must be

understood in the sense of ‘reasonably expected by a certain individual ;’

therefore for the major premise to be true, the middle term must be

understood to mean, ‘no uncommon occurrence to some one particular

person;’ whereas for the minor (which has been placed first) to be true, you

must understand it of ‘no uncommon occurrence to some one or other ;’ and

thus you will have the Fallacy of Composition.

              “This is a Fallacy with which men are extremely apt to deceive

themselves ; for when a multitude of particulars are presented to the mind,

many are too weak or too indolent to take a comprehensive view of them, but

confine their attention to each single point, by turns; and then decide, infer,

and act accordingly; e.g. , the imprudent spendthrift, finding that he is able to

afford this, or that, or the other expense, forgets that all of them together will

ruin him.” The debauchee destroys his health by successive acts of

intemperance, because no one of those acts would be of itself sufficient to do

him any serious harm. A sick person reasons with himself, “one, and another,

and another, of my symptoms do not prove that I have a fatal disease;” and

practically concludes that all taken together do not prove it.

              § 2. We have now sufficiently exemplified one of the principal

Genera in this Order of Fallacies; where, the source of error being the

ambiguity of terms, the premises are verbally what is required to support the

conclusion, but not really so. In the second great Fallacy of Confusion they

are neither verbally nor really sufficient, though, from their multiplicity and

confused arrangement, and still oftener from defect of memory, they are not

seen to be what they are. The fallacy I mean is that of Petitio Principii, or

begging the question; including the more complex and not uncommon variety

of it, which is termed Reasoning in a Circle.

              Petitio Principii, as defined by Archbishop Whately, is the fallacy

“in which the premise either appears manifestly to be the same as the

conclusion, or is actually proved from the conclusion, or is such as would

naturally and properly so be proved.” By the last clause I presume is meant,

that it is not susceptible of any other proof; for otherwise, there would be no

fallacy. To deduce from a proposition propositions from which it would itself

more naturally be deduced, is often an allowable deviation from the usual

didactic order; or at most, what, by an adaptation of a phrase familiar to
                                                              264
mathematicians, may be called a logical inelegance .              The employment of a proposition to prove that on which it is itself

dependent for proof, by no means implies the degree of mental imbecility

which might at first be supposed. The difficulty of comprehending how this

fallacy could possibly be committed, disappears when we reflect that all

persons, even the instructed, hold a great number of opinions without exactly

recollecting how they came by them. Believing that they have at some former

time verified them by sufficient evidence, but having forgotten what the

evidence was, they may easily be betrayed into deducing from them the very

propositions which are alone capable of serving as premises for their

establishment. “As if,” says Archbishop Whately, “one should attempt to

prove the being of a God from the authority of Holy Writ;” which might

easily happen to one with whom both doctrines, as fundamental tenets of his

religious creed, stand on the same ground of familiar and traditional belief.

              Arguing in a circle, however, is a stronger case of the fallacy, and

implies more than the mere passive reception of a premise by one who does

not remember how it is to be proved. It implies an actual attempt to prove

two propositions reciprocally from one another; and is seldom resorted to, at

least in express terms, by any person in his own speculations, but is

committed by those who, being hard pressed by an adversary, are forced into

giving reasons for an opinion of which, when they began to argue, they had

not sufficiently considered the grounds. As in the following example from

Archbishop Whately: “Some mechanicians attempt to prove (what they ought
                                                          265
to lay down as a probable but doubtful hypothesis) that every particle of

matter gravitates equally: ‘why?’ ‘because those bodies which contain more

particles ever gravitate more strongly, i.e. , are heavier:’ ‘but (it may be

urged) those which are heaviest are not always more bulky;’ ‘no, but they

contain more particles, though more closely condensed:’ ‘how do you know

that?’ ‘because they are heavier:’ ‘how does that prove it?’ ‘because all

particles of matter gravitating equally, that mass which is specifically the

heavier must needs have the more of them in the same space.’ ” It appears to

me that the fallacious reasoner, in his private thoughts, would not be likely to

proceed beyond the first step. He would acquiesce in the sufficiency of the

reason first given, “bodies which contain more particles are heavier.” It is

when he finds this questioned, and is called upon to prove it, without

knowing how, that he tries to establish his premise by supposing proved what

he is attempting to prove by it. The most effectual way, in fact, of exposing a

petitio principii, when circumstances allow of it, is by challenging thereasoner to prove his premises; which if he attempts to do, he is necessarily

driven into arguing in a circle.

              It is not uncommon, however, for thinkers, and those not of the

lowest description, to be led even in their own thoughts, not indeed into

formally proving each of two propositions from the other, but into admitting

propositions which can only be so proved. In the preceding example the two

together form a complete and consistent, though hypothetical, explanation of

the facts concerned. And the tendency to mistake mutual coherency for truth

— to trust one’s safety to a strong chain though it has no point of support —

is at the bottom of much which, when reduced to the strict forms of

argumentation, can exhibit itself no otherwise than as reasoning in a circle.

All experience bears testimony to the enthralling effect of neat concatenation

in a system of doctrines, and the difficulty with which people admit the

persuasion that any thing which holds so well together can possibly fall.

              Since every case where a conclusion which can only be proved from

certain premises is used for the proof of those premises, is a case of petitio

principii , that fallacy includes a very great proportion of all incorrect

reasoning. It is necessary, for completing our view of the fallacy, to

exemplify some of the disguises under which it is accustomed to mask itself,

and to escape exposure.

              A proposition would not be admitted by any person in his senses as a

corollary from itself, unless it were expressed in language which made it

seem different. One of the commonest modes of so expressing it, is to present

the proposition itself in abstract terms, as a proof of the same proposition

expressed in concrete language. This is a very frequent mode, not only of

pretended proof, but of pretended explanation; and is parodied when Molière

(Le Malade Imaginaire ) makes one of his absurd physicians say,

                Mihi a docto doctore,

  Demandatur causam et rationem quare

Opium facit dormire.

  A quoi respondeo,

  Quia est in eo

  Virtus dormitiva,

Cujus est natura

  Sensus assoupire.              The words Nature and Essence are grand instruments of this mode of

begging the question, as in the well-known argument of the scholastic

theologians, that the mind thinks always, because the essence of the mind is

to think. Locke had to point out, that if by essence is here meant some

property which must manifest itself by actual exercise at all times, the

premise is a direct assumption of the conclusion; while if it only means that

to think is the distinctive property of a mind, there is no connection between

the premise and the conclusion, since it is not necessary that a distinctive

property should be perpetually in action.

              The following is one of the modes in which these abstract terms,

Nature and Essence, are used as instruments of this fallacy. Some particular

properties of a thing are selected, more or less arbitrarily, to be termed its

nature or essence; and when this has been done, these properties are supposed

to be invested with a kind of indefeasibleness; to have become paramount to

all the other properties of the thing, and incapable of being prevailed over or

counteracted by them. As when Aristotle, in a passage already cited, “decides

that there is no void on such arguments as this: in a void there could be no

difference of up and down; for as in nothing there are no differences, so there

are none in a privation or negation; but a void is merely a privation or

negation of matter; therefore, in a void, bodies could not move up and down,
                                      266
which it is in their nature to do.” In other words, it is in the nature of

bodies to move up and down, ergo any physical fact which supposes them

not so to move, can not be authentic. This mode of reasoning, by which a bad

generalization is made to overrule all facts which contradict it, is Petitio

Principii in one of its most palpable forms.

              None of the modes of assuming what should be proved are in more

frequent use than what are termed by Bentham “question-begging

appellatives;” names which beg the question under the disguise of stating it.

The most potent of these are such as have a laudatory or vituperative

character. For instance, in politics, the word Innovation. The dictionary

meaning of this term being merely “a change to something new,” it is

difficult for the defenders even of the most salutary improvement to deny that

it is an innovation; yet the word having acquired in common usage a

vituperative connotation in addition to its dictionary meaning, the admission

is always construed as a large concession to the disadvantage of the thing

proposed.              The following passage from the argument in refutation of the

Epicureans, in the second book of Cicero, “De Finibus,” affords a fine

example of this sort of fallacy: “Et quidem illud ipsum non nimium probo (et

tantum patior) philosophum loqui de cupiditatibus finiendis. An potest

cupiditas finiri? tollenda est, atque extrahenda radicitus. Quis est enim, in quo

sit cupiditas, quin recte cupidus dici possit? Ergo et avarus erit, sed finite:

adulter, verum habebit modum: et luxuriosus eodem modo. Qualis ista

philosophia est, quæ non interitum afferat pravitatis, sed sit contenta

mediocritate vitiorum?” The question was, whether certain desires, when kept

within bounds, are vices or not; and the argument decides the point by

applying to them a word (cupiditas ) which implies vice. It is shown,

however, in the remarks which follow, that Cicero did not intend this as a

serious argument, but as a criticism on what he deemed an inappropriate

expression. “Rem ipsam prorsus probo: elegantiam desidero. Appellet hæc

desideria naturæ ; cupiditatis nomen servet alio,” etc. But many persons,

both ancient and modern, have employed this, or something equivalent to it,

as a real and conclusive argument. We may remark that the passage

respecting cupiditas and cupidus is also an example of another fallacy already

noticed, that of Paronymous Terms.

              Many more of the arguments of the ancient moralists, and especially

of the Stoics, fall within the definition of Petitio Principii. In the “De

Finibus,” for example, which I continue to quote as being probably the best

extant exemplification at once of the doctrines and the methods of the schools

of philosophy existing at that time; of what value as arguments are such pleas

as those of Cato in the third book: That if virtue were not happiness, it could

not be a thing to boast of: That if death or pain were evils, it would be

impossible not to fear them, and it could not, therefore, be laudable to despise

them, etc. In one way of viewing these arguments, they may be regarded as

appeals to the authority of the general sentiment of mankind which had

stamped its approval upon certain actions and characters by the phrases

referred to; but that such could have been the meaning intended is very

unlikely, considering the contempt of the ancient philosophers for vulgar

opinion. In any other sense they are clear cases of Petitio Principii, since the

word laudable, and the idea of boasting, imply principles of conduct; and

practical maxims can only be proved from speculative truths, namely, from

the properties of the subject-matter, and can not, therefore, be employed to

prove those properties. As well might it be argued that a government is goodbecause we ought to support it, or that there is a God because it is our duty to

pray to him.

              It is assumed by all the disputants in the “De Finibus” as the

foundation of the inquiry into the summum bonum , that “sapiens semper

beatus est.” Not simply that wisdom gives the best chance of happiness, or

that wisdom consists in knowing what happiness is, and by what things it is

promoted; these propositions would not have been enough for them; but that

the sage always is, and must of necessity be, happy. The idea that wisdom

could be consistent with unhappiness, was always rejected as inadmissible:

the reason assigned by one of the interlocutors, near the beginning of the

third book, being, that if the wise could be unhappy, there was little use in

pursuing wisdom. But by unhappiness they did not mean pain or suffering; to

that it was granted that the wisest person was liable in common with others:

he was happy, because in possessing wisdom he had the most valuable of all

possessions, the most to be sought and prized of all things, and to possess the

most valuable thing was to be the most happy. By laying it down, therefore,

at the commencement of the inquiry, that the sage must be happy, the

disputed question respecting the summum bonum was in fact begged; with the

further assumption, that pain and suffering, so far as they can co-exist with

wisdom, are not unhappiness, and are no evil.

              The following are additional instances of Petitio Principii, under

more or less of disguise.

              Plato, in the Sophistes , attempts to prove that things may exist

which are incorporeal, by the argument that justice and wisdom are

incorporeal, and justice and wisdom must be something. Here, if by

something be meant, as Plato did in fact mean, a thing capable of existing in

and by itself, and not as a quality of some other thing, he begs the question in

asserting that justice and wisdom must be something; if he means any thing

else, his conclusion is not proved. This fallacy might also be classed under

ambiguous middleterm; something , in the one premise, meaning some

substance, in the other merely some object of thought, whether substance or

attribute.

              It was formerly an argument employed in proof of what is now no

longer a popular doctrine, the infinite divisibility of matter, that every portion

of matter however small, must at least have an upper and an under surface.Those who used this argument did not see that it assumed the very point in

dispute, the impossibility of arriving at a minimum of thickness; for if there

be a minimum, its upper and under surface will of course be one; it will be

itself a surface, and no more. The argument owes its very considerable

plausibility to this, that the premise does actually seem more obvious than the

conclusion, though really identical with it. As expressed in the premise, the

proposition appeals directly and in concrete language to the incapacity of the

human imagination for conceiving a minimum. Viewed in this light, it

becomes a case of the a priori fallacy or natural prejudice, that whatever can

not be conceived can not exist. Every fallacy of Confusion (it is almost

unnecessary to repeat) will, if cleared up, become a fallacy of some other

sort; and it will be found of deductive or ratiocinative fallacies generally, that

when they mislead, there is mostly, as in this case, a fallacy of some other

description lurking under them, by virtue of which chiefly it is that the verbal

juggle, which is the outside or body of this kind of fallacy, passes undetected.

              Euler’s Algebra, a book otherwise of great merit, but full, to

overflowing, of logical errors in respect to the foundation of the science,

contains the following argument to prove that minus multiplied by minus

gives plus , a doctrine the opprobrium of all mere mathematicians, and which

Euler had not a glimpse of the true method of proving. He says minus

multiplied by minus can not give minus ; for minus multiplied by plus gives

minus , and minus multiplied by minus can not give the same product as

minus multiplied by plus . Now one is obliged to ask, why minus multiplied

by minus must give any product at all? and if it does, why its product can not

be the same as that of minus multiplied by plus? for this would seem, at the

first glance, not more absurd than that minus by minus should give the same

as plus by plus, the proposition which Euler prefers to it. The premise

requires proof, as much as the conclusion; nor can it be proved, except by

that more comprehensive view of the nature of multiplication, and of

algebraic processes in general, which would also supply a far better proof of

the mysterious doctrine which Euler is here endeavoring to demonstrate.

              A striking instance of reasoning in a circle is that of some ethical

writers, who first take for their standard of moral truth what, being the

general, they deem to be the natural or instinctive sentiments and perceptions

of mankind, and then explain away the numerous instances of divergence

from their assumed standard, by representing them as cases in which theperceptions are unhealthy. Some particular mode of conduct or feeling is

affirmed to be unnatural ; why? because it is abhorrent to the universal and

natural sentiments of mankind. Finding no such sentiment in yourself, you

question the fact; and the answer is (if your antagonist is polite), that you are

an exception, a peculiar case. But neither (say you) do I find in the people of

some other country, or of some former age, any such feeling of abhorrence;

“ay, but their feelings were sophisticated and unhealthy.”

              One of the most notable specimens of reasoning in a circle is the

doctrine of Hobbes, Rousseau, and others, which rests the obligations by

which human beings are bound as members of society, on a supposed social

compact. I waive the consideration of the fictitious nature of the compact

itself; but when Hobbes, through the whole Leviathan, elaborately deduces

the obligation of obeying the sovereign, not from the necessity or utility of

doing so, but from a promise supposed to have been made by our ancestors,

on renouncing savage life and agreeing to establish political society, it is

impossible not to retort by the question, Why are we bound to keep a promise

made for us by others? or why bound to keep a promise at all? No

satisfactory ground can be assigned for the obligation, except the

mischievous consequences of the absence of faith and mutual confidence

among mankind. We are, therefore, brought round to the interests of society,

as the ultimate ground of the obligation of a promise; and yet those interests

are not admitted to be a sufficient justification for the existence of

government and law. Without a promise it is thought that we should not be

bound to that which is implied in all modes of living in society, namely, to

yield a general obedience to the laws therein established; and so necessary is

the promise deemed, that if none has actually been made, some additional

safety is supposed to be given to the foundations of society by feigning one.

              § 3. Two principal subdivisions of the class of Fallacies of

Confusion having been disposed of; there remains a third, in which the

confusion is not, as in the Fallacy of Ambiguity, in misconceiving the import

of the premises, nor, as in Petitio Principii, in forgetting what the premises

are, but in mistaking the conclusion which is to be proved. This is the fallacy

of Ignoratio Elenchi, in the widest sense of the phrase; also called by

Archbishop Whately the Fallacy of Irrelevant Conclusion. His examples and

remarks are highly worthy of citation.

              “Various kinds of propositions are, according to the occasion,substituted for the one of which proof is required; sometimes the particular

for the universal; sometimes a proposition with different terms; and various

are the contrivances employed to effect and to conceal this substitution, and

to make the conclusion which the sophist has drawn, answer practically the

same purpose as the one he ought to have established. We say, ‘practically

the same purpose,’ because it will very often happen that some emotion will

be excited, some sentiment impressed on the mind (by a dexterous

employment of this fallacy), such as shall bring men into the disposition

requisite for your purpose; though they may not have assented to, or even

stated distinctly in their own minds, the proposition which it was your

business to establish. Thus if a sophist has to defend one who has been guilty

of some serious offense, which he wishes to extenuate, though he is unable

distinctly to prove that it is not such, yet if he can succeed in making the

audience laugh at some casual matter, he has gained practically the same

point. So also if any one has pointed out the extenuating circumstances in

some particular case of offense, so as to show that it differs widely from the

generality of the same class, the sophist, if he finds himself unable to

disprove these circumstances, may do away the force of them, by simply

referring the action to that very class , which no one can deny that it belongs

to, and the very name of which will excite a feeling of disgust sufficient to

counteract the extenuation; e.g. , let it be a case of peculation, and that many

mitigating circumstances have been brought forward which can not be

denied; the sophistical opponent will reply, ‘Well, but after all, the man is a

rogue , and there is an end of it;’ now in reality this was (by hypothesis)

never the question; and the mere assertion of what was never denied ought

not, in fairness, to be regarded as decisive; but, practically, the odiousness of

the word, arising in great measure from the association of those very

circumstances which belong to most of the class, but which we have

supposed to be absent in this particular instance, excites precisely that

feeling of disgust which, in effect, destroys the force of the defense. In like

manner we may refer to this head all cases of improper appeal to the

passions, and every thing else which is mentioned by Aristotle as extraneous

to the matter in hand (ἔξω τοῦ πράγματος).”

              Again, “instead of proving that ‘this prisoner has committed an

atrocious fraud,’ you prove that the fraud he is accused of is atrocious;

instead of proving (as in the well-known tale of Cyrus and the two coats) that

the taller boy had a right to force the other boy to exchange coats with him,you prove that the exchange would have been advantageous to both; instead

of proving that the poor ought to be relieved in this way rather than in that,

you prove that the poor ought to be relieved; instead of proving that the

irrational agent — whether a brute or a madman — can never be deterred

from any act by apprehension of punishment (as, for instance, a dog from

sheep-biting, by fear of being beaten), you prove that the beating of one dog

does not operate as an example to other dogs, etc.

              “It is evident that Ignoratio Elenchi may be employed as well for the

apparent refutation of your opponent’s proposition, as for the apparent

establishment of your own; for it is substantially the same thing, to prove

what was not denied or to disprove what was not asserted. The latter practice

is not less common, and it is more offensive, because it frequently amounts to

a personal affront, in attributing to a person opinions, etc., which he perhaps

holds in abhorrence. Thus, when in a discussion one party vindicates, on the

ground of general expediency, a particular instance of resistance to

government in a case of intolerable oppression, the opponent may gravely

maintain, ‘that we ought not to do evil that good may come;’ a proposition

which of course had never been denied, the point in dispute being, ‘whether

resistance in this particular case were doing evil or not.’ Or again, by way of

disproving the assertion of the right of private judgment in religion, one may

hear a grave argument to prove that ‘it is impossible every one can be right in

his judgment .’ ”

              The works of controversial writers are seldom free from this fallacy.

The attempts, for instance, to disprove the population doctrines of Malthus,

have been mostly cases of ignoratio elenchi . Malthus has been supposed to

be refuted if it could be shown that in some countries or ages population has

been nearly stationary; as if he had asserted that population always increases

in a given ratio, or had not expressly declared that it increases only in so far

as it is not restrained by prudence, or kept down by poverty and disease. Or,

perhaps, a collection of facts is produced to prove that in some one country

the people are better off with a dense population than they are in another

country with a thin one; or that the people have become more numerous and

better off at the same time. As if the assertion were that a dense population

could not possibly be well off; as if it were not part of the very doctrine, and

essential to it, that where there is a more abundant production there may be a

greater population without any increase of poverty, or even with a diminutionof it.

              The favorite argument against Berkeley’s theory of the non-
                                                                                  267
existence of matter, and the most popularly effective, next to a “grin” — an

argument, moreover, which is not confined to “coxcombs,” nor to men like

Samuel Johnson, whose greatly overrated ability certainly did not lie in the

direction of metaphysical speculation, but is the stock argument of the Scotch

school of metaphysicians — is a palpable Ignoratio Elenchi. The argument is

perhaps as frequently expressed by gesture as by words, and one of its

commonest forms consists in knocking a stick against the ground. This short

and easy confutation overlooks the fact, that in denying matter, Berkeley did

not deny any thing to which our senses bear witness, and therefore can not be

answered by any appeal to them. His skepticism related to the supposed

substratum, or hidden cause of the appearances perceived by our senses; the

evidence of which, whatever may be thought of its conclusiveness, is

certainly not the evidence of sense. And it will always remain a signal proof

of the want of metaphysical profundity of Reid, Stewart, and, I am sorry to

add, of Brown, that they should have persisted in asserting that Berkeley, if

he believed his own doctrine, was bound to walk into the kennel, or run his

head against a post. As if persons who do not recognize an occult cause of

their sensations could not possibly believe that a fixed order subsists among

the sensations themselves. Such a want of comprehension of the distinction

between a thing and its sensible manifestation, or, in metaphysical language,

between the noumenon and the phenomenon, would be impossible to even

the dullest disciple of Kant or Coleridge.

              It would be easy to add a greater number of examples of this fallacy,

as well as of the others which I have attempted to characterize. But a more

copious exemplification does not seem to be necessary; and the intelligent

reader will have little difficulty in adding to the catalogue from his own

reading and experience. We shall, therefore, here close our exposition of the

general principles of logic, and proceed to the supplementary inquiry which

is necessary to complete our design.

 

 

             Book VI: On the logic of the moral sciences.

 

 

              “Si l’homme peut prédire, avec une assurance presque entière, les

phénomènes dont il connaît les lois; si lors même qu’elles lui sont inconnues,

il peut, d’après l’expérience, prévoir avec une grande probabilité les

événements de l’avenir; pourquoi regarderait-on comme une entreprise

chimérique, celle de tracer avec quelque vraisemblance le tableau des

destinées futures de l’espèce humaine, d’après les résultats de son histoire?

Le seul fondement de croyance dans les sciences naturelles, est cette idée,

que les lois générales, connues ou ignorées, qui règlent les phénomènes de

l’univers, sont nécessaires et constantes; et par quelle raison ce principe

serait-il moins vrai pour le développement des facultés intellectuelles et

morales de l’homme, que pour les autres opérations de la nature? Enfin,

puisque des opinions formées d’après l’expérience ... sont la seule règle de la

conduite des hommes les plus sages, pourquoi interdirait-on au philosophe

d’appuyer ses conjectures sur cette même base, pourvu qu’il ne leur attribue

pas une certitude supérieure à celle qui peut naître du nombre, de la

constance, de l’exactitude des observations?” — CONDORCET, Esquisse

d’un Tableau Historique des Progrès de l’Esprit Humain .

 

 

                       Chapter I. – Introductory Remarks.

 

 

              § 1. Principles of Evidence and Theories of Method are not to be

constructed a priori . The laws of our rational faculty, like those of every

other natural agency, are only learned by seeing the agent at work. The earlier

achievements of science were made without the conscious observance of any

Scientific Method; and we should never have known by what process truth is

to be ascertained, if we had not previously ascertained many truths. But it

was only the easier problems which could be thus resolved: natural sagacity,

when it tried its strength against the more difficult ones, either failed

altogether, or, if it succeeded here and there in obtaining a solution, had no

sure means of convincing others that its solution was correct. In scientific

investigation, as in all other works of human skill, the way of obtaining the

end is seen as it were instinctively by superior minds in some comparatively

simple case, and is then, by judicious generalization, adapted to the variety of

complex cases. We learn to do a thing in difficult circumstances, by attending

to the manner in which we have spontaneously done the same thing in easier

ones.

              This truth is exemplified by the history of the various branches of

knowledge which have successively, in the ascending order of their

complication, assumed the character of sciences; and will doubtless receive

fresh confirmation from those of which the final scientific constitution is yet

to come, and which are still abandoned to the uncertainties of vague and

popular discussion. Although several other sciences have emerged from this

state at a comparatively recent date, none now remain in it except those

which relate to man himself, the most complex and most difficult subject of

study on which the human mind can be engaged.

              Concerning the physical nature of man, as an organized being —

though there is still much uncertainty and much controversy, which can only

be terminated by the general acknowledgment and employment of stricter

rules of induction than are commonly recognized — there is, however, a

considerable body of truths which all who have attended to the subject

consider to be fully established; nor is there now any radical imperfection in

the method observed in the department of science by its most distinguishedmodern teachers. But the laws of Mind, and, in even a greater degree, those

of Society, are so far from having attained a similar state of even partial

recognition, that it is still a controversy whether they are capable of becoming

subjects of science in the strict sense of the term: and among those who are

agreed on this point, there reigns the most irreconcilable diversity on almost

every other. Here, therefore, if anywhere, the principles laid down in the

preceding Books may be expected to be useful.

              If on matters so much the most important with which human intellect

can occupy itself a more general agreement is ever to exist among thinkers; if

what has been pronounced “the proper study of mankind” is not destined to

remain the only subject which Philosophy can not succeed in rescuing from

Empiricism; the same process through which the laws of many simpler

phenomena have by general acknowledgment been placed beyond dispute,

must be consciously and deliberately applied to those more difficult inquiries.

If there are some subjects on which the results obtained have finally received

the unanimous assent of all who have attended to the proof, and others on

which mankind have not yet been equally successful; on which the most

sagacious minds have occupied themselves from the earliest date, and have

never succeeded in establishing any considerable body of truths, so as to be

beyond denial or doubt; it is by generalizing the methods successfully

followed in the former inquiries, and adapting them to the latter, that we may

hope to remove this blot on the face of science. The remaining chapters are

an endeavor to facilitate this most desirable object.

              § 2. In attempting this, I am not unmindful how little can be done

toward it in a mere treatise on Logic, or how vague and unsatisfactory all

precepts of Method must necessarily appear when not practically exemplified

in the establishment of a body of doctrine. Doubtless, the most effectual

mode of showing how the sciences of Ethics and Politics may be constructed

would be to construct them: a task which, it needs scarcely be said, I am not

about to undertake. But even if there were no other examples, the memorable

one of Bacon would be sufficient to demonstrate, that it is sometimes both

possible and useful to point out the way, though without being one’s self

prepared to adventure far into it. And if more were to be attempted, this at

least is not a proper place for the attempt.

              In substance, whatever can be done in a work like this for the Logic

of the Moral Sciences, has been or ought to have been accomplished in thefive preceding Books; to which the present can be only a kind of supplement

or appendix, since the methods of investigation applicable to moral and social

science must have been already described, if I have succeeded in enumerating

and characterizing those of science in general. It remains, however, to

examine which of those methods are more especially suited to the various

branches of moral inquiry; under what peculiar facilities or difficulties they

are there employed; how far the unsatisfactory state of those inquiries is

owing to a wrong choice of methods, how far to want of skill in the

application of right ones; and what degree of ultimate success may be

attained or hoped for by a better choice or more careful employment of

logical processes appropriate to the case. In other words, whether moral

sciences exist, or can exist; to what degree of perfection they are susceptible

of being carried; and by what selection or adaptation of the methods brought

to view in the previous part of this work that degree of perfection is

attainable.

              At the threshold of this inquiry we are met by an objection, which, if

not removed, would be fatal to the attempt to treat human conduct as a

subject of science. Are the actions of human beings, like all other natural

events, subject to invariable laws? Does that constancy of causation, which is

the foundation of every scientific theory of successive phenomena, really

obtain among them? This is often denied; and for the sake of systematic

completeness, if not from any very urgent practical necessity, the question

should receive a deliberate answer in this place. We shall devote to the

subject a chapter apart.

 

 

                     Chapter II. – Of Liberty And Necessity.

 

 

              § 1. The question, whether the law of causality applies in the same

strict sense to human actions as to other phenomena, is the celebrated

controversy concerning the freedom of the will; which, from at least as far

back as the time of Pelagius, has divided both the philosophical and the

religious world. The affirmative opinion is commonly called the doctrine of

Necessity, as asserting human volitions and actions to be necessary and

inevitable. The negative maintains that the will is not determined, like other

phenomena, by antecedents, but determines itself; that our volitions are not,

properly speaking, the effects of causes, or at least have no causes which they

uniformly and implicitly obey.

              I have already made it sufficiently apparent that the former of these

opinions is that which I consider the true one; but the misleading terms in

which it is often expressed, and the indistinct manner in which it is usually

apprehended, have both obstructed its reception, and perverted its influence

when received. The metaphysical theory of free-will, as held by philosophers

(for the practical feeling of it, common in a greater or less degree to all

mankind, is in no way inconsistent with the contrary theory), was invented

because the supposed alternative of admitting human actions to be necessary

was deemed inconsistent with every one’s instinctive consciousness, as well

as humiliating to the pride and even degrading to the moral nature of man.

Nor do I deny that the doctrine, as sometimes held, is open to these

imputations; for the misapprehension in which I shall be able to show that

they originate, unfortunately is not confined to the opponents of the doctrine,

but is participated in by many, perhaps we might say by most, of its

supporters.

              § 2. Correctly conceived, the doctrine called Philosophical Necessity

is simply this: that, given the motives which are present to an individual’s

mind, and given likewise the character and disposition of the individual, the

manner in which he will act might be unerringly inferred; that if we knew the

person thoroughly, and knew all the inducements which are acting upon him,

we could foretell his conduct with as much certainty as we can predict any

physical event. This proposition I take to be a mere interpretation of universalexperience, a statement in words of what every one is internally convinced

of. No one who believed that he knew thoroughly the circumstances of any

case, and the characters of the different persons concerned, would hesitate to

foretell how all of them would act. Whatever degree of doubt he may in fact

feel, arises from the uncertainty whether he really knows the circumstances,

or the character of some one or other of the persons, with the degree of

accuracy required; but by no means from thinking that if he did know these

things, there could be any uncertainty what the conduct would be. Nor does

this full assurance conflict in the smallest degree with what is called our

feeling of freedom. We do not feel ourselves the less free, because those to

whom we are intimately known are well assured how we shall will to act in a

particular case. We often, on the contrary, regard the doubt what our conduct

will be, as a mark of ignorance of our character, and sometimes even resent it

as an imputation. The religious metaphysicians who have asserted the

freedom of the will, have always maintained it to be consistent with divine

foreknowledge of our actions: and if with divine, then with any other

foreknowledge. We may be free, and yet another may have reason to be

perfectly certain what use we shall make of our freedom. It is not, therefore,

the doctrine that our volitions and actions are invariable consequents of our

antecedent states of mind, that is either contradicted by our consciousness, or

felt to be degrading.

              But the doctrine of causation, when considered as obtaining between

our volitions and their antecedents, is almost universally conceived as

involving more than this. Many do not believe, and very few practically feel,

that there is nothing in causation but invariable, certain, and unconditional

sequence. There are few to whom mere constancy of succession appears a

sufficiently stringent bond of union for so peculiar a relation as that of cause

and effect. Even if the reason repudiates, the imagination retains, the feeling

of some more intimate connection, of some peculiar tie, or mysterious

constraint exercised by the antecedent over the consequent. Now this it is

which, considered as applying to the human will, conflicts with our

consciousness, and revolts our feelings. We are certain that, in the case of our

volitions, there is not this mysterious constraint. We know that we are not

compelled, as by a magical spell, to obey any particular motive. We feel, that

if we wished to prove that we have the power of resisting the motive, we

could do so (that wish being, it needs scarcely be observed, a new antecedent

); and it would be humiliating to our pride, and (what is of more importance)paralyzing to our desire of excellence, if we thought otherwise. But neither is

any such mysterious compulsion now supposed, by the best philosophical

authorities, to be exercised by any other cause over its effect. Those who

think that causes draw their effects after them by a mystical tie, are right in

believing that the relation between volitions and their antecedents is of

another nature. But they should go farther, and admit that this is also true of

all other effects and their antecedents. If such a tie is considered to be

involved in the word Necessity, the doctrine is not true of human actions; but

neither is it then true of inanimate objects. It would be more correct to say

that matter is not bound by necessity, than that mind is so.

              That the free-will metaphysicians, being mostly of the school which

rejects Hume’s and Brown’s analysis of Cause and Effect, should miss their

way for want of the light which that analysis affords, can not surprise us. The

wonder is, that the necessitarians, who usually admit that philosophical

theory, should in practice equally lose sight of it. The very same

misconception of the doctrine called Philosophical Necessity, which prevents

the opposite party from recognizing its truth, I believe to exist more or less

obscurely in the minds of most necessitarians, however they may in words

disavow it. I am much mistaken if they habitually feel that the necessity

which they recognize in actions is but uniformity of order, and capability of

being predicted. They have a feeling as if there were at bottom a stronger tie

between the volitions and their causes; as if, when they asserted that the will

is governed by the balance of motives, they meant something more cogent

than if they had only said, that whoever knew the motives, and our habitual

susceptibilities to them, could predict how we should will to act. They

commit, in opposition to their own scientific system, the very same mistake

which their adversaries commit in obedience to theirs; and in consequence do

really in some instances suffer those depressing consequences which their

opponents erroneously impute to the doctrine itself.

              § 3. I am inclined to think that this error is almost wholly an effect of

the associations with a word, and that it would be prevented, by forbearing to

employ, for the expression of the simple fact of causation, so extremely

inappropriate a term as Necessity. That word, in its other acceptations,

involves much more than mere uniformity of sequence: it implies

irresistibleness. Applied to the will, it only means that, the given cause will

be followed by the effect, subject to all possibilities of counteraction by othercauses; but in common use it stands for the operation of those causes

exclusively which are supposed too powerful to be counteracted at all. When

we say that all human actions take place of necessity, we only mean that they

will certainly happen if nothing prevents; when we say that dying of want, to

those who can not get food, is a necessity, we mean that it will certainly

happen whatever may be done to prevent it. The application of the same term

to the agencies on which human actions depend, as is used to express those

agencies of nature which are really uncontrollable, can not fail, when

habitual, to create a feeling of uncontrollableness in the former also. This,

however, is a mere illusion. There are physical sequences which we call

necessary, as death for want of food or air; there are others which, though as

much cases of causation as the former, are not said to be necessary, as death

from poison, which an antidote, or the use of the stomach-pump, will

sometimes avert. It is apt to be forgotten by people’s feelings, even if

remembered by their understandings, that human actions are in this last

predicament: they are never (except in some cases of mania) ruled by any one

motive with such absolute sway that there is no room for the influence of any

other. The causes, therefore, on which action depends, are never

uncontrollable; and any given effect is only necessary provided that the

causes tending to produce it are not controlled. That whatever happens, could

not have happened otherwise, unless something had taken place which was

capable of preventing it, no one surely needs hesitate to admit. But to call this

by the name Necessity is to use the term in a sense so different from its

primitive and familiar meaning, from that which it bears in the common

occasions of life, as to amount almost to a play upon words. The associations

derived from the ordinary sense of the term will adhere to it in spite of all we

can do; and though the doctrine of Necessity, as stated by most who hold it, is

very remote from fatalism, it is probable that most necessitarians are fatalists,

more or less, in their feelings.

              A fatalist believes, or half believes (for nobody is a consistent

fatalist), not only that whatever is about to happen will be the infallible result

of the causes which produce it (which is the true necessitarian doctrine), but

moreover that there is no use in struggling against it; that it will happen,

however we may strive to prevent it. Now, a necessitarian, believing that our

actions follow from our characters, and that our characters follow from our

organization, our education, and our circumstances, is apt to be, with more or

less of consciousness on his part, a fatalist as to his own actions, and tobelieve that his nature is such, or that his education and circumstances have

so moulded his character, that nothing can now prevent him from feeling and

acting in a particular way, or at least that no effort of his own can hinder it. In

the words of the sect which in our own day has most perseveringly inculcated

and most perversely misunderstood this great doctrine, his character is

formed for him, and not by him; therefore his wishing that it had been formed

differently is of no use; he has no power to alter it. But this is a grand error.

He has, to a certain extent, a power to alter his character. Its being, in the

ultimate resort, formed for him, is not inconsistent with its being, in part,

formed by him as one of the intermediate agents. His character is formed by

his circumstances (including among these his particular organization); but his

own desire to mould it in a particular way, is one of those circumstances, and

by no means one of the least influential. We can not, indeed, directly will to

be different from what we are. But neither did those who are supposed to

have formed our characters directly will that we should be what we are. Their

will had no direct power except over their own actions. They made us what

they did make us, by willing, not the end, but the requisite means; and we,

when our habits are not too inveterate, can, by similarly willing the requisite

means, make ourselves different. If they could place us under the influence of

certain circumstances, we, in like manner, can place ourselves under the

influence of other circumstances. We are exactly as capable of making our

own character, if we will , as others are of making it for us.

              Yes (answers the Owenite), but these words, “if we will,” surrender

the whole point: since the will to alter our own character is given us, not by

any efforts of ours, but by circumstances which we can not help, it comes to

us either from external causes, or not at all. Most true: if the Owenite stops

here, he is in a position from which nothing can expel him. Our character is

formed by us as well as for us; but the wish which induces us to attempt to

form it is formed for us; and how? Not, in general, by our organization, nor

wholly by our education, but by our experience; experience of the painful

consequences of the character we previously had; or by some strong feeling

of admiration or aspiration, accidentally aroused. But to think that we have

no power of altering our character, and to think that we shall not use our

power unless we desire to use it, are very different things, and have a very

different effect on the mind. A person who does not wish to alter his

character, can not be the person who is supposed to feel discouraged or

paralyzed by thinking himself unable to do it. The depressing effect of thefatalist doctrine can only be felt where there is a wish to do what that doctrine

represents as impossible. It is of no consequence what we think forms our

character, when we have no desire of our own about forming it; but it is of

great consequence that we should not be prevented from forming such a

desire by thinking the attainment impracticable, and that if we have the

desire, we should know that the work is not so irrevocably done as to be

incapable of being altered.

              And indeed, if we examine closely, we shall find that this feeling, of

our being able to modify our own character if we wish , is itself the feeling of

moral freedom which we are conscious of. A person feels morally free who

feels that his habits or his temptations are not his masters, but he theirs; who,

even in yielding to them, knows that he could resist; that were he desirous of

altogether throwing them off, there would not be required for that purpose a

stronger desire than he knows himself to be capable of feeling. It is of course

necessary, to render our consciousness of freedom complete, that we should

have succeeded in making our character all we have hitherto attempted to

make it; for if we have wished and not attained, we have, to that extent, not

power over our own character; we are not free. Or at least, we must feel that

our wish, if not strong enough to alter our character, is strong enough to

conquer our character when the two are brought into conflict in any particular

case of conduct. And hence it is said with truth, that none but a person of

confirmed virtue is completely free.

              The application of so improper a term as Necessity to the doctrine of

cause and effect in the matter of human character, seems to me one of the

most signal instances in philosophy of the abuse of terms, and its practical

consequences one of the most striking examples of the power of language

over our associations. The subject will never be generally understood until

that objectionable term is dropped. The free-will doctrine, by keeping in view

precisely that portion of the truth which the word Necessity puts out of sight,

namely the power of the mind to co-operate in the formation of its own

character, has given to its adherents a practical feeling much nearer to the

truth than has generally (I believe) existed in the minds of necessitarians. The

latter may have had a stronger sense of the importance of what human beings

can do to shape the characters of one another; but the free-will doctrine has, I

believe, fostered in its supporters a much stronger spirit of self-culture.

              § 4. There is still one fact which requires to be noticed (in addition tothe existence of a power of self-formation) before the doctrine of the

causation of human actions can be freed from the confusion and

misapprehensions which surround it in many minds. When the will is said to

be determined by motives, a motive does not mean always, or solely, the

anticipation of a pleasure or of a pain. I shall not here inquire whether it be

true that, in the commencement, all our voluntary actions are mere means

consciously employed to obtain some pleasure or avoid some pain. It is at

least certain that we gradually, through the influence of association, come to

desire the means without thinking of the end; the action itself becomes an

object of desire, and is performed without reference to any motive beyond

itself. Thus far, it may still be objected that, the action having through

association become pleasurable, we are, as much as before, moved to act by

the anticipation of a pleasure, namely, the pleasure of the action itself. But

granting this, the matter does not end here. As we proceed in the formation of

habits, and become accustomed to will a particular act or a particular course

of conduct because it is pleasurable, we at last continue to will it without any

reference to its being pleasurable. Although, from some change in us or in

our circumstances, we have ceased to find any pleasure in the action, or

perhaps to anticipate any pleasure as the consequence of it, we still continue

to desire the action, and consequently to do it. In this manner it is that habits

of hurtful excess continue to be practiced although they have ceased to be

pleasurable; and in this manner also it is that the habit of willing to persevere

in the course which he has chosen, does not desert the moral hero, even when

the reward, however real, which he doubtless receives from the

consciousness of well-doing, is any thing but an equivalent for the sufferings

he undergoes, or the wishes which he may have to renounce.

              A habit of willing is commonly called a purpose; and among the

causes of our volitions, and of the actions which flow from them, must be

reckoned not only likings and aversions, but also purposes. It is only when

our purposes have become independent of the feelings of pain or pleasure

from which they originally took their rise, that we are said to have a

confirmed character. “A character,” says Novalis, “is a completely fashioned

will:” and the will, once so fashioned, may be steady and constant, when the

passive susceptibilities of pleasure and pain are greatly weakened or

materially changed.

              With the corrections and explanations now given, the doctrine of thecausation of our volitions by motives, and of motives by the desirable objects

offered to us, combined with our particular susceptibilities of desire, may be

considered, I hope, as sufficiently established for the purposes of this
        268
treatise.

 

 

 Chapter III. – That There Is, Or May Be, A Science Of Human Nature.

 

 

              § 1. It is a common notion, or at least it is implied in many common

modes of speech, that the thoughts, feelings, and actions of sentient beings

are not a subject of science, in the same strict sense in which this is true of

the objects of outward nature. This notion seems to involve some confusion

of ideas, which it is necessary to begin by clearing up.

              Any facts are fitted, in themselves, to be a subject of science which

follow one another according to constant laws, although those laws may not

have been discovered, nor even be discoverable by our existing resources.

Take, for instance, the most familiar class of meteorological phenomena,

those of rain and sunshine. Scientific inquiry has not yet succeeded in

ascertaining the order of antecedence and consequence among these

phenomena, so as to be able, at least in our regions of the earth, to predict

them with certainty, or even with any high degree of probability. Yet no one

doubts that the phenomena depend on laws, and that these must be derivative

laws resulting from known ultimate laws, those of heat, electricity,

vaporization, and elastic fluids. Nor can it be doubted that if we were

acquainted with all the antecedent circumstances, we could, even from those

more general laws, predict (saving difficulties of calculation) the state of the

weather at any future time. Meteorology, therefore, not only has in itself

every natural requisite for being, but actually is, a science; though, from the

difficulty of observing the facts on which the phenomena depend (a difficulty

inherent in the peculiar nature of those phenomena), the science is extremely

imperfect; and were it perfect, might probably be of little avail in practice,

since the data requisite for applying its principles to particular instances

would rarely be procurable.

              A case may be conceived, of an intermediate character, between the

perfection of science and this its extreme imperfection. It may happen that the

greater causes, those on which the principal part of the phenomena depends,

are within the reach of observation and measurement; so that if no other

causes intervened, a complete explanation could be given not only of the

phenomena in general, but of all the variations and modifications which it

admits of. But inasmuch as other, perhaps many other causes, separatelyinsignificant in their effects, co-operate or conflict in many or in all cases

with those greater causes, the effect, accordingly, presents more or less of

aberration from what would be produced by the greater causes alone. Now if

these minor causes are not so constantly accessible, or not accessible at all, to

accurate observation, the principal mass of the effect may still, as before, be

accounted for, and even predicted; but there will be variations and

modifications which we shall not be competent to explain thoroughly, and

our predictions will not be fulfilled accurately, but only approximately.

              It is thus, for example, with the theory of the tides. No one doubts

that Tidology (as Dr. Whewell proposes to call it) is really a science. As

much of the phenomena as depends on the attraction of the sun and moon is

completely understood, and may, in any, even unknown, part of the earth’s

surface, be foretold with certainty; and the far greater part of the phenomena

depends on those causes. But circumstances of a local or casual nature, such

as the configuration of the bottom of the ocean, the degree of confinement

from shores, the direction of the wind, etc., influence, in many or in all

places, the height and time of the tide; and a portion of these circumstances

being either not accurately knowable, not precisely measurable, or not

capable of being certainly foreseen, the tide in known places commonly

varies from the calculated result of general principles by some difference that

we can not explain, and in unknown ones may vary from it by a difference

that we are not able to foresee or conjecture. Nevertheless, not only is it

certain that these variations depend on causes, and follow their causes by

laws of unerring uniformity; not only, therefore, is tidology a science, like

meteorology, but it is, what hitherto at least meteorology is not, a science

largely available in practice. General laws may be laid down respecting the

tides, predictions may be founded on those laws, and the result will in the

main, though often not with complete accuracy, correspond to the

predictions.

              And this is what is or ought to be meant by those who speak of

sciences which are not exact sciences. Astronomy was once a science,

without being an exact science. It could not become exact until not only the

general course of the planetary motions, but the perturbations also, were

accounted for, and referred to their causes. It has become an exact science,

because its phenomena have been brought under laws comprehending the

whole of the causes by which the phenomena are influenced, whether in agreat or only in a trifling degree, whether in all or only in some cases, and

assigning to each of those causes the share of effect which really belongs to

it. But in the theory of the tides the only laws as yet accurately ascertained are

those of the causes which affect the phenomenon in all cases, and in a

considerable degree; while others which affect it in some cases only, or, if in

all, only in a slight degree, have not been sufficiently ascertained and studied

to enable us to lay down their laws; still less to deduce the completed law of

the phenomenon, by compounding the effects of the greater with those of the

minor causes. Tidology, therefore, is not yet an exact science; not from any

inherent incapacity of being so, but from the difficulty of ascertaining with

complete precision the real derivative uniformities. By combining, however,

the exact laws of the greater causes, and of such of the minor ones as are

sufficiently known, with such empirical laws or such approximate

generalizations respecting the miscellaneous variations as can be obtained by

specific observation, we can lay down general propositions which will be true

in the main, and on which, with allowance for the degree of their probable

inaccuracy, we may safely ground our expectations and our conduct.

              § 2. The science of human nature is of this description. It falls far

short of the standard of exactness now realized in Astronomy; but there is no

reason that it should not be as much a science as Tidology is, or as

Astronomy was when its calculations had only mastered the main

phenomena, but not the perturbations.

              The phenomena with which this science is conversant being the

thoughts, feelings, and actions of human beings, it would have attained the

ideal perfection of a science if it enabled us to foretell how an individual

would think, feel, or act throughout life, with the same certainty with which

astronomy enables us to predict the places and the occultations of the

heavenly bodies. It needs scarcely be stated that nothing approaching to this

can be done. The actions of individuals could not be predicted with scientific

accuracy, were it only because we can not foresee the whole of the

circumstances in which those individuals will be placed. But further, even in

any given combination of (present) circumstances, no assertion, which is both

precise and universally true, can be made respecting the manner in which

human beings will think, feel, or act. This is not, however, because every

person’s modes of thinking, feeling, and acting do not depend on causes; nor

can we doubt that if, in the case of any individual, our data could becomplete, we even now know enough of the ultimate laws by which mental

phenomena are determined, to enable us in many cases to predict, with

tolerable certainty, what, in the greater number of supposable combinations

of circumstances, his conduct or sentiments would be. But the impressions

and actions of human beings are not solely the result of their present

circumstances, but the joint result of those circumstances and of the

characters of the individuals; and the agencies which determine human

character are so numerous and diversified (nothing which has happened to the

person throughout life being without its portion of influence), that in the

aggregate they are never in any two cases exactly similar. Hence, even if our

science of human nature were theoretically perfect, that is, if we could

calculate any character as we can calculate the orbit of any planet, from given

data ; still, as the data are never all given, nor ever precisely alike in different

cases, we could neither make positive predictions, nor lay down universal

propositions.

              Inasmuch, however, as many of those effects which it is of most

importance to render amenable to human foresight and control are

determined, like the tides, in an incomparably greater degree by general

causes, than by all partial causes taken together; depending in the main on

those circumstances and qualities which are common to all mankind, or at

least to large bodies of them, and only in a small degree on the idiosyncrasies

of organization or the peculiar history of individuals; it is evidently possible

with regard to all such effects, to make predictions which will almost always

be verified, and general propositions which are almost always true. And

whenever it is sufficient to know how the great majority of the human race,

or of some nation or class of persons, will think, feel, and act, these

propositions are equivalent to universal ones. For the purposes of political
                                                                        269
and social science this is sufficient. As we formerly remarked, an

approximate generalization is, in social inquiries, for most practical purposes

equivalent to an exact one; that which is only probable when asserted of

individual human beings indiscriminately selected, being certain when

affirmed of the character and collective conduct of masses.

              It is no disparagement, therefore, to the science of Human Nature,

that those of its general propositions which descend sufficiently into detail to

serve as a foundation for predicting phenomena in the concrete, are for the

most part only approximately true. But in order to give a genuinely scientificcharacter to the study, it is indispensable that these approximate

generalizations, which in themselves would amount only to the lowest kind

of empirical laws, should be connected deductively with the laws of nature

from which they result; should be resolved into the properties of the causes

on which the phenomena depend. In other words, the science of Human

Nature may be said to exist in proportion as the approximate truths, which

compose a practical knowledge of mankind, can be exhibited as corollaries

from the universal laws of human nature on which they rest; whereby the

proper limits of those approximate truths would be shown, and we should be

enabled to deduce others for any new state of circumstances, in anticipation

of specific experience.

              The proposition now stated is the text on which the two succeeding

chapters will furnish the comment.

 

 

                       Chapter IV. – Of The Laws Of Mind.

 

 

              § 1. What the Mind is, as well as what Matter is, or any other

question respecting Things in themselves, as distinguished from their sensible

manifestations, it would be foreign to the purposes of this treatise to consider.

Here, as throughout our inquiry, we shall keep clear of all speculations

respecting the mind’s own nature, and shall understand by the laws of mind

those of mental Phenomena; of the various feelings or states of consciousness

of sentient beings. These, according to the classification we have uniformly

followed, consist of Thoughts, Emotions, Volitions, and Sensations; the last

being as truly states of Mind as the three former. It is usual, indeed, to speak

of sensations as states of body, not of mind. But this is the common

confusion, of giving one and the same name to a phenomenon and to the

approximate cause or conditions of the phenomenon. The immediate

antecedent of a sensation is a state of body, but the sensation itself is a state

of mind. If the word Mind means any thing, it means that which feels.

Whatever opinion we hold respecting the fundamental identity or diversity of

matter and mind, in any case the distinction between mental and physical

facts, between the internal and the external world, will always remain, as a

matter of classification; and in that classification, sensations, like all other

feelings, must be ranked as mental phenomena. The mechanism of their

production, both in the body itself and in what is called outward nature, is all

that can with any propriety be classed as physical.

              The phenomena of mind, then, are the various feelings of our nature,

both those improperly called physical and those peculiarly designated as

mental; and by the laws of mind, I mean the laws according to which those

feelings generate one another.

              § 2. All states of mind are immediately caused either by other states

of mind, or by states of body. When a state of mind is produced by a state of

mind, I call the law concerned in the case a law of Mind. When a state of

mind is produced directly by a state of body, the law is a law of Body, and

belongs to physical science.

              With regard to those states of mind which are called sensations, allare agreed that these have for their immediate antecedents, states of body.

Every sensation has for its proximate cause some affection of the portion of

our frame called the nervous system, whether this affection originates in the

action of some external object, or in some pathological condition of the

nervous organization itself. The laws of this portion of our nature — the

varieties of our sensations, and the physical conditions on which they

proximately depend — manifestly belong to the province of Physiology.

              Whether the remainder of our mental states are similarly dependent

on physical conditions, is one of the vexatæ questiones in the science of

human nature. It is still disputed whether our thoughts, emotions, and

volitions are generated through the intervention of material mechanism;

whether we have organs of thought and of emotion, in the same sense in

which we have organs of sensation. Many eminent physiologists hold the

affirmative. These contend that a thought (for example) is as much the result

of nervous agency, as a sensation; that some particular state of our nervous

system, in particular of that central portion of it called the brain, invariably

precedes, and is presupposed by, every state of our consciousness. According

to this theory, one state of mind is never really produced by another: all are

produced by states of body. When one thought seems to call up another by

association, it is not really a thought which recalls a thought; the association

did not exist between the two thoughts, but between the two states of the

brain or nerves which preceded the thoughts: one of those states recalls the

other, each being attended in its passage by the particular state of

consciousness which is consequent on it. On this theory the uniformities of

succession among states of mind would be mere derivative uniformities,

resulting from the laws of succession of the bodily states which cause them.

There would be no original mental laws, no Laws of Mind in the sense in

which I use the term, at all; and mental science would be a mere branch,

though the highest and most recondite branch, of the science of physiology.

M. Comte, accordingly, claims the scientific cognizance of moral and

intellectual phenomena exclusively for physiologists; and not only denies to

Psychology, or Mental Philosophy properly so called, the character of a

science, but places it, in the chimerical nature of its objects and pretensions,

almost on a par with astrology.

              But, after all has been said which can be said, it remains

incontestable that there exist uniformities of succession among states ofmind, and that these can be ascertained by observation and experiment.

Further, that every mental state has a nervous state for its immediate

antecedent and proximate cause, though extremely probable, can not hitherto

be said to be proved, in the conclusive manner in which this can be proved of

sensations; and even were it certain, yet every one must admit that we are

wholly ignorant of the characteristics of these nervous states; we know not,

and at present have no means of knowing, in what respect one of them differs

from another; and our only mode of studying their successions or co-

existences must be by observing the successions and co-existences of the

mental states, of which they are supposed to be the generators or causes. The

successions, therefore, which obtain among mental phenomena, do not admit

of being deduced from the physiological laws of our nervous organization;

and all real knowledge of them must continue, for a long time at least, if not

always, to be sought in the direct study, by observation and experiment, of

the mental successions themselves. Since, therefore, the order of our mental

phenomena must be studied in those phenomena, and not inferred from the

laws of any phenomena more general, there is a distinct and separate Science

of Mind.

              The relations, indeed, of that science to the science of physiology

must never be overlooked or undervalued. It must by no means be forgotten

that the laws of mind may be derivative laws resulting from laws of animal

life, and that their truth, therefore, may ultimately depend on physical

conditions; and the influence of physiological states or physiological changes

in altering or counteracting the mental successions, is one of the most

important departments of psychological study. But, on the other hand, to

reject the resource of psychological analysis, and construct the theory of the

mind solely on such data as physiology at present affords, seems to me as

great an error in principle, and an even more serious one in practice.

Imperfect as is the science of mind, I do not scruple to affirm that it is in a

considerably more advanced state than the portion of physiology which

corresponds to it; and to discard the former for the latter appears, to me an

infringement of the true canons of inductive philosophy, which must produce,

and which does produce, erroneous conclusions in some very important

departments of the science of human nature.

              § 3. The subject, then, of Psychology is the uniformities of

succession, the laws, whether ultimate or derivative, according to which onemental state succeeds another; is caused by, or at least, is caused to follow,

another. Of these laws some are general, others more special. The following

are examples of the most general laws:

              First. Whenever any state of consciousness has once been excited in

us, no matter by what cause, an inferior degree of the same state of

consciousness, a state of consciousness resembling the former, but inferior in

intensity, is capable of being reproduced in us, without the presence of any

such cause as excited it at first. Thus, if we have once seen or touched an

object, we can afterward think of the object though it be absent from our sight

or from our touch. If we have been joyful or grieved at some event, we can

think of or remember our past joy or grief, though no new event of a happy or

painful nature has taken place. When a poet has put together a mental picture

of an imaginary object, a Castle of Indolence, a Una, or a Hamlet, he can

afterward think of the ideal object he has created, without any fresh act of

intellectual combination. This law is expressed by saying, in the language of

Hume, that every mental impression has its idea .

              Secondly. These ideas, or secondary mental states, are excited by our

impressions, or by other ideas, according to certain laws which are called

Laws of Association. Of these laws the first is, that similar ideas tend to

excite one another. The second is, that when two impressions have been

frequently experienced (or even thought of) either simultaneously or in

immediate succession, then whenever one of these impressions, or the idea of

it, recurs, it tends to excite the idea of the other. The third law is, that greater

intensity in either or both of the impressions is equivalent, in rendering them

excitable by one another, to a greater frequency of conjunction. These are the

laws of ideas, on which I shall not enlarge in this place, but refer the reader to

works professedly psychological, in particular to Mr. James Mill’s Analysis

of the Phenomena of the Human Mind , where the principal laws of

association, along with many of their applications, are copiously exemplified,
                            270
and with a masterly hand.

              These simple or elementary Laws of Mind have been ascertained by

the ordinary methods of experimental inquiry; nor could they have been

ascertained in any other manner. But a certain number of elementary laws

having thus been obtained, it is a fair subject of scientific inquiry how far

those laws can be made to go in explaining the actual phenomena. It is

obvious that complex laws of thought and feeling not only may, but must, begenerated from these simple laws. And it is to be remarked, that the case is

not always one of Composition of Causes: the effect of concurring causes is

not always precisely the sum of the effects of those causes when separate, nor

even always an effect of the same kind with them. Reverting to the

distinction which occupies so prominent a place in the theory of induction,

the laws of the phenomena of mind are sometimes analogous to mechanical,

but sometimes also to chemical laws. When many impressions or ideas are

operating in the mind together, there sometimes takes place a process of a

similar kind to chemical combination. When impressions have been so often

experienced in conjunction, that each of them calls up readily and

instantaneously the ideas of the whole group, those ideas sometimes melt and

coalesce into one another, and appear not several ideas, but one; in the same

manner as, when the seven prismatic colors are presented to the eye in rapid

succession, the sensation produced is that of white. But as in this last case it

is correct to say that the seven colors when they rapidly follow one another

generate white, but not that they actually are white; so it appears to me that

the Complex Idea, formed by the blending together of several simpler ones,

should, when it really appears simple (that is, when the separate elements are

not consciously distinguishable in it), be said to result from , or be generated

by , the simple ideas, not to consist of them. Our idea of an orange really

consists of the simple ideas of a certain color, a certain form, a certain taste

and smell, etc., because we can, by interrogating our consciousness, perceive

all these elements in the idea. But we can not perceive, in so apparently

simple a feeling as our perception of the shape of an object by the eye, all that

multitude of ideas derived from other senses, without which it is well

ascertained that no such visual perception would ever have had existence;

nor, in our idea of Extension, can we discover those elementary ideas of

resistance, derived from our muscular frame, in which it has been

conclusively shown that the idea originates. These, therefore, are cases of

mental chemistry; in which it is proper to say that the simple ideas generate,

rather than that they compose, the complex ones.

              With respect to all the other constituents of the mind, its beliefs, its

abstruser conceptions, its sentiments, emotions, and volitions, there are some

(among whom are Hartley and the author of the Analysis ) who think that the

whole of these are generated from simple ideas of sensation, by a chemistry

similar to that which we have just exemplified. These philosophers have

made out a great part of their case, but I am not satisfied that they haveestablished the whole of it. They have shown that there is such a thing as

mental chemistry; that the heterogeneous nature of a feeling A, considered in

relation to B and C, is no conclusive argument against its being generated

from B and C. Having proved this, they proceed to show, that where A is

found, B and C were, or may have been present, and why, therefore, they ask,

should not A have been generated from B and C? But even if this evidence

were carried to the highest degree of completeness which it admits of; if it

were shown (which hitherto it has not, in all cases, been) that certain groups

of associated ideas not only might have been, but actually were, present

whenever the more recondite mental feeling was experienced; this would

amount only to the Method of Agreement, and could not prove causation

until confirmed by the more conclusive evidence of the Method of

Difference. If the question be whether Belief is a mere case of close

association of ideas, it would be necessary to examine experimentally if it be

true that any ideas whatever, provided they are associated with the required

degree of closeness, give rise to belief. If the inquiry be into the origin of

moral feelings, the feeling for example of moral reprobation, it is necessary to

compare all the varieties of actions or states of mind which are ever morally

disapproved, and see whether in all these cases it can be shown, or reasonably

surmised, that the action or state of mind had become connected by

association, in the disapproving mind, with some particular class of hateful or

disgusting ideas; and the method employed is, thus far, that of Agreement.

But this is not enough. Supposing this proved, we must try further by the

Method of Difference, whether this particular kind of hateful or disgusting

ideas, when it becomes associated with an action previously indifferent, will

render that action a subject of moral disapproval. If this question can be

answered in the affirmative, it is shown to be a law of the human mind, that

an association of that particular description is the generating cause of moral

reprobation. That all this is the case has been rendered extremely probable,

but the experiments have not been tried with the degree of precision
                                                                        271
necessary for a complete and absolutely conclusive induction.

              It is further to be remembered, that even if all which this theory of

mental phenomena contends for could be proved, we should not be the more

enabled to resolve the laws of the more complex feelings into those of the

simpler ones. The generation of one class of mental phenomena from another,

whenever it can be made out, is a highly interesting fact in psychological

chemistry; but it no more supersedes the necessity of an experimental study