the price of what they buy has risen in the same ratio with their means of

paying for it: but it is an advantage to them in buying anything which has not

risen, and, still more, anything which has fallen. They, therefore, benefit as

consumers of cloth, not merely to the extent to which cloth has fallen, but

also to the extent to which other prices have risen. Suppose that this is one-

tenth. The same proportion of their [48 these] money-incomes as before, will

suffice to supply their other wants; and the remainder, being increased one-

tenth in amount, will enable them to purchase one-tenth more cloth than

before, even though cloth had not fallen: but it has fallen; so that they are

doubly gainers. They purchase the same quantity with less money, and have

more to expend upon their other wants.

              “In England, on the contrary, general money-prices have fallen.

Linen, however, has fallen more than the rest, having been lowered in price

by importation from a country where it was cheaper; whereas the others have

fallen only from the consequent efflux of money. Notwithstanding, therefore,

the general fall of money-prices, the English producers will be exactly as they

were in all other respects, while they will gain as purchasers of linen.

              “The greater the efflux of money required to restore the equilibrium,

the greater will be the gain of Germany, both by the fall of cloth and by the

rise of her general prices. The less the efflux of money requisite, the greater

will be the gain of England; because the price of linen will continue lower,

and her general prices will not be reduced so much. It must not, however, be

imagined that high money-prices are a good, and low money-prices an evil,

in themselves. But the higher the general money-prices in any country, the

Neater will be that country’s means of purchasing those commodities which,

being imported from abroad, are independent of the causes which keep prices

high at home.”

              In practice, the cloth and the linen would not, as here supposed, be at

the same price in England and in Germany: each would be dearer in money-

price in the country which imported than in that which produced it, by the

amount of the cost of carriage, together with the ordinary profit on the

importer’s capital for the average length of time which elapsed before the

commodity could be disposed of. But it does not follow that each country

pays the cost of carriage of the commodity it imports; for the addition of this

item to the price may operate as a greater check to demand on one side than

on the other; and the equation of international demand, and consequentequilibrium of payments, may not be maintained. Money would then flow out

of one country into the other, until, in the manner already illustrated, the

equilibrium was restored: and, when this was effected, one country would be

paying more than its own cost of carriage, and the other less.

        204
               Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, 3rd. ed. p. 143.

 

 

     Chapter 22 – Influence of the Currency on the Exchanges and on

                                    Foreign Trade

 

 

              1. In our inquiry into the laws of international trade, we commenced

with the principles which determine international exchanges and international

values on the hypothesis of barter. We next showed that the introduction of

money as a medium of exchange, makes no difference in the laws of

exchanges and of values between country and country, no more than between

individual and individual: since the precious metals, under the influence of

those same laws, distribute themselves in such proportions among the

different countries of the world, as to allow the very same exchanges to go

on, and at the same values, as would be the case under a system of barter. We

lastly considered how the value of money itself is affected, by those

alterations in the state of trade which arise from alterations either in the

demand and supply of commodities, or in their cost of production. It remains

to consider the alterations in the state of trade which originate not in

commodities but in money.

              Gold and silver may vary like other things, though they are not so

likely to vary as other things, in their cost of production. The demand for

them in foreign countries may also vary. It may increase, by augmented

employment of the metals for purposes of art and ornament, or because the

increase of production and of transactions has created a greater amount of

business to be done by the circulating medium. It may diminish, for the

opposite reasons; or from the extension of the economizing expedients by

which the use of metallic money is partially dispensed with. These changes

act upon the trade between other countries and the mining countries, and

upon the value of the precious metals, according to the general laws of the

value of imported commodities: which have been set forth in the previous

chapters with sufficient fulness.

              What I propose to examine in the present chapter, is not those

circumstances affecting money, which alter the permanent conditions of its

value; but the effects produced on international trade by casual or temporary

variations in the value of money, which have no connexion with any causesaffecting its permanent value. This is a subject of importance, on account of

its bearing upon the practical problem which has excited so much discussion

for sixty years past, the regulation of the currency.

              2. Let us suppose in any country a circulating medium purely

metallic, and a sudden casual increase made to it; for example, by bringing

into circulation hoards of treasure, which had been concealed in a previous

period of foreign invasion or internal disorder. The natural effect would be a

rise of prices. This would check exports, and encourage imports; the imports

would exceed the exports, the exchanges would become unfavourable, and

the newly acquired stock of money would diffuse itself over all countries

with which the supposed country carried on trade, and from them,

progressively, through all parts of the commercial world. The money which

thus overflowed would spread itself to an equal depth over all commercial

countries. For it would go on flowing until the exports and imports again

balanced one another: and this (as no change is supposed in the permanent

circumstances of international demand) could only be, when the money had

diffused itself so equally that prices had risen in the same ratio in all

countries, so that the alteration of price would be for all practical purposes

ineffective, and the exports and imports, though at a higher money valuation,

would be exactly the same as they were originally. This diminished value of

money throughout the world, (at least if the diminution was considerable)

would cause a suspension, or at least a diminution, of the annual supply from

the mines: since the metal would no longer command a value equivalent to its

highest cost of production. The annual waste would, therefore, not be fully

made up, and the usual causes of destruction would gradually reduce the

aggregate quantity of the precious metals to its former amount; after which

their production would recommence on its former scale. The discovery of the

treasure would thus produce only temporary effects; namely, a brief

disturbance of international trade until the treasure had disseminated itself

through the world, and then a temporary depression in the value of the metal,

below that which corresponds to the cost of producing or of obtaining it;

which depression would gradually be corrected, by a temporarily diminished

production in the producing countries, and importation in the importing

countries.

              The same effects which would thus arise from the discovery of a

treasure, accompany the process by which bank notes, or any of the othersubstitutes for money, take the place of the precious metals. Suppose that

England possessed a currency wholly metallic, of twenty millions sterling,

and that suddenly twenty millions of bank notes were sent into circulation. If

these were issued by bankers, they would be employed in loans, or in the

purchase of securities, and would therefore create a sudden fall in the rate of

interest, which would probably send a great part of the twenty millions of

gold out of the country as capital, to seek a higher rate of interest elsewhere,

before there had been time for any action on prices. But we will suppose that

the notes are not issued by bankers, or money-lenders of any kind, but by

manufacturers, in the payment of wages and purchase of materials, or by the

government in its ordinary expenses, so that the whole amount would be

rapidly carried into the markets for commodities. The following would be the

natural order of consequences. All prices would rise greatly. Exportation

would almost cease; importation would be prodigiously stimulated. A great

balance of payments would become due; the exchanges would turn against

England, to the full extent of the cost of exporting money; and the surplus

coin would pour itself rapidly forth, over the various countries of the world,

in the order of their proximity, geographically and commercially, to England.

The efflux would continue until the currencies of all countries had come to a

level; by which I do not mean, until money became of the same value

everywhere, but until the differences were only those which existed before,

and which corresponded to permanent differences in the cost of obtaining it.

When the rise of prices had extended itself in an equal degree to all countries,

exports and imports would everywhere revert to what they were at first,

would balance one another, and the exchanges would return to par. If such a

sum of money as twenty millions, when spread over the whole surface of the

commercial world, were sufficient to raise the general level in a perceptible

degree, the effect would be of no long duration. No alteration having

occurred in the general conditions under which the metals were procured,

either in the world at large or in any part of it, the reduced value would no

longer be remunerating, and the supply from the mines would cease partially
                                                            213
or wholly, until the twenty millions were absorbed; after which absorption,

the currencies of all countries would be, in quantity and in value, nearly at

their original level. I say nearly, for in strict accuracy there would be a slight

difference. A somewhat smaller annual supply of the precious metals would

now be required, there being in the world twenty millions less of metallic

money undergoing waste. The equilibrium of payments, consequently,between the mining countries and the rest of the world, would thenceforth

require that the mining countries should either export rather more of

something else, or import rather less of foreign commodities; which implies a

somewhat lower range of prices than previously in the mining countries, and

a somewhat higher in all others; a scantier currency in the former, and rather

fuller currencies in the latter. This effect, which would be too trifling to

require notice except for the illustration of a principle, is the only permanent

change which would be produced on international trade, or on the value or

quantity of the currency of any country.

              Effects of another kind, however, will have been produced. Twenty

millions which formerly existed in the unproductive form of metallic money,

have been converted into what is, or is capable of becoming, productive

capital. This gain is at first made by England at the expense of other

countries, who have taken her superfluity of this costly and unproductive

article off her hands, giving for it an equivalent value in other commodities.

By degree the loss is made up to those countries by diminished influx from

the mines, and finally the world has gained a virtual addition of twenty

millions to its productive resources. Adam Smith’s illustration, though so

well known, deserves for its extreme aptness to be once more repeated. He

compares the substitution of paper in the room of the precious metals, to the

construction of a highway through the air, by which the ground now occupied

by roads would become available for agriculture. As in that case a portion of

the soil, so in this a part of the accumulated wealth of the country, would be

relieved from a function in which it was only employed in rendering other

soils and capitals productive, and would itself become applicable to

production; the office it previously fulfilled being equally well discharged by

a medium which costs nothing.

              The value saved to the community by thus dispensing with metallic

money, is a clear gain to those who provide the substitute. They have the use

of twenty millions of circulating medium which have cost them only the

expense of an engraver’s plate. If they employ this accession to their fortunes

as productive capital, the produce of the country is increased, and the

community benefited, as much as by any other capital of equal amount.

Whether it is so employed or not, depends, in some degree, upon the mode of

issuing it. If issued by the government, and employed in paying off debt, it

would probably become productive capital. The government, however, mayprefer employing this extraordinary resource in its ordinary expenses; may

squander it uselessly, or make it a mere temporary substitute for taxation to

an equivalent amount; in which last case the amount is saved by the taxpayers

at large, who either add it to their capital or spend it as income. When paper

currency is supplied, as in our own country, by bankers and banking

companies, the amount is almost wholly turned into productive capital: for

the issuers, being at all times liable to be called upon to refund the value, are

under the strongest inducements not to squander it, and the only cases in

which it is not forthcoming are cases of fraud or mismanagement. A banker’s

profession being that of a moneylender, his issue of notes is a simple

extension of his ordinary occupation. He lends the amount to farmers,

manufacturers, or dealers, who employ it in their several businesses. So

employed, it yields, like any other capital, wages of labour and profits of

stock. The profit is shared between the banker, who receives interest, and a

succession of borrowers, mostly for short periods, who after paying the

interest, gain a profit in addition, or a convenience equivalent to profit. The

capital itself in the long run becomes entirely wages, and when replaced by

the sale of the produce, becomes wages again; thus affording a perpetual

fund, of the value of twenty millions, for the maintenance of productive

labour, and increasing the annual produce of the country by all that can be

produced through the means of a capital of that value. To this gain must be

added a further saving to the country, of the annual supply of the precious

metals necessary for repairing the wear and tear, and other waste, of a

metallic currency.

              The substitution, therefore, of paper for the precious metals, should

always be carried as far as is consistent with safety; no greater amount of

metallic currency being retained than is necessary to maintain, both in fact

and in public belief, the convertibility of the paper. A country with the

extensive commercial relations of England is liable to be suddenly called

upon for large foreign payments, sometimes in loans, or other investments of

capital abroad, sometimes as the price of some unusual importation of goods,

the most frequent case being that of large importations of food consequent on

a bad harvest. To meet such demands it is necessary that there should be,

either in circulation or in the coffers of the banks, coin or bullion to a very

considerable amount, and that this, when drawn out by any emergency,

should be allowed to return after the emergency is past. But since gold

wanted for exportation is almost invariably drawn from the reserves of thebanks, and is never likely to be taken directly from the circulation while the

banks remain solvent, the only advantage which can be obtained from

retaining partially a metallic currency for daily purposes is, that the banks

may occasionally replenish their reserves from it.

              3. When metallic money had been entirely superseded and expelled

from circulation, by the substitution of an equal amount of bank notes, any

attempt to keep a still further quantity of paper in circulation must, if the

notes are convertible, be a complete failure. The new issue would again set in

motion the same train of consequences by which the gold coin had already

been expelled. The metals would, as before, be required for exportation, and

would be for that purpose demanded from the banks, to the full extent of the

superfluous notes; which thus could not possibly be retained in circulation. If,

indeed, the notes were inconvertible, there would be no such obstacle to the

increase of their quantity. An inconvertible paper acts in the same way as a

convertible, while there remains any coin for it to supersede: the difference

begins to manifest itself when all the coin is driven from circulation (except

what may be retained for the convenience of small change), and the issues

still go on increasing. When the paper begins to exceed in quantity the

metallic currency which it superseded, prices of course rise; things which

were worth 5l. in metallic money, become worth 6l. in inconvertible paper, or

more, as the case may be. But this rise of price will not, as in the cases before

examined, stimulate import, and discourage export. The imports and exports

are determined by the metallic prices of things, not by the paper prices: and it

is only when the paper is exchangeable at pleasure for the metals, that paper

prices and metallic prices must correspond.

              Let us suppose that England is the country which has the depreciated

paper. Suppose that some English production could be bought, while the

currency was still metallic, for 5l., and sold in France for 5l. 10s., the

difference covering the expense and risk, and affording a profit to the

merchant. On account of the depreciation this commodity will now cost in

England 6l., and cannot be sold in France for more than 5l. 10s., and yet it

will be exported as before. Why? Because the 5l. 10s. which the exporter can

get for it in France, is not depreciated paper, but gold or silver. and since in

England bullion has risen, in the same proportion with other things-if the

merchant brings the gold or silver to England, he can sell his 5l. 10s. for 6l.

12s., and obtain as before 10 per cent for profit and expenses.              It thus appears, that a depreciation of the currency does not affect the

foreign trade of the country: this is carried on precisely as if the currency

maintained its value. But though the trade is not affected, the exchanges are.

When the imports and exports are in equilibrium, the exchange, in a metallic

currency, would be at par; a bill on France for the equivalent of five

sovereigns, would be worth five sovereigns. But five sovereigns, or the

quantity of gold contained in them, having come to be worth in England 6l., it

follows that a bill on France for 5l. will be worth 6l. When, therefore, the real

exchange is at par, there will be a nominal exchange against the country, of

as much per cent as the amount of the depreciation. If the currency is

depreciated 10, 15, or 20 per cent, then in whatever way the real exchange,

arising from the variations of international debts and credits, may vary, the

quoted exchange will always differ 10, 15, or 20 per cent from it. However

high this nominal premium may be, it has no tendency to send gold out of the

country, for the purpose of drawing a bill against it and profiting by the

premium; because the gold so sent must be procured, not from the banks and

at par, as in the case of a convertible currency, but in the market at an

advance of price equal to the premium. In such cases, instead of saying that

the exchange is unfavourable, it would be a more correct representation to

say that the par has altered, since there is now required a larger quantity of

English currency to be equivalent to the same quantity of foreign. The

exchanges, however, continue to be computed according to the metallic par.

The quoted exchanges, therefore, when there is a depreciated currency, are

compounded of two elements or factors; the real exchange, which follows the

variations of international payments, and the nominal exchange, which varies

with the depreciation of the currency, but which, while there is any

depreciation at all, must always be unfavourable. Since the amount of

depreciation is exactly measured by the degree in which the market price of

bullion exceeds the Mint valuation, we have a sure criterion to determine

what portion of the quoted exchange, being referable to depreciation, may be

struck off as nominal; the result so corrected expressing the real exchange.

              The same disturbance of the exchanges and of international trade,

which is produced by an increased issue of convertible bank notes, is in like

manner produced by those extensions of credit, which, as was so fully shown

in a preceding chapter, have the same effect on prices as an increase of the

currency. Whenever circumstances have given such an impulse to the spirit

of speculation as to occasion a great increase of purchases on credit, moneyprices rise, just as much as they would have risen if each person who so buys

on credit had bought with money. All the effects, therefore, must be similar.

As a consequence of high prices, exportation is checked and importation

stimulated; though in fact the increase of importation seldom waits for the

rise of prices which is the consequence of speculation, inasmuch as some of

the great articles of import are usually among the things in which speculative

overtrading first shows itself. There is, therefore, in such periods, usually a

great excess of imports over exports; and when the time comes at which these

must be paid for, the exchanges become unfavourable, and gold flows out of

the country. In what precise manner this efflux of gold takes effect on prices,

depends on circumstances of which we shall presently speak more fully; but

that its effect is to make them recoil downwards, is certain and evident. The

recoil, once begun, generally becomes a total rout, and the unusual extension

of credit is rapidly exchanged for an unusual contraction of it. Accordingly,

when credit has been imprudently stretched, and the speculative spirit carried

to excess, the turn of the exchanges, and consequent pressure on the banks to

obtain gold for exportation, are generally the proximate cause of the

catastrophe. But these phenomena, though a conspicuous accompaniment, are

no essential part, of the collapse of credit called a commercial crisis; which,
                          214
as we formerly showed, might happen to as great an extent, and is quite as

likely to happen, in a country, if any such there were, altogether destitute of

foreign trade.

        205
               I am here supposing a state of things in which gold and silver

mining are a permanent branch of industry, carried on under known

conditions; and not the present state of uncertainty, in which gold-gathering

is a game of chance, prosecuted (for the present) in the spirit of an adventure,

not in that of a regular industrial pursuit.

        206
               Supra, pp. 540–1.

 

 

                       Chapter 23 – Of the Rate of Interest

 

 

              1. The present seems the most proper place for discussing the

circumstances which determine the rate of interest. The interest of loans,

being really a question of exchange value, falls naturally into the present

division of our subject: and the two topics of Currency and Loans, though in

themselves distinct, are so intimately blended in the phenomena of what is

called the money market, that it is impossible to understand the one without

the other, and in many minds the two subjects are mixed up in the most

inextricable confusion.

                                    215
              In the preceding Book we defined the relation in which interest

stands to profit. We found that the gross profit of capital might be

distinguished into three parts, which are respectively the remuneration for

risk, for trouble, and for the capital itself, and may be termed insurance,

wages of superintendence, and interest. After making compensation for risk,

that is, after covering the average losses to which capital is exposed either by

the general circumstances of society or by the hazards of the particular

employment, there remains a surplus, which partly goes to repay the owner of

the capital for his abstinence, and partly the employer of it for his time and

trouble. How much goes to the one and how much to the other, is shown by

the amount of the remuneration which, when the two functions are separated,

the owner of capital can obtain from the employer for its use. This is

evidently a question of demand and supply. Nor have demand and supply any

different meaning or effect in this case from what they have in all others. The

rate of interest will be such as to equalize the demand for loans with the

supply of them. It will be such, that exactly as much as some people are

desirous to borrow at that rate, others shall be willing to lend. If there is more

offered than demanded, interest will fall; if more is demanded than offered, it

will rise; and in both cases, to the point at which the equation of supply and

demand is re-established.

              Both the demand and supply of loans fluctuate more incessantly than

any other demand or supply whatsoever. The fluctuations in other things

depend on a limited number of influencing circumstances; but the desire to

borrow, and the willingness to lend, are more or less influenced by everycircumstance which affects the state or prospects of industry or commerce,

either generally or in any of their branches. The rate of interest, therefore, on

good security, which alone we have here to consider (for interest in which

considerations of risk bear a part may swell to any amount) is seldom, in the

great centres of money transactions, precisely the same for two days together;

as is shown by the never-ceasing variations in the quoted prices of the funds

and other negotiable securities. Nevertheless, there must be, as in other cases

of value, some rate which (in the language of Adam Smith and Ricardo) may

be called the natural rate; some rate about which the market rate oscillates,

and to which it always tends to return. This rate partly depends on the amount

of accumulation going on in the hands of persons who cannot themselves

attend to the employment of their savings, and partly on the comparative taste

existing in the community for the active pursuits of industry, or for the

leisure, ease, and independence of an annuitant.

              2. To exclude casual fluctuations, we will suppose commerce to be

in a quiescent condition, no employment being unusually prosperous, and

none particularly distressed. In these circumstances, the more thriving

producers and traders have their capital fully employed, and many are able to

transact business to a considerably greater extent than they have capital for.

These are naturally borrowers: and the amount which they desire to borrow,

and can obtain credit for, constitutes the demand for loans on account of

productive employment. To these must be added the loans required by

Government, and by landowners, or other unproductive consumers who have

good security to give. This constitutes the mass of loans for which there is an

habitual demand.

              Now it is conceivable that there might exist, in the hands of persons

disinclined or disqualified for engaging personally in business, a mass of

capital equal to, and even exceeding, this demand. In that case there would be

an habitual excess of competition on the part of lenders, and the rate of

interest would bear a low proportion to the rate of profit. Interest would be

forced down to the point which would either tempt borrowers to take a

greater amount of loans than they had a reasonable expectation of being able

to employ in their business, or would so discourage a portion of the lenders,

as to make them either forbear to accumulate, or endeavour to increase their

income by engaging in business on their own account, and incurring the risks,

if not the labours, of industrial employment.              On the other hand, the capital owned by persons who prefer lending

it at interest, or whose avocations prevent them from personally

superintending its employment, may be short of the habitual demand for

loans. It may be in great part absorbed by the investments afforded by the

public debt and by mortgages, and the remainder may not be sufficient to

supply the wants of commerce. If so, the rate of interest will be raised so high

as in some way to re-establish the equilibrium. When there is only a small

difference between interest and profit, many borrowers may no longer be

willing to increase their responsibilities and involve their credit for so small a

remuneration: or some who would otherwise have engaged in business, may

prefer leisure, and become lenders instead of borrowers: or others, under the

inducement of high interest and easy investment for their capital, may retire

from business earlier, and with smaller fortunes, than they otherwise would

have done. Or, lastly, there is another process by which, in England and other

commercial countries, a large portion of the requisite supply of loans is

obtained. Instead of its being afforded by persons not in business, the

affording it may itself become a business. A portion of the capital employed

in trade may be supplied by a class of professional money lenders. These

money lenders, however, must have more than a mere interest; they must

have the ordinary rate of profit on their capital, risk and all other

circumstances being allowed for. But it can never answer to any one who

borrows for the purposes of his business, to pay a full profit for capital from

which he will only derive a full profit: and money-lending, as an

employment, for the regular supply of trade, cannot, therefore, be carried on

except by persons who, in addition to their own capital, can lend their credit,

or, in other words, the capital of other people: that is, bankers, and persons

(such as bill-brokers) who are virtually bankers, since they receive money in

deposit. A bank which lends its notes, lends capital which it borrows from the

community, and for which it pays no interest. A bank of deposit lends capital

which it collects from the community in small parcels; sometimes without

paying any interest, as is the case with the London private bankers; and if,

like the Scotch, the joint stock, and most of the country banks, it does pay

interest, it still pays much less than it receives; for the depositors, who in any

other way could mostly obtain for such small balances no interest worth

taking any trouble for, are glad to receive even a little. Having this subsidiary

resource, bankers are enabled to obtain, by lending at interest, the ordinary

rate of profit on their own capital. In any other manner, money-lending couldnot be carried on as a regular mode of business, except upon terms on which

none would consent to borrow but persons either counting on extraordinary

profits, or in urgent need: unproductive consumers who have exceeded their

means, or merchants in fear of bankruptcy. The disposable capital deposited

in banks; that represented by bank notes; the capital of bankers themselves,

and that which their credit in any way in which they use it, enables them to

dispose of; these, together with the funds belonging to those who, either from

necessity or preference, live upon the interest of their property, constitute the

general loan fund of the country: and the amount of this aggregate fund,

when set against the habitual demands of producers and dealers, and those of

the Government and of unproductive consumers, determines the permanent

or average rate of interest; which must always be such as to adjust these two
                          216
amounts to one another. But while the whole of this mass of lent capital

takes effect upon the permanent rate of interest, the fluctuations depend

almost entirely upon the portion which is in the hands of bankers; for it is that

portion almost exclusively, which, being lent for short times only, is

continually in the market seeking an investment. The capital of those who

live on the interest of their own fortunes, has generally sought and found

some fixed investment, such as the public funds, mortgages, or the bonds of

public companies, which investment, except under peculiar temptations or

necessities, is not changed.

              3. Fluctuations in the rate of interest arise from variations either in

the demand for loans; or in the supply. The supply is liable to variation,

though less so than the demand. The willingness to lend is greater than usual

at the commencement of a period of speculation, and much less than usual

during the revulsion which follows. In speculative times, money-lenders as

well as other people are inclined to extend their business by stretching their

credit; they lend more than usual (just as other classes of dealers and

producers employ more than usual) of capital which does not belong to them.

Accordingly, these are the times when the rate of interest is low; though for

this too (as we shall hereafter see) there are other causes. During the

revulsion, on the contrary, interest always rises inordinately, because, while

there is a most pressing need on the part of many persons to borrow, there is a

general disinclination to lend. This disinclination, when at its extreme point,

is called a panic. It occurs when a succession of unexpected failures has

created in the mercantile, and sometimes also in the non-mercantile public, a

general distrust in each other’s solvency; disposing every one not only torefuse fresh credit, except on very onerous terms, but to call in, if possible, all

credit which he has already given. Deposits are withdrawn from banks; notes

are returned on the issuers in exchange for specie; bankers raise their rate of

discount, and withhold their customary advances; merchants refuse to renew

mercantile bills. At such times the most calamitous consequences were

formerly experienced from the attempt of the law to prevent more than a

certain limited rate of interest from being given or taken. Persons who could

not borrow at five per cent, had to pay, not six or seven, but ten or fifteen per

cent, to compensate the lender for risking the penalties of the law: or had to

sell securities or goods for ready money at a still greater sacrifice.

              In the intervals between commercial crises, there is usually a

tendency in the rate of interest to a progressive decline, from the gradual

process of accumulation : which process, in the great commercial countries,

is sufficiently rapid to account for the almost periodical recurrence of these

fits of speculation; since, when a few years have elapsed without a crisis, and

no new and tempting channel for investment has been opened in the

meantime, there is always found to have occurred in those few years so large

an increase of capital seeking investment, as to have lowered considerably the

rate of interest, whether indicated by the prices of securities or by the rate of

discount on bills; and this diminution of interest tempts the possessor to incur

hazards in hopes of a more considerable return.

              The rate of interest is, at times, affected more or less permanently by

circumstances, though not of frequent, yet of occasional occurrence, which

tend to alter the proportion between the class of interest-receiving and that of

profit-receiving capitalists. Two causes of this description, operating in

contrary ways, have manifested themselves of late years, and are now

producing considerable effects in England. One is, the gold discoveries. The

masses of the precious metals which are constantly arriving from the gold

countries, are, it may safely be said, wholly added to the funds that supply the

loan market. So great an additional capital, not divided between the two

classes of capitalists, but aggregated bodily to the capital of the interest-

receiving class, disturbs the preexisting ratio between the two, and tends to

depress interest relatively to profit. Another circumstance of still more recent

date, but tending to the contrary effect, is the legalization of joint-stock

associations with limited liability. The shareholders in these associations,

now so rapidly multiplying, are drawn almost exclusively from the lendingclass; from those who either left their disposable funds in deposit, to be lent

out by bankers, or invested them in public or private securities, and received

the interest. To the extent of their shares in any of these companies (with the

single exception of banking companies) they have become traders on their

own capital; they have ceased to be lenders, and have even, in most cases,

passed over to the class of borrowers. Their subscriptions have been

abstracted from the funds which feed the loan market, and they themselves

have become competitors for a share of the remainder of those funds: of all

which, the natural effect is a rise of interest. And it would not be surprising if,

for a considerable time to come, the ordinary rate of interest in England

should bear a higher proportion to the common rate of mercantile profit, than
                                                                    217
it has borne at any time since the influx of new gold set in.

              The demand for loans varies much more largely than the supply, and

embraces longer cycles of years in its aberrations. A time of war, for

example, is a period of unusual drafts on the loan market. The Government,

at such times, generally incurs new loans, and as these usually succeed each

other rapidly as long as the war lasts, the general rate of interest is kept higher

in war than in peace, without reference to the rate of profit, and productive

industry is stinted of its usual supplies. During part of the last war with

France, the Government could not borrow under six per cent, and of course

all other borrowers had to pay at least as much. Nor does the influence of

these loans altogether cease when the Government ceases to contract others;

for those already contracted continue to afford an investment for a greatly

increased amount of the disposable capital of the country, which if the

national debt were paid off, would be added to the mass of capital seeking

investment, and (independently of temporary disturbance) could not but, to

some extent, permanently lower the rate of interest.

              The same effect on interest which is produced by Government loans

for war expenditure, is produced by the sudden opening of any new and

generally attractive mode of permanent investment. The only instance of the

kind in recent history on a scale comparable to that of the war loans, is the

absorption of capital in the construction of railways. This capital must have

been principally drawn from the deposits in banks, or from savings which

would have gone into deposit, and which were destined to be ultimately

employed in buying securities from persons who would have employed the

purchase money in discounts or other loans at interest: in either case, it was adraft on the general loan fund. It is, in fact, evident, that unless savings were

made expressly to be employed in railway adventure, the amount thus

employed must have been derived either from the actual capital of persons in

business, or from capital which would have been lent to persons in business.

In the first case, the subtraction, by crippling their means, obliges them to be

larger borrowers; in the second, it leaves less for them to borrow; in either

case it equally tends to raise the rate of interest.

              4. I have, thus far, considered loans, and the rate of interest, as a

matter which concerns capital in general, in direct opposition to the popular

notion, according to which it only concerns money. In loans, as in all other

money transactions, I have regarded the money which passes, only as the

medium, and commodities as the thing really transferred — the real subject

of the transaction. And this is, in the main, correct: because the purpose for

which, in the ordinary course of affairs, money is borrowed, is to acquire a

purchasing power over commodities. In an industrious and commercial

country, the ulterior intention commonly is, to employ the commodities as

capital: but even in the case of loans for unproductive consumption, as those

of spendthrifts, or of the Government, the amount borrowed is taken from a

previous accumulation, which would otherwise have been lent to carry on

productive industry; it is, therefore, so much subtracted from what may

correctly be called the amount of loanable capital.

              There is, however, a not unfrequent case, in which the purpose of the

borrower is different from what I have here supposed. He may borrow

money, neither to employ it as capital nor to spend it unproductively, but to

pay a previous debt. In this case, what he wants is not purchasing power, but

legal tender, or something which a creditor will accept as equivalent to it. His

need is specifically for money, not for commodities or capital. It is the

demand arising from this cause, which produces almost all the great and

sudden variations of the rate of interest. Such a demand forms one of the

earliest features of a commercial crisis. At such a period, many persons in

business who have contracted engagements, have been prevented by a change

of circumstances from obtaining in time the means on which they calculated

for fulfilling them. These means they must obtain at any sacrifice, or submit

to bankruptcy; and what they must have is money. Other capital, however

much of it they may possess, cannot answer the purpose unless money can

first be obtained for it; while, on the contrary, without any increase of thecapital of the country, a mere increase of circulating instruments of credit (be

they of as little worth for any other purpose as the box of one pound notes

discovered in the vaults of the Bank of England during the panic of 1825)

will effectually serve their turn if only they are allowed to make use of it. An

increased issue of notes, in the form of loans, is all that is required to satisfy

the demand, and put an end to the accompanying panic. But although, in this

case, it is not capital, or purchasing power, that the borrower needs, but

money as money, it is not only money that is transferred to him. The money

carries its purchasing power, with it wherever it goes; and money thrown into

the loan market really does, through its purchasing power, turn over an

increased portion of the capital of the country into the direction of loans.

Though money alone was wanted, capital passes; and it may still be said with

truth that it is by an addition to loanable capital that the rise of the rate of

interest is met and corrected.

              Independently of this, however, there is a real relation, which it is

indispensable to recognise, between loans and money. Loanable capital is all

of it in the form of money. Capital destined directly for production exists in

many forms; but capital destined for lending exists normally in that form

alone. Owing to this circumstance, we should naturally expect that among the

causes which affect more or less the rate of interest, would be found not only

causes which act through capital, but some causes which act, directly at least,

only through money.

              The rate of interest bears no necessary relation to the quantity or

value of the money in circulation. The permanent amount of the circulating

medium, whether great or small, affects only prices; not the rate of interest. A

depreciation of the currency, when it has become an accomplished fact,

affects the rate of interest in no manner whatever. It diminishes indeed the

power of money to buy commodities, but not the power of money to buy

money. If a hundred pounds will buy a perpetual annuity of four pounds a

year, a depreciation which makes the hundred pounds worth only half as

much as before, has precisely the same effect on the four pounds, and cannot

therefore alter the relation between the two. The greater or smaller number of

counters which must be used to express a given amount of real wealth, makes

no difference in the position or interests of lenders or borrowers, and

therefore makes no difference in the demand and supply of loans. There is the

same amount of real capital lent and borrowed; and if the capital in the handsof lenders is represented by a greater number of pounds sterling, the same

greater number of pounds sterling will, in consequence of the rise of prices,

be now required for the purposes to which the borrowers intend to apply

them.

              But though the greater or less quantity of money makes in itself no

difference in the rate of interest, a change from a less quantity to a greater, or

from a greater to a less, may and does make a difference in it. Suppose

money to be in process of depreciation by means of an inconvertible

currency, issued by a government in payment of its expenses. This fact will in

no way diminish the demand for real capital on loan; but it will diminish the

real capital loanable, because, this existing only in the form of money, the

increase of quantity depreciates it. Estimated in capital, the amount offered is

less, while the amount required is the same as before. Estimated in currency,

the amount offered is only the same as before, while the mount required,

owing to the rise of prices, is greater. Either way, the rate of interest must

rise. So that in this case increase of currency really affects the rate of interest,

but in the contrary way to that which is generally supposed; by raising, not by

lowering it.

              The reverse will happen as the effect of calling in, or diminishing in

quantity, a depreciated currency. The money in the hands of lenders, in

common with all other money, will be enhanced in value, that is, there vill be

a greater amount of real capital seeking borrowers; while the real capital

wanted by borrowers will be only the same as before, and the money mount

less: the rate of interest, therefore, will tend to fall.

              We thus see that depreciation, merely as such, while in process of

taking place, tends to raise the rate of interest: and the expectation of further

depreciation adds to this effect; because lenders who expect that their interest

will be paid and the principal perhaps redeemed, in a less valuable currency

than they lent, of course require a rate of interest sufficient to cover this

contingent loss.

              But this effect is more than counteracted by a contrary one, when the

additional money is thrown into circulation not by purchases but by loans. In

England, and in most other commercial countries, the paper currency in

common use, being a currency provided by bankers, is all issued in the way

of loans, except the part employed in the purchase of gold and silver. Thesame operation, therefore, which adds to the currency also adds to the loans:

the whole increase of currency in the first instance swells the loan market.

Considered as an addition to loans it tends to lower interest, more than in its

character of depreciation it tends to raise it; for the former effect depends on

the ratio which the new money bears to the money lent, while the latter

depends on its ratio to all the money in circulation. An increase, therefore, of

currency issued by banks, tends, while the process continues, to bring down

or to keep down the rate of interest. A similar effect is produced by the

increase of money arising from the gold discoveries; almost the whole of

which, as already noticed, is, when brought to Europe, added to the deposits

in banks, and consequently to the mount of loans; and when drawn out and

invested in securities, liberates an equivalent amount of other loanable

capital. The newly-arrived gold can only get itself invested, in any given state

of business, by lowering the rate of interest; and as long as the influx

continues, it cannot fail to keep interest lower than, all other circumstances

being supposed the same, would otherwise have been the case.

              As the introduction of additional gold and silver, which goes into the

loan market, tends to keep down the rate of interest, so any considerable

abstraction of them from the country invariably raises it; even when

occurring in the course of trade, as in paying for the extra importations

caused by a bad harvest, or for the high-priced cotton which, under the

influence of the American civil war, was imported from so many parts of the

world. The money required for these payments is taken in the first instance

from the deposits in the hands of bankers, and to that extent starves the fund

that supplies the loan market.

              The rate of interest, then, depends essentially and permanently on

the comparative amount of real capital offered and demanded in the way of

loan; but is subject to temporary disturbances of various sorts, from increase

and diminution of the circulating medium; which derangements are

somewhat intricate, and sometimes in direct opposition to first appearances.

All these distinctions are veiled over and confounded, by the unfortunate

misapplication of language which designates the rate of interest by a phrase

(“the value of money”) which properly expresses the purchasing power of the

circulating medium. The public, even mercantile, habitually fancies that ease

in the money market, that is, facility of borrowing at low interest, is

proportional to the quantity of money in circulation. Not only, therefore, arebank notes supposed to produce effects as currency, which they only produce

as loans, but attention is habitually diverted from effects similar in kind and

much greater in degree, when produced by an action on loans which does not

happen to be accompanied by any action on the currency.

              For example, in considering the effect produced by the proceedings

of banks in encouraging the excesses of speculation, an immense effect is

usually attributed to their issues of notes, but until of late hardly any attention

was paid to the management of their deposits; though nothing is more certain

than that their imprudent extensions of credit take place more frequently by

means of their deposits than of their issues. “There is no doubt,” says Mr.
      218
Tooke, “that banks, whether private or joint stock, may, if imprudently

conducted, minister to an undue extension of credit for the purpose of

speculations, whether in commodities, or in overtrading in exports or imports,

or in building or mining operations, and that they have so ministered not

unfrequently, and in some cases to an extent ruinous to themselves, and

without ultimate benefit to the parties to whose views their resources were

made subservient.” But, “supposing all the deposits received by a banker to

be in coin, is he not, just as much as the issuing banker, exposed to the

importunity of customers, whom it may be impolitic to refuse, for loans or

discounts, or to be tempted by a high interest? and may he not be induced to

encroach so much upon his deposits as to leave him, under not improbable

circumstances, unable to meet the demands of his depositors? In what

respect, indeed, would the case of a banker in a perfectly metallic circulation,

differ from that of a London banker at the present day? He is not a creator of

money, he cannot avail himself of his privilege as an issuer in aid of his other

business, and yet there have been lamentable instances of London bankers

issuing money in excess.”

              In the discussions, too, which have been for so many years carried

on respecting the operations of the Bank of England, and the effects produced

by those operations on the state of credit, though for nearly half a century

there never has been a commercial crisis which the Bank has not been

strenuously accused either of producing or of aggravating, it has been almost

universally assumed that the influence of its acts was felt only through the

amount of its notes in circulation, and that if it could be prevented from

exercising any discretion as to that one feature in its position, it would no

longer have any power liable to abuse. This at least is an error which, afterthe experience of the year 1847, we may hope has been committed for the last

time. During that year the hands of the bank were absolutely tied, in its

character of a bank of issue; but through its operations as a bank of deposit it

exercised as great an influence, or apparent influence, on the rate of interest

and the state of credit, as at any former period; it was exposed to as vehement

accusations of abusing that influence; and a crisis occurred, such as few that

preceded it had equalled, and none perhaps surpassed, in intensity.

              5. Before quitting the general subject of this chapter, I will make the

obvious remark, that the rate of interest determines the value and price of all

those saleable articles which are desired and bought, not for themselves, but

for the income which they are capable of yielding. The public funds, shares in

joint-stock companies, and all descriptions of securities, are at a high price in

proportion as the rate of interest is low. They are sold at the price which will

give the market rate of interest on the purchase money, with allowance for all

differences in the risk incurred, or in any circumstance of convenience.

Exchequer bills, for example, usually sell at a higher price than consols,

proportionally to the interest which they yield; because, though the security is

the same, yet the former being annually paid off at par unless renewed by the

holder, the purchaser (unless obliged to sell in a moment of general

emergency), is in no danger of losing anything by the resale, except the

premium he may have paid.

              The price of land, mines, and all other fixed sources of income,

depends in like manner on the rate of interest. Land usually sells at a higher

price, in proportion to the income afforded by it, than the public funds, not

only because it is thought, even in this country, to be somewhat more secure,

but because ideas of power and dirty are associated with its possession. But

these differences are constant, or nearly so; and in the variations of price,

land follows, caeteris paribus, the permanent (though of course not the daily)

variations of the rate of interest. When interest is low, land will naturally be

dear; when interest is high, land will be cheap. The last long war presented a

striking exception to this rule, since the price of land as well as the rate of

interest was then remarkably high. For this, however, there was a special

cause. The continuance of a very high average price of corn for many years,

had raised the rent of land even more than in proportion to the rise of interest

and fall of the selling price of fixed incomes. Had it not been for this

accident, chiefly dependent on the seasons, land must have sustained as greata depreciation in value as the public funds: which it probably would do, were

a similar war to break out hereafter; to the signal disappointment of those

landlords and farmers who, generalizing from the casual circumstances of a

remarkable period, so long persuaded themselves that a state of war was

peculiarly advantageous, and a state of peace disadvantageous, to what they

chose to call the interests of agriculture.

        207
               Supra, book ii, ch. xv. section 1.

        208
               I do not include in the general loan fund of the country the

capitals, large as they sometimes are, which are habitually employed in

speculatively buying and selling the public funds and other securities. It is

true that all who buy securities add, for the time, to the general amount of

money on loan, and lower pro tanto the rate of interest. But as the persons I

speak of buy only to sell again at a higher price, they are alternately in the

position of lenders and of borrowers: their operations raise the rate of interest

at one time, exactly as much as they lower it at another. Like all persons who

buy and sell on speculation, their function is to equalize, not to raise or lower,

the value of the commodity. When they speculate prudently, they temper the

fluctuations of price; when imprudently, they often aggravate them.

        209
               To the cause of augmentation in the rate of interest, mentioned in

the text, must be added another, forcibly insisted on by the author of an able

article in the Edinburgh Review for January, 1865; the increased and

increasing willingness to send capital abroad for investment. Owing to the

vastly augmented facilities of access to foreign countries, and the abundant

information incessantly received from them, foreign investments have ceased

to inspire the terror that belongs to the unknown; capital flows, without

misgiving, to any place which affords an expectation of high profit; and the

loan market of the whole commercial world is rapidly becoming one. The

rate of interest, therefore, in the part of the world out of which capital most

freely flows, cannot any longer remain so much inferior to the rate elsewhere,

as it has hitherto been.

        210
               Inquiry into the Currency Principle, ch. xiv.

 

 

     Chapter 24 – Of the Regulation of a Convertible Paper Currency

 

 

              1. The frequent recurrence during the last half century of the painful

series of phenomena called a commercial crisis, has directed much of the

attention both of economists and of practical politicians to the contriving of

expedients for averting, or at the least, mitigating its evils. And the habit

which grew up during the era of the Bank restriction, of ascribing all

alternations of high and low prices to the issues of banks, has caused

inquirers in general to fix their hopes of success in moderating those

vicissitudes, upon schemes for the regulation of bank notes. A scheme of this

nature, after having obtained the sanction of high authorities, so far

established itself in the public mind, as to be, with general approbation,

converted into a law, at the renewal of the Charter of the Bank of England in

1844: and the regulation is still in force, though with a great abatement of its

popularity, and with its prestige impaired by three temporary suspensions, on

the responsibility of the executive, the earliest little more than three years

after its enactment. It is proper that the merits of this plan for the relation of a

convertible bank note currency should be here considered. Before touching

upon the practical provisions of Sir Robert Peel’s Act of 1844, I shall briefly

state the nature, and examine the grounds, of the theory on which it is

founded.

              It is believed by many, that banks of issue universally, or the Bank

of England in particular, have a power of throwing their notes into

circulation, and thereby raising prices, arbitrarily; that this power is only

limited by the degree of moderation with which they think fit to exercise it;

that when they increase their issues beyond the usual mount, the rise of

prices, thus produced, generates a spirit of speculation in commodities, which

carries prices still higher, and ultimately causes a reaction and recoil,

mounting in extreme cases to a commercial crisis; and that every such crisis

which has occurred in this country within mercantile memory, has been either

originally produced by this cause, or greatly aggravated by it. To this extreme

length the currency theory has not been carried by the eminent political

economists who have given to a more moderate form of the same theory the

sanction of their names. But I have not overstated the extravagance of the

popular version; which is a remarkable instance to what lengths a favouritetheory will hurry, not the closet students whose competency in such questions

is often treated with so much contempt, but men of the world and of business,

who pique themselves on the practical knowledge which they have at least

had ample opportunities of acquiring. Not only has this fixed idea of the

currency as the prime agent in the fluctuations of price, made them shut their

eyes to the multitude of circumstances which, by influencing the expectation

of supply, are the true causes of almost all speculations, and of almost all

fluctuations of price; but in order to bring about the chronological agreement

required by their theory, between the variations of bank issues and those of

prices, they have played such fantastic tricks with facts and dates as would be

thought incredible, if an eminent practical authority ad not taken the trouble

of meeting them, on the ground of mere history, with an elaborate exposure. I

refer, as all conversant with the subject must be aware, to Mr Tooke’s History

of Prices. The result of Mr Tooke’s investigations was thus stated by himself,

in his examination before the Commons’ Committee on the Bank Charter

question in 1832; and the evidences of it stand recorded in his book: “In point

of fact, and historically, as far as my researches have gone, in every signal

instance of a rise or fall of prices, the rise or fall has preceded, and therefore

could not be the effect of, an enlargement or contraction of the bank

circulation.”

              The extravagance of the currency theorists, in attributing almost

every rise or fall of prices to an enlargement or contraction of the issues of

bank notes, has raised up, by reaction, a theory the extreme opposite of the

former, of which, in scientific discussion, the most prominent representatives

are Mr Tooke and Mr Fullarton. This counter-theory denies to bank notes, so

long as their convertibility is maintained, any power whatever of raising

prices, and to banks any power of increasing their circulation, except as a

consequence of, and in proportion to, an increase of the business to be done.

This last statement is supported by the unanimous assurances of all the

country bankers who have been examined before successive Parliamentary

Committees on the subject. They all bear testimony that (in the words of Mr
        219
Fullarton ) “the amount of their issues is exclusively regulated by the

extent of local dealings and expenditure in their respective districts,

fluctuating with the fluctuations of production and price, and that they neither

can increase their issues beyond the limits which the range of such dealings

and expenditure prescribes, without the certainty of having their notes

immediately returned to them, nor diminish them, but at an almost equalcertainty of the vacancy being filled up from some other source.” from these

premises it is argued by Mr Tooke and Mr Fullarton, that bank issues, since

they cannot be increased in amount unless there be an increased demand,

cannot possibly raise prices; cannot encourage speculation, nor occasion a

commercial crisis; and that the attempt to guard against that evil by an

artificial management of the issue of notes, is of no effect for the intended

purpose, and liable to produce other consequences extremely calamitous.

              2. As much of this doctrine as rests upon testimony, and not upon

inference, appears to me incontrovertible. I give complete credence to the

assertion of the country bankers, very clearly and correctly condensed into a

small compass in the sentence just quoted from Mr Fullarton. I am convinced

that they cannot possibly increase their issue of notes in any other

circumstances than those which are there stated. I believe, also, that the

theory, grounded by Mr Fullarton upon this fact, contains a large portion of

truth, and is far nearer to being the expression of the whole truth than any

form whatever of the currency theory.

              There are two states of the markets: one which may be termed the

quiescent state, the other the expectant, or speculative state. The first is that in

which there is nothing tending to engender in any considerable portion of the

mercantile public a desire to extend their operations. The producers produce

and the dealers purchase only their usual stocks, having no expectation of a

more than usually rapid vent for them. Each person transacts his ordinary

amount of business, and no more; or increases it only in correspondence with

the increase of his capital or connexion, or with the gradual growth of the

demand for his commodity, occasioned by the public prosperity. Not

meditating any unusual extension of their own operations, producers and

dealers do not need more than the usual accommodation from bankers and

other money lenders; and as it is only by extending their loans that bankers

increase their issues, none but a momentary augmentation of issues is in these

circumstances possible. If at a certain time of the year a portion of the public

have larger payments to make than at other times, or if an individual, under

some peculiar exigency, requires an extra advance, they may apply for more

bank notes, and obtain them; but the notes will no more remain in circulation,

than the extra quantity of Bank of England notes which are issued once in

every three months in payment of the dividends. The person to whom, after

being borrowed, the notes are paid away, has no extra payments to make, andno peculiar exigency, and he keeps them by him unused, or sends them into

deposit, or repays with them a previous advance made to him by some

banker: in any case he does not buy commodities with them, since by the

supposition there is nothing to induce him to lay in a larger stock of

commodities than before. Even if we suppose, as we may do, that bankers

create an artificial increase of the demand for loans by offering them below

the market rate of interest, the notes they issue will not remain in circulation;

for when the borrower, having completed the transaction for which he availed

himself of them, has paid them away, the creditor or dealer who receives

them, having no demand for the immediate use of an extra quantity of notes,

sends them into deposit. In this case, therefore, there can be no addition, at

the discretion of bankers, to the general circulating medium: any increase of

their issues either comes back to them, or remains idle in the hands of the

public, and no rise takes place in prices.

              But there is another state of the markets, strikingly contrasted with

the preceding, and to this state it is not so obvious that the theory of Mr

Tooke and Mr Fullarton is applicable; namely, when an impression prevails,

whether well founded or groundless, that the supply of one or more great

articles of commerce is likely to fall short of the ordinary consumption. In

such circumstances all persons connected with those commodities desire to

extend their operations. The producers or importers desire to produce or

import a larger quantity, speculators desire to lay in a stock in order to profit

by the expected rise of price, and holders of the commodity desire additional

advances to enable them to continue holding. All these classes are disposed to

make a more than ordinary use of their credit, and to this desire it is not

denied that bankers very often unduly administer. Effects of the same kind

may be produced by anything which, exciting more than usual hopes of

profit, gives increased briskness to business. for example, a sudden foreign

demand for commodities on a large scale, or the expectation of it; such as

occurred on the opening of Spanish America to English trade, and has

occurred on various occasions in the trade with the United States. Such

occurrences produce a tendency to a rise of price in exportable articles, and

generate speculations, sometimes of a reasonable, and (as long as a large

proportion of men in business prefer excitement to safety) frequently of an

irrational or immoderate character. In such cases there is a desire in the

mercantile classes, or in some portion of them, to employ their credit, in a

more than usual degree, as a power of purchasing. This is a state of businesswhich, when pushed to an extreme length, brings on the revulsion called a

commercial crisis; and it is a known fact that such periods of speculation

hardly ever pass off without having been attended, during some part of their

progress, by a considerable increase of bank notes.

              To this, however, it is replied by Mr Tooke and Mr Fullarton, that

the increase of the circulation always follows instead of preceding the rise of

prices, and is not its cause, but its effect. That in the first place, the

speculative purchases by which prices are raised, are not effected by bank

notes but by cheques, or still more commonly on a simple book credit: and

secondly, even if they were made with bank notes borrowed for that express

purpose from bankers, the notes, after being used for that purpose, would, if

not wanted for current transactions, be returned into deposit by the persons

receiving them. In this I fully concur, and I regard it as proved, both

scientifically and historically, that during the ascending period of speculation,

and as long as it is confined to transactions between dealers, the issues of

bank notes are seldom materially increased, nor contribute anything to the

speculative rise of prices. It seems to me, however, that this can no longer be

affirmed when speculation has proceeded so far as to reach the producers.

Speculative orders given by merchants to manufacturers induce them to

extend their operations, and to become applicants to bankers for increased

advances, which if made in notes, are not paid away to persons who return

them into deposit, but are partially expended in paying wages, and pass into

the various channels of retail trade, where they become directly effective in

producing a further rise of prices. I cannot but think that this employment of

bank notes must have been powerfully operative on prices at the time when

notes of one and two pounds value were permitted by law. Admitting,

however, that the prohibition of notes below five pounds has now rendered

this part of their operation comparatively insignificant by greatly limiting

their applicability to the payment of wages, there is another form of their

instrumentality which comes into play in the latter stages of speculation, and

which forms the principal argument of the more moderate supporters of the

currency theory. Though advances by bankers are seldom demanded for the

purpose of buying on speculation, they are largely demanded by unsuccessful

speculators for the purpose of holding on; and the competition of these

speculators for a share of the loanable capital, makes even those who have

not speculated, more dependent than before on bankers for the advances they

require. Between the ascending period of speculation and the revulsion, thereis an interval extending to weeks and sometimes months, of struggling

against a fall. The tide having shown signs of turning, the speculative holders

are unwilling to sell in a falling market, and in the meantime they require

funds to enable them to fulfil even their ordinary engagements. It is this stage

that is ordinarily marked by a considerable increase in the amount of the

banknote circulation. That such an increase does usually take place, is denied

by no one. And I think it must be admitted that this increase tends to prolong

the duration of the speculations; that it enables the speculative prices to be

kept up for some time after they would otherwise have collapsed; and

therefore prolongs and increases the drain of the precious metals for

exportation, which is a leading feature of this stage in the progress of a

commercial crisis: the continuance of which drain at last endangering the

power of the banks to fulfil their engagement of paying their notes on

demand, they are compelled to contract their credit more suddenly and

severely than would have been necessary if they had been prevented from

propping up speculation by increased advances, after the time when the recoil

had become inevitable.

              3. To prevent this retardation of the recoil, and ultimate aggravation

of its severity, is the object of the scheme for regulating the currency, of

which Lord Overstone, Mr Norman, and Colonel Torrens, were the first

promulgators, and which has, in a slightly modified form, been enacted into
  220
law.

              According to the scheme in its original purity, the issue of

promissory notes for circulation was to be confined to one body. In the form

adopted by Parliament, all existing issuers were permitted to retain this

privilege, but none were to be hereafter admitted to it, even in the place of

those who might discontinue their issues: and, for all except the Bank of

England, a maximum of issues was prescribed, on a scale intentionally low.

To the Bank of England no maximum was fixed for the aggregate amount of

its notes, but only for the portion issued on securities, or in other words, on

loan. These were never to exceed a certain limit, fixed in the first instance at
                    221
fourteen millions. All issues beyond that amount must be in exchange for

bullion; of which the Bank is bound to purchase, at a trifle below the Mint

valuation, any quantity which is offered to it, giving its notes in exchange. In

regard, therefore, to any issue of notes beyond the limit of fourteen millions,

the Bank is purely passive, having no function but the compulsory one ofgiving its notes for gold at 3l. 17s. 9d., and gold for its notes at 3l. 17s. 10

1/2d., whenever and by whomsoever it is called upon to do so.

              The object for which this mechanism is intended is, that the bank-

note currency may vary in its amount at the exact times, and in the exact

degree, in which a purely metallic currency would vary. And the precious

metals being the commodity that has hitherto approached nearest to that

invariability in all the circumstances influencing value, which fits a

commodity for being adopted as a medium of exchange, it seems to be

thought that the excellence of the Act of 1844 is fully made out, if under its

operation the issues conform in all their variations of quantity, and therefore,

as is inferred, of value, to the variations which would take place in a currency

wholly metallic.

              Now, all reasonable opponents of the Act, in common with its

supporters, acknowledge as an essential requisite of any substitute for the

precious metals, that it should conform exactly in its permanent value to a

metallic standard. And they say, that so long as it is convertible into specie on

demand, it does and must so conform. But when the value of a metallic or of

any other currency is spoken of, there are two points to be considered; the

permanent or average value, and the fluctuations. It is to the permanent value

of a metallic currency, that the value of a paper currency ought to conform.

But there is no obvious reason why it should be required to conform to the

fluctuations too. The only object of its conforming at all, is steadiness of

value; and with respect to fluctuations the sole thing desirable is that they

should be the smallest possible. Now the fluctuations in the value of the

currency are determined, not by its quantity, whether it consist of gold or of

paper, but by the expansions and contractions of credit. To discover,

therefore, what currency will conform the most nearly to the permanent value

of the precious metals, we must find under what currency the variations in

credit are least frequent and least extreme. Now, whether this object is best

attained by a metallic currency (and therefore by a paper currency exactly

conforming in quantity to it) is precisely the question to be decided. If it

should prove that a paper currency which follows all the fluctuations in

quantity of a metallic, leads to more violent revulsions of credit than one

which is not held to this rigid conformity, it will follow that the currency

which agrees most exactly in quantity with a metallic currency is not that

which adheres closest to its value; that is to say, its permanent value, withwhich alone agreement is desirable.

              Whether this is really the case or not we will now inquire. And first,

let us consider whether the Act effects the practical object chiefly relied on in

its defence by the more sober of its advocates, that of arresting speculative

extensions of credit at an earlier period, with a less drain of gold, and

consequently by a milder and more gradual process. I think it must be

admitted that to a certain degree it is successful in this object.

              I am aware of what may be urged, and reasonably urged, in

opposition to this opinion. It may be said, that when the time arrives at which

the banks are pressed for increased advances to enable speculators to fulfil

their engagements, a limitation of the issue of notes will not prevent the

banks, if otherwise willing, from making these advances; that they have still

their deposits as a source from which loans may be made beyond the point

which is consistent with prudence as bankers; and that even if they refused to

do so, the only effect would be, that the deposits themselves would be drawn

out to supply the wants of the depositors; which would be just as much an

addition to the bank notes and coin in the hands of the public, as if the notes

themselves were increased. This is true, and is a sufficient answer to those

who think that the advances of banks to prop up failing speculations are

objectionable chiefly as an increase of the currency. But the mode in which

they are really objectionable, is as an extension of credit. If, instead of

increasing their discounts, the banks allow their deposits to be drawn out,

there is the same increase of currency (for a short time at least), but there is

not an increase of loans, at the time when there ought to be a diminution. If

they do increase their discounts, not by means of notes, but at the expense of

the deposits alone, their deposits (properly so called) are definite and

exhaustible, while notes may be increased to any amount, or, after being

returned, may be re-issued without limit. It is true that a bank, if willing to

add indefinitely to its liabilities, has the power of making its nominal deposits

as unlimited a fund as its issues could be; it has only to make its advances in

a book credit, which is creating deposits out of its own liabilities, the money

for which it has made itself responsible becoming a deposit in its hands, to be

drawn against by cheques; and the cheques when drawn may be liquidated

(either at the same bank or at the clearing house) without the aid of notes, by

a mere transfer of credit from one account to another. I apprehend it is chiefly

in this way that undue extensions of credit, in periods of speculation, arecommonly made. But the banks are not likely to persist in this course when

the tide begins to turn. It is not when their deposits have already begun to

flow out, that they are likely to create deposit accounts which represent,

instead of funds placed in their hands, fresh liabilities of their own. But

experience proves that extension of credit, when in the form of notes, goes on

long after the recoil from over-speculation has commenced. When this mode

of resisting the revulsion is made impossible, and deposits and book credits

are left as the only sources from which undue advances can be made, the rate

of interest is not so often, or so long, prevented from rising, after the

difficulties consequent on excess of speculation begin to be felt. On the

contrary, the necessity which the banks feel of diminishing their advances to

maintain their solvency, when they find their deposits flowing out, and

cannot supply the vacant place by their own notes, accelerates the rise of the

rate of interest. Speculative holders are therefore obliged to submit earlier to

that loss by resale, which could not have been prevented from coming on

them at last: the recoil of prices and collapse of general credit take place

sooner.

              To appreciate the effects which this acceleration of the crisis has in

mitigating its intensity, let us advert more particularly to the nature and

effects of that leading feature in the period just preceding the collapse, the

drain of gold. A rise of prices produced by a speculative extension of credit,

even when bank notes have not been the instrument, is not the less effectual

(if it lasts long enough) in turning the exchanges: and when the exchanges

have turned from this cause, they can only be turned back, and the drain of

gold stopped, either by a fall of prices or by a rise of the rate of interest. A

fall of prices will stop it by removing the cause which produced it, and by

rendering goods a more advantageous remittance than gold, even for paying

debts already due. A rise of the rate of interest, and consequent fall of the

prices of securities, will accomplish the purpose still more rapidly, by

inducing foreigners, instead of taking away the gold which is due to them, to

leave it for investment within the country, and even send gold into the

country to take advantage of the increased rate of interest. Of this last mode

of stopping a drain of gold, the year 1847 afforded signal examples. But until

one of these two things takes place until either prices fall, or the rate of

interest rises-nothing can possibly arrest, or even moderate, the efflux of

gold. Now, neither will prices fall nor interest rise, so long as the unduly

expanded credit is upheld by the continued advances of bankers. It is wellknown that when a drain of gold has set in, even if bank notes have not

increased in quantity, it is upon them that the contraction first falls, the gold

wanted for exportation being always obtained from the Bank of England in

exchange for its notes. But under the system which preceded 1844, the Bank

of England, being subjected, in common with other banks, to the

importunities for fresh advances which are characteristic of such a time,

could, and often did, immediately re-issue the notes which had been returned

to it in exchange for bullion. It is a great error, certainly, to suppose that the

mischief of this re-issue chiefly consisted in preventing a contraction of the

currency. It was, however, quite as mischievous as it has ever been supposed

to be. As long as it lasted, the efflux of gold could not cease, since neither

would prices fall nor interest rise while these advances continued. Prices,

having risen without any increase of bank notes, could well have fallen

without a diminution of them; but having risen in consequence of an

extension of credit, they could not fall without a contraction of it. As long,

therefore, as the Bank of England and the other banks persevered in this

course, so long gold continued to flow out, until so little was left that the

Bank of England, being in danger of suspension of payments, was compelled

at last to contract its discounts so greatly and suddenly as to produce a much

more extreme variation in the rate of interest, inflict much greater loss and

distress on individuals, and destroy a much greater amount of the ordinary

credit of the country, than any real necessity required.

              I acknowledge, (and the experience of 1847 has proved to those who

overlooked it before,) that the mischief now described, may be wrought, and

in large measure, by the Bank of England, through its deposits alone. It may

continue or even increase its discounts and advances, when it ought to

contract them: with the ultimate effect of making the contraction much more

severe and sudden than necessary. I cannot but think, however, that banks

which commit this error with their deposits, would commit it still more if

they were at liberty to make increased loans with their issues as well as their

deposits. I am compelled to think that the being restricted from increasing

their issues, is a real impediment to their making those advances which arrest

the tide at its turn, and make it rush like a torrent afterwards.. and when the

Act is blamed for interposing obstacles at a time when not obstacles but

facilities are needed, it must in justice receive credit for interposing them

when they are an acknowledged benefit. In this particular, therefore, I think it

cannot be denied, that the new system is a real improvement upon the old.              4. But however this may be, it seems to me certain that these

advantages, whatever value may be put on them, are purchased by still

greater disadvantages. In the first place, a large extension of credit by

bankers, though most hurtful when, credit being already in an inflated state, it

can only serve to retard and aggravate the collapse, is most salutary when the

collapse has come, and when credit instead of being in excess is in distressing

deficiency, and increased advances by bankers, instead of being an addition

to the ordinary amount of floating credit, serve to replace a mass of other

credit which has been suddenly destroyed. Antecedently to 1844, if the Bank

of England occasionally aggravated the severity of a commercial revulsion by

rendering the collapse of credit more tardy and hence more violent than

necessary, it in return rendered invaluable services during the revulsion itself,

by coming forward with advances to support solvent firms, at a time when all

other paper and almost all mercantile credit had become comparatively

valueless. This service was eminently conspicuous in the crisis of 1825–6, the

severest probably ever experienced; during which the Bank increased what is

called its circulation by many millions, in advances to those mercantile firms

of whose ultimate solvency it felt no doubt; advances which if it had been

obliged to withhold, the severity of the crisis would have been still greater
                                                                        222
than it was. If the Bank, it is justly remarked by Mr Fullarton,  complies

with such applications, “it must comply with them by an issue of notes, for

notes constitute the only instrumentality through which the Bank is in the

practice of lending its credit. But those notes are not intended to circulate, nor

do they circulate. There is no more demand for circulation than there was

before. On the contrary, the rapid decline of prices which the case in

supposition presumes, would necessarily contract the demand for circulation.

The notes would either be returned to the Bank of England, as fast as they

were issued, in the shape of deposits, or would be locked up in the drawers of

the private London bankers, or distributed by them to their correspondents in

the country, or intercepted by other capitalists, who, during the fervour of the

previous excitement, had contracted liabilities which they might be

imperfectly prepared on the sudden to encounter. In such emergencies, every

man connected with business, who has been trading on other means than his

own, is placed on the defensive, and his whole object is to make himself as

strong as possible, an object which cannot be more effectually answered than

by keeping by him as large a reserve as possible in paper which the law has

made a legal tender. The notes themselves never find their way into theproduce market; and if they at all contribute to retard” (or, as I should rather

say, to moderate) “the fall of prices, it is not by promoting in the slightest

degree the effective demand for commodities, not by enabling consumers to

buy more largely for consumption, and so giving briskness to commerce, but

by a process exactly the reverse, by enabling the holders of commodities to

hold on, by obstructing traffic and repressing consumption.”

              The opportune relief thus afforded to credit, during the excessive

contraction which succeeds to an undue expansion, is consistent with the

principle of the new system; for an extraordinary contraction of credit, and

fall of prices, inevitably draw gold into the country, and the principle of the

system is that the bank-note currency shall be permitted, and even compelled,

to enlarge itself, in all cases in which a metallic currency would do the same.

But, what the principle of the law would encourage, its provisions in this

instance preclude, by not suffering the increased issues to take place until the

gold has actually arrived: which is never until the worst part of the crisis has

passed, and almost all the losses and failures attendant on it are

consummated. The machinery of the system withholds, until for many

purposes it comes too late, the very medicine which the theory of the system
                                          223
prescribes as the appropriate remedy.

              This function of banks in filling up the gap made in mercantile credit

by the consequences of undue speculation and its revulsion, is so entirely

indispensable, that if the Act of 1844 continues unrepealed, there can be no

difficulty in foreseeing that its provisions must be suspended, as they were in

1847, in every period of great commercial difficulty, as soon as the crisis has
                                224
really and completely set in. Were this all, there would be no absolute

inconsistency in maintaining the restriction as a means of preventing a crisis,

and relaxing it for the purpose of relieving one. But there is another

objection, of a still more radical and comprehensive character, to the new

system.

              Professing, in theory, to require that a paper currency shall vary in

its amount in exact conformity to the variations of a metallic currency, it

provides, in fact, that in every case of an efflux of gold, a corresponding

diminution shall take place in the quantity of bank notes; in other words, that

every exportation of the precious metals shall be virtually drawn from the

circulation; it being assumed that this would be the case if the currency were

wholly metallic. This theory, and these practical arrangements, are adapted tothe case in which the drain of gold originates in a rise of prices produced by

an undue expansion of currency or credit; but they are adapted to no case

beside.

              When the efflux of gold is the last stage of a series of effects arising

from an increase of the currency, or from an expansion of credit tantamount

in its effect on prices to an increase of currency, it is in that case a fair

assumption that in a purely metallic system the gold exported would be

drawn from the currency itself; because such a drain, being in its nature

unlimited, will necessarily continue as long as currency and credit are

undiminished. But an exportation of the precious metis often arises from no

causes affecting currency or credit, but simply from an unusual extension of

foreign payments, arising either from the state of the markets for

commodities, or from some circumstance not commercial. In this class of

causes, four, of powerful operation, are included, of each of which the last

fifty years of English history afford repeated instances. The first is that of an

extraordinary foreign expenditure by government, either political or military.

as in the revolutionary war, and, as long as it lasted, during the Crimean war.

The second is the case of a large exportation of capital for foreign

investment; such as the loans and mining operations which partly contributed

to the crisis of 1825, and the American speculations which were the principal

cause of the crisis of 1839. The third is a failure of crops in the countries

which supply the raw material of important manufactures; such as the cotton

failure in America, which compelled England, in 1847, to incur unusual

liabilities for the purchase of that commodity at an advanced price. The

fourth is a bad harvest, and a great consequent importation of food; of which

the years 1846 and 1847 presented an example surpassing all antecedent

experience.

              In none of these cases, if the currency were metallic, would the gold

or silver exported for the purposes in question be necessarily, or even

probably, drawn wholly from the circulation. It would be drawn from the

hoards, which under a metallic currency always exist to a very large amount;

in uncivilized countries, in the hands of all who can afford it; in civilized

countries chiefly in the form of bankers’ reserves. Mr Tooke, in his “Inquiry

into the Currency Principle,” bears testimony to this fact; but it is to Mr

Fullarton that the public are indebted for the clearest and most satisfactory

elucidation of it. As I am not aware that this part of the theory of currency hasbeen set forth by any other writer with anything like the same degree of

completeness, I shall quote somewhat largely from this able production.

              “No person who has ever resided in an Asiatic country, where

hoarding is carried on to a far larger extent in proportion to the existing stock

of wealth, and where the practice has become much more deeply engrafted in

the habits of the people, by traditionary apprehensions of insecurity and the

difficulty of finding safe and remunerative investments, than in any European

community — no person who has had personal experience of this state of

society, can be at a loss to recollect innumerable instances of large metallic

treasures extracted in times of pecuniary difficulty from the coffers of

individuals by the temptation of a high rate of interest, and brought in aid of

the public necessities, nor, on the other hand, of the facility with which those

treasures have been absorbed again, when the inducements which had drawn

them into light were no longer in operation. In countries more advanced in

civilization and wealth than the Asiatic principalities, and where no man is in

fear of attracting the cupidity of power by an external display of riches, but

where the interchange of commodities is still almost universally conducted

through the medium of a metric circulation, as is the case with most of the

commercial countries on the Continent of Europe, the motives for amassing

the precious metals may be less powerful than in the majority of Asiatic

principalities; but the ability to accumulate being more widely extended, the

absolute quantity amassed will be found probably to bear a considerably
                                        225
larger proportion to the population. In those states which lie exposed to

hostile invasion, or whose social condition is unsettled and menacing, the

motive indeed must still be very strong; and in a nation carrying on an

extensive commerce, both foreign and internal, without any considerable aid

from any of the banking substitutes for money, the reserves of gold and silver

indispensably required to secure the regularity of payments, must of

themselves engross a share of the circulating coin which it would not be easy

to estimate.

              “In this country, where the banking system has been carried to an

extent and perfection unknown in any other part of Europe, and may be said

to have entirely superseded the use of coin, except for retail dealings and the

purposes of foreign commerce, the incentives to private hoarding exist no

longer, and the hoards have all been transferred to the banks, or rather, I

should say, to the Bank of England. But in France, where the bank-notecirculation is still comparatively limited, the quantity of gold l and silver coin

in existence I find now currently estimated, on what are described as the

latest authorities, at the enormous sum of 120 millions sterling; nor is the

estimate at all at variance with the reasonable probabilities of the case. Of this

vast treasure there is every reason to presume that a very large proportion,

probably by much the greater part, is absorbed in the hoards. If you present

for payment a bill for a thousand francs to a french banker, he brings you the

silver in a sealed bag from his strong room. And not the banker only, but

every merchant and trader, according to his means, is under the necessity of

keeping by him a stock of cash sufficient not only for his ordinary

disbursements, but to meet any unexpected demands. That the quantity of

specie accumulated in these innumerable depots, not in France only, but all

over the Continent, where banking institutions are still either entirely wanting

or very imperfectly organized, is not merely immense in itself, but admits of

being largely drawn upon, and transferred even in vast masses from one

country to another, with very little, if any, effect on prices, or other material

derangements, we have had some remarkable proofs: “among others, “the

signal success which attended the simultaneous efforts of some of the

principal European powers (Russia, Austria, Prussia, Sweden, and Denmark)

to replenish their treasuries, and to replace with coin a considerable portion of

the depreciated paper which the necessities of the war had forced upon them,

and this at the very time when the available stock of the precious metals over

the world had been reduced by the exertions of England to recover her

metallic currency..... There can be no doubt that these combined operations

were on a scale of very extraordinary magnitude, that they were

accomplished without any sensible injury to commerce or public prosperity,

or any other effect than some temporary derangement of the exchanges, and

that the private hoards of treasure accumulated throughout Europe during the

war must have been the principal source from which all this gold and silver

was collected. And no person, I think, can fairly contemplate the vast

superflux of metallic wealth thus proved to be at all times in existence, and,

though in a dormant and inert state, always ready to spring into activity on

the first indication of a sufficiently intense demand, without feeling

themselves compelled to admit the possibility of the mines being even shut

up for years together, and the production of the metals altogether suspended,

while there might be scarcely a perceptible alteration in the exchangeable
                      226
value of the metal.”               Applying this to the currency doctrine and its advocates, “one might
                                227
imagine,” says Mr Fullarton, “that they supposed the gold which is drained

off for exportation from a country using a currency exclusively metallic, to be

collected by driblets at the fairs and markets, or from the tills of the grocers

and mercers. They never even allude to the existence of such a thing as a

great hoard of the metals, though upon the action of the hoards depends the

whole economy of international payments between specie-circulating

communities, while any operation of the money collected in hoards upon

prices must, even according to the currency hypothesis, be wholly

impossible. We know from experience what enormous payments in gold and

silver specie-circulating countries are capable, at times, of making, without

the least disturbance of their internal prosperity; and whence is it supposed

that these payments come, but from their hoards? let us think how the money

market of a country transacting all its exchanges through the medium of the

precious metals only, would be likely to be affected by the necessity of

making a foreign payment of several millions. Of course the necessity could

only be satisfied by a transmission of capital; and would not the competition

for the possession of capital for transmission which the occasion would call

forth, necessarily raise the market rate of interest? If the payment was to be

made by the government, would not the government, in all probability, have

to open a new loan on terms more than usually favourable to the lender?” If

made by merchants, would it not be drawn either from the deposits in banks,

or from the reserves which merchants keep by them in default of banks, or

would it not oblige them to obtain the necessary amount of specie by going

into the money market as borrowers? “And would not all this inevitably act

upon the hoards, and draw forth into activity a portion of the gold and silver

which the money-dealers had been accumulating, and some of them with the

express view of watching such opportunities for turning their treasures to

advantage?....

              “To come to the present time, the balance of payments with nearly

all Europe has for about four years past been in favour of this country, and

gold has been pouring in till the influx amounts to the unheard-of sum of

about fourteen millions sterling. Yet in all this time, has any one heard a

complaint of any serious suffering inflicted on the people of the Continent?

Have prices there been greatly depressed beyond their range in this country?

Have wages fallen, Or have merchants been extensively ruined by the

universal depreciation of their stock? There has occurred nothing of the kind.The tenor of commercial and monetary affairs has been everywhere even and

tranquil; and in France more particularly, an improving revenue and extended

commerce bear testimony to the continued progress of internal prosperity. It

may be doubted, indeed, if this great efflux of gold has withdrawn from that

portion of the metallic wealth of the nation which really circulates, a single

napoleon. And it has been equally obvious, from the undisturbed state of

credit, that not only has the supply of specie indispensable for the conduct of

business in the retail market been all the while uninterrupted, but that the

hoards have continued to furnish every facility requisite for the regularity of

mercantile payments. It is of the very essence of the metallic system, that the

hoards, in all cases of probable occurrence, should be equal to both objects;

that they should, in the first place, supply the bullion demanded for

exportation, and in the next place, should keep up the home circulation to its

legitimate complement. Every man trading under that system, who, in the

corse of his business, may have frequent occasion to remit large sums in

specie to foreign countries, must either keep by him a sufficient treasure of

his own or must have the means of borrowing enough from his neighbours,

not only to make up when wanted the amount of his remittances, but to

enable him, moreover, to carry on his ordinary transactions at home without

interruption.”

              In a country in which credit is carried to so great an extent as in

England, one great reserve, in a single establishment, the Bank of England,

supplies the place, as far as the precious metals are concerned, of the

multitudinous reserves of other countries. The theoretical principle, therefore,

of the currency doctrine would require, that all those drains of the metal,

which, if the currency were purely metallic, would be taken from the hoards,

should be allowed to operate freely upon the reserve in the coffers of the

Bank of England, without any attempt to stop it either by a diminution of the

currency or by a contraction of credit. Nor to this would there be any well-

grounded objection, unless the drain were so great as to threaten the

exhaustion of the reserve, and a consequent stoppage of payments; a danger

against which it is possible to take adequate precautions, because in the cases

which we are considering, the drain is for foreign payments of definite

amount, and stops of itself as soon as these are effected. And in all systems it

is admitted that the habitual reserve of the Bank should exceed the utmost

amount to which experience warrants the belief that such a drain may extend;

which extreme limit Mr Fullarton affirms to be seven millions, but Mr Tookerecommends an average reserve of ten, and in his last publication, of twelve

millions. Under these circumstances, the habitual reserve, which would never

be employed in discounts, but kept to be paid out exclusively in exchange for

cheques or bank notes, would be sufficient for a crisis of this description;

which therefore would pass off without having its difficulties increased by a

contraction either of credit or of the circulation. But this, the most

advantageous denouement that the case admits of, and not only consistent

with but required by the professed principle of the system, the panegyrists of

the system claim for it as a great merit that it prevents. They boast, that on the

first appearance of a drain for exportation-whatever may be its cause, and

whether, under a metallic currency, it would involve a contraction of credit or

not — the Bank is at once obliged to curtail its advances. And this, be it

remembered, when there has been no speculative rise of prices which it is

indispensable to correct, no unusual extension of credit requiring contraction;

but the demand for gold is solely occasioned by foreign payments on account

of government, or large corn importations consequent on a bad harvest.

              Even supposing that the reserve is insufficient to meet the foreign

payments, and that the means wherewith to make them have to be taken from

the loanable capital of the country, the consequence of which is a rise of the

rate of interest; in such circumstances some pressure on the money market is

unavoidable, but that pressure is much increased in severity by the separation

of the banking from the issue department. The case is generally stated as if

the Act only operated in one way, namely, by preventing the Bank, when it

has parted with (say) three millions of bullion in exchange for three millions

of its notes, from again lending those notes, in discounts or other advances.

But the Act really does much more than this. It is well known, that the first

operation of a drain is always on the banking department. The bank deposits

constitute the bulk of the unemployed and disposable capital of the country;

and capital wanted for foreign payments is almost always obtained mainly by

drawing out deposits. Supposing three millions to be the amount wanted,

three millions of notes are drawn from the banking department (either

directly or through the private bankers, who keep the bulk of their reserves

with the Bank of England), and the three millions of notes, thus obtained, are

presented at the Issue Department, and exchanged against gold for

exportation. Thus a drain upon the country at large of only three millions, is a

drain upon the Bank virtually of six millions. The deposits have lost three

millions, and the reserve of the Issue Department has lost an equal amount.As the two departments, so long as the Act remains in operation, cannot even

in the utmost extremity help one another, each must take its separate

precautions for its own safety. Whatever measures, therefore, on the part of

the Bank, would have been required under the old system by a drain of six

millions, are now rendered necessary by a drain only of three. The Issue

Department protects itself in the manner prescribed by the Act, by not re-

issuing the three millions of notes which have been returned to it. But the

Banking Department must take measures to replenish its reserve, which has

been reduced by three millions. Its liabilities having also decreased three

millions, by the loss of that amount of deposits, the reserve, on the ordinary

banking principle of a third of the liabilities, will bear a reduction of one

million. But the other two millions it must procure by letting that amount of

advances out, and not renewing them. Not only must it raise its rate of

interest, but it must effect, by whatever means, a diminution of two millions

in the total amount of its discounts: or it must sell securities to an equal

amount. This violent action on the money market for the purpose of

replenishing the Banking reserve, is wholly occasioned by the Act of 1844. If

the restrictions of that Act did not exist, the Bank, instead of contracting its

discounts, would simply transfer two millions, either in gold or in notes, from

the Issue to the Banking Department; not in order to lend them to the public,

but to secure the solvency of the Banking Department in the event of further

unexpected demands by the depositors. And unless the drain continued, and

reached so great an amount as to seem likely to exceed the whole of the gold

in the reserves of both departments, the Bank would be under no necessity,

while the pressure lasted, of withholding from commerce its accustomed

amount of accommodation, at a rate of interest corresponding to the increased
        228
demand.

              I am aware it will be said that by allowing drains of this character to

operate freely upon the Bank reserve until they cease of themselves, a

contraction of the currency and of credit would not be prevented, but only

postponed; since if a limitation of issues were not resorted to for the purpose

of checking the drain in its commencement, the same or a still greater

limitation must take place afterwards, in order, by acting on prices, to bring

back this large quantity of gold, for the indispensable purpose of replenishing

the Bank reserve. But in this argument several things are overlooked. In the

first place, the gold might be brought back, not by a fall of prices, but by the

much more rapid and convenient medium of a rise of the rate of interest,involving no fall of any prices except the price of securities. Either English

securities would be bought on account of foreigners, or foreign securities

held in England would be sent abroad for sale, both which operations took

place largely during the mercantile difficulties of 1847, and not only checked

the efflux of gold, but turned the tide and brought the metal back. It was not,

therefore, brought back by a contraction of the currency, though in this case it

certainly was so by a contraction of loans. But even this is not always

indispensable for in the second place, it is not necessary that the gold should

return with the same suddenness with which it went out. A great portion

would probably return in the ordinary way of commerce, in payment for

exported commodities. The extra gains made by dealers and producers in

foreign countries through the extra payments they receive from this country,

are very likely to be partly expended in increased purchases of English

commodities, either for consumption or on speculation, though the effect may

not manifest itself with sufficient rapidity to enable the transmission of gold

to be dispensed with in the first instance. These extra purchases would turn

the balance of payments in favour of the country, and gradually restore a

portion of the exported gold; and the remainder would probably be brought

back, without any considerable rise of the rate of interest in England, by the

fall of it in foreign countries, occasioned by the addition of some millions of

gold to the loanable capital of those countries. Indeed, in the state of things

consequent on the gold discoveries, when the enormous quantity of gold

annually produced in Australia, and much of that from California, is

distributed to other countries through England, and a month seldom passes

without a large arrival, the Bank reserves can replenish themselves without

any re-importation of the gold previously carried off by a drain. All that is

needful is an intermission, and a very brief intermission is sufficient, of the

exportation.

              For these reasons it appears to me, that notwithstanding the

beneficial operation of the Act of 1844 in the first stages of one kind of

commercial crisis (that produced by over-speculation), it on the whole

materially aggravates the severity of commercial revulsions. And not only are

contractions of credit made more severe by the Act, they are also made

greatly more frequent. “Suppose,” says Mr George Walker, in a clear,

impartial, and conclusive series of papers in the Aberdeen Herald, forming

one of the best existing discussions of the present question-“suppose that, of

eighteen millions of gold, ten are in the issue department and eight are in thebanking department. The result is the same as under a metric currency with

only eight millions in reserve, instead of eighteen...... The effect of the Bank

Act is, that the proceedings of the Bank under a drain are not determined by

the amount of gold within its vaults, but are, or ought to be, determined by

the portion of it belonging to the banking department. With the whole of the

gold at its disposal, it may find it unnecessary to interfere with credit, or force

down prices, if a drain leave a fair reserve behind. With only the banking

reserve at its disposal, it must, from the narrow margin it has to operate on,

meet all drains by counteractives more or less strong, to the injury of the

commercial world; and if it fail to do so, as it may fail, the consequence is

destruction. Hence the extraordinary and frequent variations of the rate of

interest under the Bank Act. Since 1847; when the eyes of the Bank were

opened to its true position, it has felt it necessary, as a precautionary measure,

that every variation in the reserve should be accompanied by an iteration in

the rate of interest.” To make the Act innocuous, therefore, it would be

necessary that the Bank, in addition to the whole of the gold in the Issue

Department, should retain as great a reserve in gold or notes in the Banking

Department alone, as would suffice under the old system for the security both

of the issues and of the deposits.

              5. There remain two questions respecting a bank-note currency,

which have also been a subject of considerable discussion of late years:

whether the privilege of providing it should be confined to a single

establishment, such as the Bank of England, or a plurality of issuers should

be allowed; and in the latter case, whether any peculiar precautions are

requisite or advisable, to protect the holders of notes against losses

occasioned by the insolvency of the issuers.

              The course of the preceding speculations has led us to attach so

much less of peculiar importance to bank notes, as compared with other

forms of credit, than accords with the notions generally current, that

questions respecting the regulation of so very small a part of the general mass

of credit, cannot appear to us of such momentous import as they are

sometimes considered. Bank notes, however, have so far a real peculiarity,

that they are the only form of credit sufficiently convenient for all the

purposes of circulation, to be able entirely to supersede the use of metallic

money for internal purposes. Though the extension of the use of cheques has

a tendency more and more to diminish the number of bank notes, as it wouldthat of the sovereigns or other coins which would take their place if they were

abolished; there is sure, for a long time to come, to be a considerable supply

of them, wherever the necessary degree of commercial confidence exists, and

their free use is permitted. The exclusive privilege, therefore, of issuing them,

if reserved to the Government or to some one body, is a source of great

pecuniary gain. That this gain should be obtained for the nation at large is

both practicable and desirable: and if the management of a bank-note

currency ought to be so completely mechanical, so entirely a thing of fixed

rule, as it is made by the Act of 1844, there seems no reason why this

mechanism should be worked for the profit of any private issuer, rather than

for the public treasury. If, however, a plan be preferred which leaves the

variations in the amount of issues in any degree whatever to the discretion of

the issuers, it is not desirable that to the ever-growing attributions of the

Government, so delicate a function should be superadded; and that the

attention of the heads of the state should be diverted from larger objects, by

their being besieged with the applications, and made a mark for all the

attacks, which are never spared to those deemed to be responsible for any

acts, however minute, connected with the regulation of the currency. It would

be better that treasury notes, exchangeable for gold on demand, should be

issued to a fixed amount, not exceeding the minimum of a bank-note

currency; the remainder of the notes which may be required being left to be

supplied either by one or by a number of private banking establishments. Or

an establishment like the Bank of England might supply the whole country,

on condition of lending fifteen or twenty millions of its notes to the

government without interest; which would give the same pecuniary

advantage to the state as if it issued that number of its own notes.

              The reason ordinarily alleged in condemnation of the system of

plurality of issuers which existed in England before the Act of 1844, and

under certain limitations still subsists, is that the competition of these

different issuers induces them to increase the amount of their notes to an

injurious extent. But we have seen that the power which bankers have of

augmenting their issues, and the degree of mischief which they can produce

by it, are quite trifling compared with the current over-estimate. As remarked
                  229
by Mr Fullarton,  the extraordinary increase of banking competition

occasioned by the establishment of the joint-stock banks, a competition often

of the most reckless kind, has proved utterly powerless to enlarge the

aggregate mass of the bank-note circulation; that aggregate circulationhaving, on the contrary, actually decreased. In the absence of any special case

for an exception to freedom of industry, the general rule ought to prevail. It

appears desirable, however, to maintain one great establishment like the Bank

of England, distinguished from other banks of issue in this, that it alone is

required to pay in gold, the others being at liberty to pay their notes with

notes of the central establishment. The object of this is that there may be one

body, responsible for maintaining a reserve of the precious metals sufficient

to meet any drain that can reasonably be expected to take place. By

disseminating this responsibility among a number of banks, it is prevented

from operating efficaciously upon any. or if it be still enforced against one,

the reserves of the metals retained by all the others are capital kept idle in

pure waste, which may be dispensed with by allowing them at their option to

pay in Bank of England notes.

              6. The question remains whether, in case of a plurality of issuers,

any peculiar precautions are needed to protect the holders of notes from the

consequences of failure of payment. Before 1826, the insolvency of banks of

issue was a frequent and very serious evil, often spreading distress through a

whole neighbourhood, and at one blow depriving provident industry of the

results of long and painful saving. This was one of the chief reasons which

induced Parliament, in that year, to prohibit the issue of bank notes of a

denomination below five pounds, that the labouring classes at least might be

as little as possible exposed to participate in this suffering. As an additional

safeguard, it has been suggested to give the holders of notes a priority over

other creditors, or to require bankers to deposit stock or other public

securities as a pledge for the whole amount of their issues. The insecurity of

the former bank-note currency of England was partly the work of the law,

which, in order to give a qualified monopoly of banking business to the Bank

of England, had actually made the formation of safe banking establishments a

punishable offence, by prohibiting the existence of any banks, in town or

country, whether of issue or deposit, with a number of partners exceeding six.

This truly characteristic specimen of the old system of monopoly and

restriction vas done away with in 1826, both as to issues and deposits,

everywhere but in a district of sixty-five miles radius round London, and in

1833 in that district also, as far as relates to deposits. It was hoped that the

numerous joint-stock banks since established would have furnished a more

trustworthy currency, and that under their influence the banking system of

England would have been almost as secure to the public as that of Scotland(where banking was always free) has been for two centuries past. But the

almost incredible instances of reckless and fraudulent mismanagement which

these institutions have of late afforded (though in some of the most notorious

cases the delinquent establishments have not been banks of issue), have

shown only too clearly that, south of the Tweed at least, the joint-stock

principle applied to banking is not the adequate safeguard it was so

confidently supposed to be: and it is difficult now to resist the conviction,

that if plurality of issuers is allowed to exist, some kind of special security in

favour of the holders of notes should be exacted as an imperative condition.

        211
               Regulation of Currencies, p. 85.

        212
               I think myself justified in affirming that the mitigation of

commercial revulsions is the real, and only serious, purpose of the Act of

1844. I am quite aware that its supporters insist (especially since 1847) on its

supreme efficacy in “maintaining the convertibility of the Bank note.” But I

must be excused for not attaching any serious importance to this one among

its alleged merits. The convertibility of the Bank note was maintained, and

would have continued to be maintained, at whatever cost, under the old

system. As was well said by Lord Overstone in his Evidence, the Bank can

always, by a sufficiently violent action on credit, save itself at the expense of

the mercantile public. That the Act of 1844 mitigates the violence of that

process, is a sufficient claim to prefer in its behalf. Besides, if we suppose

such a degree of mismanagement, on the part of the Bank, as, were it not for

the Act, would endanger the continuance of convertibility, the same (or a

less) degree of mismanagement, practised under the Act, would suffice to

produce a suspension of payments by the Banking Department; an event

which the compulsory separation of the two departments brings much nearer

to possibility than it was before, and which, involving as it would the

probable stoppage of every private banking establishment in London, and

perhaps also the non-payment of the dividends to the national creditor, would

be a far greater immediate calamity than a brief interruption of the

convertibility of the note; insomuch that, to enable the Bank to resume

payment of its deposits, no Government would hesitate a moment to suspend

payment of the notes, if suspension of the Act of 1844 proved insufficient. 3.

A conditional increase of this maximum is permitted, but only when by

arrangement with any country bank the issues of that bank are discontinued,

and Bank of England motes substituted; and even then the increase is limitedto two-thirds of the amount of the country notes to be thereby superseded.

Under the provision the amount of notes which the Bank of England is now

at liberty to issue against securities, is about fifteen millions.

        213
               p. 106.

        214
               True the Bank is not precluded from making increased advances

from its deposits, which are likely to be of unusually large amount, since, at

these periods, every one leaves his money in deposit in order to have it within

call. But, that the deposits are not always sufficient, was conclusively proved

in 1847, when the Bank stretched to the very utmost the means of relieving

commerce which its deposits afforded, without allaying the panic, which

however ceased at once when the Government decided on suspending the

Act.

        215
               This prediction was verified on the very next occurrence of a

commercial crisis, in 1857; when Government were again under the necessity

of suspending, on their own responsibility, the provisions of the Act.

        216
               It is known, from unquestionable facts, that the hoards of money

at all times existing in the hands of the French peasantry, often from a remote

date, surpass any amount which could have been imagined possible; and even

in so poor a country as Ireland, it has of late been ascertained, that the small

farmers sometimes possess hoards quite disproportioned to their visible

means of subsistence.

        217
               Fullarton on the Regulation of Currencies, pp. 71–4.

        218
               Ib. pp. 139–42.

        219
               This, which I have called “the double action of drains.” has been

strangely understood as if I had asserted that the Bank is compelled to part

with six millions’ worth of property by a drain of three millions. such an

assertion would be too absurd to require any refutation. Drains have a double

action, not upon the pecuniary position of the Bank itself, but upon the

measures it is forced to take in order to stop the drain. Though the Bank itself

is no poorer, its two reserves, the reserve in the banking department and the

reserve in the issue department, have each been reduced by three millions by

a drain of only three. And as the separation of the departments renders it

necessary that each of them separately should be kept as strong as the two

together need be if they could help one another, the Bank’s action on themoney market must be as violent on a drain of three millions, as would have

been required on the old system for one of six. The reserve in the banking

department being less than it otherwise would be by the entire amount of the

bullion in the issue department, and the whole amount of the drain falling in

the first instance on that diminished reserve, the pressure of the whole drain

on the half reserve is as much felt, and requires as strong measures to stop it,

as a pressure of twice the amount on the entire reserve. As I have said

elsewhere “it is as if a man having to lift a weight were restricted from using

both hands to do it, and where only allowed to use one hand at a time: in

which case it would be necessary that each of his hands should be as strong

as the two together.” {Evidence before the Committee of the House of

Commons on the Bank Acts, in 1857.

        220
               Pp. 89–92.

 

 

   Chapter 25 – Of the Competition of Different Countries in the Same

                                        Market

 

 

              1. In the phraseology of the Mercantile System, the language and

doctrines of which are still the basis of what may be called the political

economy of the selling classes, as distinguished from the buyers or

consumers, there is no word of more frequent recurrence or more perilous

import than the word underselling. To undersell other countries — not to be

undersold by other countries — were spoken of, and are still very often

spoken of, almost as if they were the sole purposes for which production and

commodities exist. The feelings of rival tradesmen, prevailing among

nations, overruled for centuries all sense of the general community of

advantage which commercial countries derive from the prosperity of one

another: and that commercial spirit which is now one of the strongest

obstacles to wars, was during a certain period of European history their

principal cause.

              Even in the more enlightened view now attainable of the nature and

consequences of international commerce, some, though a comparatively

small, space must still be made for the fact of commercial rivality. Nations

may, like individual dealers, be competitors, with opposite interests, in the

markets of some commodities, while in others they are in the more fortunate

relation of reciprocal customers. The benefit of commerce does not consist,

as it was once thought to do, in the commodities sold; but, since the

commodities sold are the means of obtaining those which are bought, a nation

would be cut off from the real advantage of commerce, the imports, if it could

not induce other nations to take any of its commodities in exchange; and in

proportion as the competition of other counties compels it to offer its

commodities on cheaper terms, on pain of not selling them at all, the imports

which it obtains by its foreign trade are procured at greater cost.

              These points have been adequately, though incidentally, frustrated in

some of the preceding chapters. But the great space which the topic has filled,

and continues to fill, in economical speculations, and in the practical

anxieties both of politicians and of dealers and manufacturers, makes itdesirable, before quitting the subject of international exchange, to subjoin a

few observations on the things which do, and on those which do not, enable

countries to undersell one another.

              One country can only undersell another in a given market, to the

extent of entirely expelling her from it, on two conditions. In the first place,

she must have a greater advantage than the second country in the production

of the article exported by both; meaning by a greater advantage (as has been

already so fully explained) not absolutely, but in comparison with other

commodities; and in the second place, such must be her relation with the

customer country in respect to the demand for each other’s products, and

such the consequent state of international values, as to give away to the

customer country more than the whole advantage possessed by the rival

country; otherwise the rival will still be able to hold her ground in the market.

              Let us revert to the imaginary hypothesis of a trade between England

and Germany in cloth and linen: England being capable of producing 10

yards of cloth at the same cost with 15 yards of linen, Germany at the same

cost with 20, and the two commodities being exchanged between the two

countries (cost of carriage apart) at some intermediate rate, say 10 for 17.

Germany could not be permanently undersold in the English market, and

expelled from it, unless by a country which offered not merely more than 17,

but more than 20 yards of linen for 10 of cloth. Short of that, the competition

would only oblige Germany to pay dearer for cloth, but would not disable her

from exporting linen. The country, therefore, which could undersell

Germany, must, in the first place, be able to produce linen at less cost,

compared with cloth, than Germany herself; and in the next place, must have

such a demand for cloth, or other English commodities, as would compel her,

even when she became sole occupant of the market, to give a greater

advantage to England than Germany could give by resigning the whole of

hers; to give, for example, 21 yards for 10. For if not — if, for example, the

equation of international demand, after Germany was excluded, gave a ratio

of 18 for 10, Germany could again enter into the competition; Germany

would be now the underselling nation; and there would be a point, perhaps 19

for 10, at which both countries would be able to maintain their ground, and to

sell in England enough linen to pay for the cloth, or other English

commodities, for which, on these newly-adjusted terms of interchange, they

had a demand. In like manner, England, as an exporter of cloth, could only bedriven from the German market by some rival whose superior advantages in

the production of cloth enabled her, and the intensity of whose demand for

German produce compelled her, to offer 10 yards of cloth, not merely for less

than 17 yards of linen, but for less than 15. In that case, England could no

longer carry on the trade without loss; but in any case short of this, she would

merely be obliged to give to Germany more cloth for less linen than she had

previously given.

              It thus appears that the alarm of being permanently undersold may

be taken much too easily; may be taken when the thing really to be

anticipated is not the loss of the trade, but the minor inconvenience of

carrying it on at a diminished advantage; an inconvenience chiefly falling on

the consumers of foreign commodities, and not on the producers or sellers of

the exported article. It is no sufficient ground of apprehension to the English

producers, to find that some other country can sell cloth in foreign markets at

some particular time, a trifle cheaper than they can themselves afford to do in

the existing state of prices in England. Suppose them to be temporarily

undersold, and their exports diminished; the imports will exceed the exports,

there will be a new distribution of the precious metals, prices will fall, and as

all the money expenses of the English producers will be diminished, they will

be able (if the case falls short of that stated in the preceding paragraph) again

to compete with their rivals. The loss which England will incur, will not fall

upon the exporters, but upon those who consume imported commodities;

who, with money incomes reduced in amount, will have to pay the same or

even an increased price for all things produced in foreign countries.

              2. Such, I conceive, is the true theory, or rationale, of underselling. It

will be observed that it takes no account of some things which we hear

spoken of, oftener perhaps than any others, in the character of causes

exposing a country to be undersold.

              According to the preceding doctrine, a country cannot be undersold

in any commodity, unless the rival country has a stronger inducement than

itself for devoting its labour and capital to the production of the commodity;

arising from the fact that by doing so it occasions a greater saving of labour

and capital, to be shared between itself and its customers — a greater increase

of the aggregate produce of the world. The underselling, therefore, though a

loss to the undersold country, is an advantage to the world at large; the

substituted commerce being one which economies more of the labour andcapital of mankind, and adds more to their collective wealth, than the

commerce superseded by it. The advantage, of course, consists in being able

to produce the commodity of better quality, or with less labour (compared

with other things); or perhaps not with less labour, but in less time; with a

less prolonged detention of the capital employed. This may arise from greater

natural advantages (such as soil, climate, richness of mines); superior

capability, either natural or acquired, in the labourers; better division of

labour, and better tools, or machinery. But there is no place left in this theory

for the case of lower wages. This, however, in the theories commonly

current, is a favourite cause of underselling. We continually hear of the

disadvantage under which the British producer labours, both in foreign

markets and even in his own, through the lower wages paid by his foreign

rivals. These lower wages, we are told, enable, or are always on the point of

enabling them to sell at lower prices, and to dislodge the English

manufacturer from all markets in which he is not artificially protected.

              Before examining this opinion on grounds of principle, it is worth

while to bestow a moment’s consideration upon it as a question of fact. Is it

true, that the wages of manufacturing labour are lower in foreign countries

than in England, in any sense in which low wages are an advantage to the

capitalist? The artisan of Ghent or Lyons may earn less wages in a day, but

does he not do less work? Degrees of efficiency considered, does his labour

cost less to his employer? Though wages may be lower on the Continent, is

not the Cost of Labour, which is the real element in the competition, very

nearly the same? That it is so seems the opinion of competent judges, and is

confirmed by the very little difference in the rate of profit between England

and the Continental countries. But if so, the opinion is absurd that English

producers can be undersold by their Continental rivals from this cause. It is

only in America that the supposition is prima facie admissible. In America,

wages are much higher than in England, if we mean by wages the daily

earnings of a labourer: but the productive power of American labour is so

great — its efficiency, combined with the favourable circumstances in which

it is exerted, makes it worth so much to the purchaser, that the Cost of Labour

is lower in America than in England; as is indicated by the fact that the

general rate of profits and of interest is higher.

              3. But is it true that low wages, even in the sense of low Cost of

Labour, enable a country to sell cheaper in the foreign market? I mean, ofcourse, low wages which are common to the whole productive industry of the

country.

              If wages, in any of the departments of industry which supply

exports, are kept, artificially, or by some accidental cause, below the general

rate of wages in the country, this is a real advantage in the foreign market. It

lessens the comparative cost of production of those articles, in relation to

others; and has the same effect as if their production required so much less

labour. Take, for instance, the case of the United States in respect to certain

commodities, prior to the civil war. Tobacco and cotton, two great articles of

export, were produced by slave labour, while food and manufactures

generally were produced by free labourers, neither working on their own

account or paid by wages. In spite of the inferior efficiency of slave labour,

there can be no reasonable doubt that in a country where the wages of free

labour were so high, the work executed by slaves was a better bargain to the

capitalist. To whatever extent it was so, this smaller cost of labour, being not

general, but limited to those employments, was just as much a cause of

cheapness in the products, both in the home and in the foreign market, as if

they had been made by a less quantity of labour. If, when the slaves in the

Southern States were emancipated, their wages rose to the general level of the

earnings of free labour in America, that country might have been obliged to

erase some of the slave-grown articles from the catalogue of its exports, and

would certainly be unable to sell any of them in the foreign market at the

accustomed price. Accordingly, American cotton is now habitually at a much

higher price than before the war. Its previous cheapness was partly an

artificial cheapness, which may be compared to that produced by a bounty on

production or on exportation: or, considering the means by which it was

obtained, an apter comparison would be with the cheapness of stolen goods.

              An advantage of a similar economical, though of a very different

moral character, is that possessed by domestic manufactures; fabrics

produced in the leisure hours of families partially occupied in other pursuits,

who, not depending for subsistence on the produce of the manufacture, can

afford to sell it at any price, however low, for which they think it worth while

to take the trouble of producing. In an account of the Canton of Zurich, to
                                                                                230
which I have had occasion to refer on another subject, it is observed, “The

workman of Zurich is today a manufacturer, tomorrow again an agriculturist,

and changes his occupations with the seasons, in a continual round.Manufacturing industry and tillage advance hand in hand, in inseparable

alliance, and in this union of the two occupations the secret may be found,

why the simple and unlearned Swiss manufacturer can always go on

competing, and increasing in prosperity, in the face of those extensive

establishments fitted out with great economic, and (what is still more

important) intellectual, resources. Even in those parts of the Canton where

manufactures have extended themselves the most widely, only one-seventh of

all the families belong to manufactures alone; four-sevenths combine that

employment with agriculture. The advantage of this domestic or family

manufacture consists chiefly in the fact, that it is compatible with all other

avocations, or rather that it may in part be regarded as only a supplementary

employment. In winter in the dwellings of the operatives, the whole family

employ themselves in it: but as soon as spring appears, those on whom the

early field labours devolve, abandon the indoor work; many a shuttle stands

still; by degrees, as the field-work increases, one member of the family

follows another, till at last, at the harvest, and during the so-called ‘great

works,’ all hands seize the implements of husbandry; but in unfavourable

weather, and in all otherwise vacant hours, the work in the cottage is

resumed, and when the ungenial season again recurs, the people return in the

same gradual order to their home occupation, until they have all resumed it.”

              In the case of these domestic manufactures, the comparative cost of

production, on which the interchange between countries depends, is much

lower than in proportion to the quantity of labour employed. The workpeople,

looking to the earnings of their loom for a part only, if for any part, of their

actual maintenance, can afford to work for a less remuneration than the

lowest rate of wages which can permanently exist in the employments by

which the labourer has to support the whole expense of a family. Working, as

they do, not for an employer but for themselves, they may be said to carry on

the manufacture at no cost at all, except the small expense of a loom and of

the material; and the limit of possible cheapness is not the necessity of living

by their trade but that of earning enough by the work to make that social

employment of their leisure hours not disagreeable.

              4. These two cases, of slave labour and of domestic manufactures,

exemplify the conditions under which low wages enable a country to sell its

commodities cheaper in foreign markets, and consequently to undersell its

rivals, or to avoid being undersold by them. But no such advantage isconferred by low wages when common to all branches of industry. General

low wages never caused any country to undersell its rivals, nor did general

high wages ever hinder it from doing so.

              To demonstrate this, we must return to an elementary principle
                                                231
which was discussed in a former chapter. General low wages do not cause

low prices, nor high wages high prices, within the country itself. General

prices are not raised by a rise of wages, any more than they would be raised

by an increase of the quantity of labour required in all production. Expenses

which affect all commodities equally, have no influence on prices. If the

maker of broadcloth or cutlery, and nobody else, had to pay higher wages, the

price of his commodity would rise, just as it would if he had to employ more

labour; because otherwise he would gain less profit than other producers, and

nobody would engage in the employment. But if everybody has to pay higher

wages, or everybody to employ more labour, the loss must be submitted to; as

it affects everybody alike, no one can hope to get rid of it by a change of

employment, each therefore resigns himself to a diminution of profits, and

prices remain as they were. In like manner, general low wages, or a general

increase in the productiveness of labour, does not make prices low, but

profits high. If wages fall, (meaning here by wages the cost of labour,) why,

on that account, should the producer lower his price? He will be forced, it

may be said, by the competition of other capitalists who will crowd into his

employment. But other capitalists are also paying lower wages, and by

entering into competition with him they would gain nothing but what they are

gaining already. The rate then at which labour is paid, as well as the quantity

of it which is employed, affects neither the value nor the price of the

commodity produced, except in so far as it is peculiar to that commodity, and

not common to commodities generally.

              Since low wages are not a cause of low prices in the country itself,

so neither do they cause it to offer its commodities in foreign markets at a

lower price. It is quite true that if the cost of labour is lower in America than

in England, America could sell her cottons to Cuba at a lower price than

England, and still gain as high a profit as the English manufacturer. But it is

not with the profit of the English manufacturer that the American cotton

spinner will make his comparison; it is with the profits of other American

capitalists. These enjoy, in common with himself, the benefit of a low cost of

labour, and have accordingly a high rate of profit. This high profit the cottonspinner must also have: he will not content himself with the English profit. It

is true he may go on for a time at that lower rate, rather than change his

employment; and a trade may be carried on, sometimes for a long period, at a

much lower profit than that for which it would have been originally engaged

in. Countries which have a low cost of labour, and high profits, do not for

that reason undersell others, but they do oppose a more obstinate resistance to

being undersold, because the producers can often submit to a diminution of

profit without being unable to live, and even to thrive, by their business. But

this is all which their advantage does for them: and in this resistance they will

not long persevere, when a change of times which may give them equal

profits with the rest of their countrymen has become manifestly hopeless.

              5. There is a class of trading and exporting communities, on which a

few words of explanation seem to be required. These are hardly to be looked

upon as countries, carrying on an exchange of commodities with other

countries, but more properly as outlying agricultural or manufacturing

establishments belonging to a larger community. Our West india colonies, for

example, cannot be regarded as countries, with a productive capital of their

own. If Manchester, instead of being where it is, were on a rock in the North

Sea, (its present industry nevertheless continuing,) it would still be but a town

of England, not a country trading with England; it would be merely, as now, a

place where England finds it convenient to carry on her cotton manufacture.

The West Indies, in like manner, are the place where England finds it

convenient to carry on the production of sugar, coffee, and a few other

tropical commodities. All the capital employed is English capital; almost all

the industry is carried on for English uses; there is little production of

anything except the staple commodities, and these are sent to England, not to

be exchanged for things exported to the colony and consumed by its

inhabitants, but to be sold in England for the benefit of the proprietors there.

The trade with the West Indies is therefore hardly to be considered as

external trade, but more resembles the traffic between town and country, and

is amenable to the principles of the home trade. The rate of profit in the

colonies will be regulated by English profits; the expectation of profit must

be about the same as in England, with the addition of compensation for the

disadvantages attending the more distant and hazardous employment: and

after allowance is made for those disadvantages, the value and price of West

India produce in the English market must be regulated, (or rather must have

been regulated formerly,) like that of any English commodity, by the cost ofproduction. For the last twelve or fifteen years this principle has been in

abeyance: the price was first kept up beyond the ratio of the cost of

production by deficient supplies, which could not, owing to the deficiency of

labour, be increased; and more recently the admission of foreign competition

has introduced another element, and some of the West India Islands are

undersold, not so much because wages are higher than in Cuba and Brazil, as

because they are higher than in England: for were they not so, Jamaica could

sell her sugars at Cuban prices, and still obtain, though not a Cuban, an

English rate of profit.

              It is worth while also to notice another class of small, but in this case

mostly independent communities, which have supported and enriched

themselves almost without any productions of their own, (except ships and

marine equipments,) by a mere carrying trade, and commerce of entrepot; by

buying the produce of one country, to sell it at a profit in another. Such were

Venice and the Hanse Towns. The case of these communities is very simple.

They made themselves and their capital the instruments, not of production,

but of accomplishing exchanges between the productions of other countries.

These exchanges are attended with an advantage to those countries — an

increase of the aggregate returns to industry — part of which went to

indemnify the agents for the necessary expenses of transport, and another part

to remunerate the use of their capital and mercantile skill. The countries

themselves had not capital disposable for the operation. When the Venetians

became the agents of the general commerce of Southern Europe, they had

scarcely any competitors: the thing would not have been done at all without

them, and there was really no limit to their profits except the limit to what the

ignorant feudal nobility could and would give for the unknown luxuries then

first presented to their sight. At a later period competition arose, and the

profit of this operation, like that of others, became amenable to natural laws.

The carrying trade was taken up by Holland, a country with productions of its

own and a large accumulated capital. The other nations of Europe also had

now capital to spare, and were capable of conducting their foreign trade for

themselves: but Holland, having, from a variety of circumstances, a lower

rate of profit at home, could afford to carry for other countries at a smaller

advance on the original cost of the goods, than would have been required by

their own capitalists; and Holland, therefore, engrossed the greatest part of

the carrying trade of all those countries which did not keep it to themselves

by Navigation Laws, constructed, like those of England, for that expresspurpose.

        221
               Historisch — geographisch — staatistisches Germalde der

Schweiz. Erstes Heft, 1834, p. 105.

        222
               Supra, book iii. ch. iv.          Chapter 26 – Of Distribution, as Affected by Exchange

 

 

              1. We have now completed, as far as is compatible with our

purposes and limits, the exposition of the machinery through which the

produce of a country is apportioned among the different classes of its

inhabitants; which is no other than the machinery of Exchange, and has for

the exponents of its operation, the laws of Value and of Price. We shall now

avail ourselves of the light thus acquired, to cast a retrospective glance at the

subject of Distribution. The division of the produce among the three classes,

Labourers, Capitalists, and Landlords, when considered without any

reference to Exchange, appeared to depend on certain general laws. It is fit

that we should now consider whether these same laws still operate, when the

distribution takes place through the complex mechanism of exchange and

money; or whether the properties of the mechanism interfere with and modify

the presiding principles.

              The primary division of the produce of human exertion and frugality

is, as we have seen, into three shares, wages, profits, and rent; and these

shares are portioned out to the persons entitled to them, in the form of money,

and by a process of exchange; or rather, the capitalist, with whom in the usual

arrangements of society the produce remains, pays in money, to the other two

sharers, the market value of their labour and land. If we examine, on what the

pecuniary value of labour, and the pecuniary value of the use of land, depend,

we shall find that it is on the very same causes by which we found that wages

and rent would be regulated if there were no money and no exchange of

commodities.

              It is evident, in the first place, that the law of Wages is not affected

by the existence or non-existence of Exchange or Money. Wages depend on

the ratio between population and capital; and would do so if all the capital in

the world were the property of one association, or if the capitalists among

whom it is shared maintained each an establishment for the production of

every article consumed in the community, exchange of commodities having

no existence. As the ratio between capital and population, in all old countries,

depends on the strength of the checks by which the too rapid increase of

population is restrained, it may be said, popularly speaking, that wagesdepend on the checks to population; that when the check is not death, by

starvation or disease, wages depend on the prudence of the labouring people;

and that wages in any country are habitually at the lowest rate, to which in

that country the labourer will suffer them to be depressed rather than put a

restraint upon multiplication.

              What is here meant, however, by wages, is the labourer’s real scale

of comfort; the quantity he obtains of the things which nature or habit has

made necessary or agreeable to him: wages in the sense in which they are of

importance to the receiver. In the sense in which they are of importance to the

payer, they do not depend exclusively on such simple principles. Wages in

the first sense, the wages on which the labourer’s comfort depends, we will

call real wages, or wages in kind. Wages in the second sense, we may be

permitted to call, for the present, money wages; assuming, as it is allowable

to do, that money remains for the time an invariable standard, no iteration

taking place in the conditions under which the circulating medium itself is

produced or obtained. If money itself undergoes no variation in cost, the

money price of labour is an exact measure of the Cost of Labour, and may be

made use of as a convenient symbol to express it.

              The money wages of labour are a compound result of two elements:

first, real wages, or wages in kind, or in other words, the quantity which the

labourer obtains of the ordinary articles of consumption; and secondly, the

money prices of those articles. In all old countries — all countries in which

the increase of population is in any degree checked by the difficulty of

obtaining subsistence — the habitual money price of labour is that which will

just enable the labourers, one with another, to purchase the commodities

without which they neither cannot or will not keep up the population at its

customary rate of increase. Their standard of comfort being given, (and by

the standard of comfort in a labouring class, is meant that, rather than forego

which, they will abstain from multiplication,) money wages depend on the

money price, and therefore on the cost of production, of the various articles

which the labourers habitually consume: because if their wages cannot

procure them a given quantity of these, their increase will slacken, and their

wages rise. Of these articles, food and other agricultural produce are so much

the principal, as to leave little influence to anything else.

              It is at this point that we are enabled to invoke the aid of the

principles which have been laid down in this Third Part. The cost ofproduction of food and agricultural produce has been analyzed in a preceding

chapter. It depends on the productiveness of the least fertile land, or of the

least productively employed portion of capital, which the necessities of

society have as yet put in requisition for agricultural purposes. The cost of

production of the food grown in these least advantageous circumstances,

determines, as we have seen, the exchange value and money price of the

whole. In any given state, therefore, of the labourers’ habits, their money

wages depend on the productiveness of the least fertile land, or least

productive agricultural capital; on the point which cultivation has reached in

its downward progress — in its encroachments on the barren lands, and its

gradually increased strain upon the powers of the more fertile. Now, the force

which urges cultivation in this downward course, is the increase of people;

while the counter-force which checks the descent, is the improvement of

agricultural science and practice, enabling the same soil to yield to the same

labour more ample returns. The costliness of the most costly part of the

produce of cultivation, is an exact expression of the state, at any given

moment, of the race which population and agricultural skill are always

running against each other.

              2. It is well said by Dr Chalmers, that many of the most important

lessons in political economy are to be learnt at the extreme margin of

cultivation, the last point which the culture of the soil has reached in its

contest with the spontaneous agencies of nature. The degree of

productiveness of this extreme margin, is an index to the existing state of the

distribution of the produce among the three classes, of labourers, capitalists,

and landlords.

              When the demand of an increasing population for more food cannot

be satisfied without extending cultivation to less fertile land or incurring

additional outlay, with a less proportional return, on land already in

cultivation, it is a necessary condition of this increase of agricultural produce,

that the value and price of that produce must first rise. But as soon as the

price has risen sufficiently to give to the additional outlay of capital the

ordinary profit, the rise will not go on still further for the purpose of enabling

the new land, or the new expenditure on old land, to yield rent as well as

profit. The land or capital last put in requisition, and occupying what Dr

Chalmers calls the margin of cultivation, will yield, and continue to yield, no

rent. But if this yields no rent, the rent afforded by all other land oragricultural capital will be exactly so much as it produces more than this. The

price of food will always on the average be such, that the worst land, and the

least productive instalment of the capital employed on the better lands, shall

just replace the expenses with the ordinary profit. If the least favoured land

and capital just do thus much, all other land and capital will yield an extra

profit, equal to the proceeds of the extra produce due to their superior

productiveness; and this extra profit becomes, by competition, the prize of the

landlords. Exchange, and money, therefore, make no difference in the law of

rent: it is the same as we originally found it. Rent is the extra return made to

agricultural capital when employed with peculiar advantages; the exact

equivalent of what those advantages enable the producers to economize in the

cost of production: the value and price of the produce being regulated by the

cost of production to those producers who have no advantages; by the return

to that portion of agricultural capital, the circumstances of which are the least

favourable.

              3. Wages and Rent being thus regulated by the same principles when

paid in money, as they would be if apportioned in kind, it follows that Profits

are so likewise. For the surplus, after replacing wages and paying rent,

constitutes Profits.

              We found in the last chapter of the Second Book, that the advances

of the capitalist, when analyzed to their ultimate elements, consist either in

the purchase or maintenance of labour, or in the profits of former capitalists;

and that therefore profits, in the last resort, depend upon the Cost of Labour,

falling as that rises, and rising as it falls. Let us endeavour to trace more

minutely the operation of this law.

              There are two modes in which the Cost of Labour, which is correctly

represented (money being supposed invariable) by the money wages of the

labourer, may be increased. The labourer may obtain greater comforts; wages

in kind — real wages — may rise. Or the progress of population may force

down cultivation to inferior soils, and more costly processes; thus raising the

cost of production, the value, and the price, of the chief articles of the

labourer’s consumption. On either of these suppositions, the rate of profit will

fall.

              If the labourer obtains more abundant commodities, only by reason

of their greater cheapness; if he obtains a greater quantity, but not on thewhole a greater cost; real wages will be increased, but not money wages, and

there will be nothing to affect the rate of profit. But if he obtains a greater

quantity of commodities of which the cost of production is not lowered, he

obtains a greater cost; his money wages are higher. The expense of these

increased money wages falls wholly on the capitalist. There are no

conceivable means by which he can shake it off. It may be said — it is, not

unfrequently, said — that he will get rid of it by raising his price. But this
                                                                      232
opinion we have already, and more than once, fully refuted.

              The doctrine, indeed, that a rise of wages causes an equivalent rise

of prices, is, as we formerly observed, self-contradictory for if it did so, it

would not be a rise of wages; the labourer would get no more of any

commodity than he had before, let his money wages rise ever so much; a rise

of real wages would be an impossibility. This being equally contrary to

reason and to fact, it is evident that a rise of money wages does not raise

prices; that high wages are not a cause of high prices. A rise of general wages

falls on profits. There is no possible alternative.

              Having disposed of the case in which the increase of money wages,

and of the Cost of Labour, arises from the labourer’s obtaining more ample

wages in kind, let us now suppose it to arise from the increased cost of

production of the things which he consumes; owing to an increase of

population, unaccompanied by an equivalent increase of agricultural skill.

The augmented supply required by the population would not be obtained,

unless the price of food rose sufficiently to remunerate the farmer for the

increased cost of production. The farmer, however, in this case sustains a

twofold disadvantage. He has to carry on his cultivation under less favourable

conditions of productiveness than before. For this, as it is a disadvantage

belonging to him only as a farmer, and not shared by other employers, he

will, on the general principles of value, be compensated by a rise of the price

of his commodity: indeed, until this rise has taken place, he will not bring to

market the required increase of produce. But this very rise of price involves

him in another necessity, for which he is not compensated. As the real wages

of labour are by supposition unaltered, he must pay higher money wages to

his labourers. This necessity, being common to him with all other capitalists,

forms no ground for a rise of price. The price will rise, until it has placed him

in as good a situation in respect of profits, as other employers of labour: it

will rise so as to indemnify him for the increased labour which he must nowemploy in order to produce a given quantity of food: but the increased wages

of that labour are a burthen common to all, and for which no one can be

indemnified. It will be paid wholly from profits.

              Thus we see that increased wages, when common to all descriptions

of productive labourers, and when really representing a greater Cost of

Labour, are always and necessary at the expense of profits. And by reversing

the cases, we should find in like manner that diminished wages, when

representing a really diminished Cost of Labour, are equivalent to a rise of

profits. But the opposition of pecuniary interest thus indicated between the

class of capitalists and that of labourers, is to a great extent only apparent.

Real wages are a very different thing from the Cost of Labour, and are

generally highest at the times and places where, from the easy terms on

which the land yields all the produce as yet required from it, the value and

price of food being low, the cost of labour to the employer, notwithstanding

its ample remuneration, is comparatively cheap, and the rate of profit

consequently high. We thus obtain a full confirmation of our original theorem

that Profits depend on the Cost of Labour: or, to express the meaning with

still greater accuracy, the rate of profit and the cost of labour vary inversely

as one another, and are joint effects of the same agencies or causes.

              But does not this proposition require to be slightly modified, by

making allowance for that portion (though comparatively small) of the

expenses of the capitalist, which does not consist in wages paid by himself or

reimbursed to previous capitalists, but in the profits of those previous

capitalists? Suppose, for example, an invention in the manufacture of leather,

the advantage of which should consist in rendering it unnecessary that the

hides should remain for so great a length of time in the tan-pit. Shoemakers,

saddlers, and other workers in leather, would save a part of that portion of the

cost of their material which consists of the tanner’s profits during the time his

capital is locked up; and this saving, it may be said, is a source from which

they might derive an increase of profit, though wages and the Cost of Labour

remained exactly the same. In the case here supposed, however, the consumer

alone would benefit, since the prices of shoes, harness, and all other articles

into which leather enters, would fall, until the profits of the producers were

reduced to the general level. To obviate this objection, let us suppose that a

similar saving of expense takes place in all departments of production at

once. In that case, since values and prices would not be affected, profitswould probably be raised; but if we look more closely into the case we shall

find, that it is because the cost of labour would be lowered. In this as in any

other case of increase in the general productiveness of labour, if the labourer

obtained only the same real wages, profits would be raised: but the same real

wages would imply a smaller Cost of Labour; the cost of production of all

things having been, by the supposition, diminished. If, on the other hand, the

real wages of labour rose proportionally, and the Cost of Labour to the

employer remained the same, the advances of the capitalist would bear the

same ratio to his returns as before, and the rate of profit would be unaltered.

The reader who may wish for a more minute examination of this point, will

find it in the volume of separate Essays to which reference has before been
      233
made. The question is too intricate in comparison with its importance, to be

further entered into in a work like the present; and I will merely say, that it

seems to result from the considerations adduced in the Essay, that there is

nothing in the case in question to affect the integrity of the theory which

affirms an exact correspondence, in an inverse direction, between the rate of

profit and the Cost of Labour.

        223
               Supra, book iii. ch. iv. section 2, and ch. xxv. section 4.

        224
               Essay IV, on Profits and Interest.

 

 

 Book 4: Influence of the Progress of Society on Production and

                                    Distribution

 

 

 

 

   Chapter 1 – General Characteristics of a Progressive State of Wealth

 

 

              1. The three preceding Parts include as detailed a view as our limits

permit, of what, by a happy generalization of a mathematical phrase, has been

called the Statics of the subject. We have surveyed the field of economical

facts, and have examined how they stand related to one another as causes and

effects; what circumstances determine the amount of production, of

employment for labour, of capital and population; what laws regulate rent,

profits, and wages; under what conditions and in what proportions

commodities are interchanged between individuals and between countries.

We have thus obtained a collective view of the economical phenomena of

society, considered as existing simultaneously. We have ascertained, to a

certain extent, the principles of their interdependence; and when the state of

some of the elements is known, we should now be able to infer, in a general

way, the contemporaneous state of most of the others. All this, however, has

only put us in possession of the economical laws of a stationary and

unchanging society. We have still to consider the economical condition of

mankind as liable to change, and indeed (in the more advanced portions of

the race, and in all regions to which their influence reaches) as at all times

undergoing progressive changes. We have to consider what these changes

are, what are their laws, and what their ultimate tendencies; thereby adding a

theory of motion to our theory of equilibrium — the Dynamics of political

economy to the Statics.

              In this inquiry, it is natural to commence by tracing the operation of

known and acknowledged agencies. Whatever may be the other changes

which the economy of society is destined to undergo, there is one actually in

progress, concerning which there can be no dispute. In the leading countries

of the world, and in all others as they come within the influence of those

leading countries, there is at least one progressive movement which continues

with little interruption from year to year and from generation to generation; a

progress in wealth; an advancement of what is called material prosperity. All

the nations which we are accustomed to call civilized, increase gradually in

production and in population: and there is no reason to doubt, that not only

these nations will for some time continue so to increase, but that most of theother nations of the world, including some not yet founded, will successively

enter upon the same career. It will, therefore, be our first object to examine

the nature and consequences of this progressive change; the elements which

constitute it, and the effects it produces on the various economical facts of

which we have been tracing the laws, and especially on wages, profits, rents,

values, and prices.

              2. Of the features which characterize this progressive economical

movement of civilized nations, that which first excites attention, through its

intimate connexion with the phenomena of Production, is the perpetual, and

so far as human foresight can extend, the unlimited, growth of man’s power

over nature. Our knowledge of the properties and laws of physical objects

shows no sign of approaching its ultimate boundaries: it is advancing more

rapidly, and in a greater number of directions at once, than in any previous

age or generation, and affording such frequent glimpses of unexplored fields

beyond, as to justify the belief that our acquaintance with nature is still

almost in its infancy. This increasing physical knowledge is now, too, more

rapidly than at any former period, converted, by practical ingenuity, into

physical power. The most marvellous of modern inventions, one which

realizes the imaginary feats of the magician, not metaphorically but literally

— the electro-magnetic telegraph — sprang into existence but a few years

after the establishment of the scientific theory which it realizes and

exemplifies. Lastly, the manual part of these great scientific operations is

now never wanting to the intellectual : there is no difficulty in finding or

forming, in a sufficient number of the working hands of the community, the

skill requisite for executing the most delicate processes of the application of

science to practical uses. From this union of conditions, it is impossible not to

look for. ward to a vast multiplication and long succession of contrivances for

economizing labour and increasing its produce; and to an ever wider

diffusion of the use and benefit of those contrivances.

              Another change, which has always hitherto characterized, and will

assuredly continue to characterize, the progress of civilized society, is a

continual increase of the security of person and property. The people of every

country in Europe, the most back. ward as well as the most advanced, are, in

each generation, better protected against the violence and rapacity of one

another, both by a more efficient judicature and police for the suppression of

private crime, and by the decay and destruction of those mischievousprivileges which enabled certain classes of the community to prey with

impunity upon the rest. They are also, in every generation, better protected,

either by institutions or by manners and opinion, against arbitrary exercise of

the power of government. Even in semi-barbarous Russia, acts of spoliation

directed against individuals, who have not made themselves politically

obnoxious, are not supposed to be now so frequent as much to affect any

person’s feelings of security. Taxation, in all European countries, grows less

arbitrary and oppressive, both in itself and in the manner of levying it. Wars,

and the destruction they cause, are now usually confined, in almost every

country, to those distant and outlying possessions at which it comes into

contact with savages. Even the vicissitudes of fortune which arise from

inevitable natural calamities, are more and more softened to those on whom

they fall, by the continual extension of the salutary practice of insurance.

              Of this increased security, one of the most unfailing effects is a great

increase both of production and of accumulation. Industry and frugality

cannot exist, where there is not a preponderant probability that those who

labour and spare will be permitted to enjoy. And the nearer this probability

approaches to certainty, the more do industry and frugality become pervading

qualities in a people. Experience has shown that a large proportion of the

results of labour and abstinence may be taken away by fixed taxation, without

impairing, and sometimes even with the effect of stimulating, the qualities

from which a great production and an abundant capital take their rise. But

those qualities are not proof against a high degree of uncertainty. The

Government may carry off a part; but there must be assurance that it will not

interfere, nor suffer any one to interfere, with the remainder.

              One of the changes which most infallibly attend the progress of

modern society, is an improvement in the business capacities of the general

mass of mankind. I do not mean that the practical sagacity of an individual

human being is greater than formerly. I am inclined to believe that

economical progress has hitherto had even a contrary effect. A person of

good natural endowments, in a rude state of society, can do a great number of

things tolerably well, has a greater power of adapting means to ends, is more

capable of extricating himself and others from an unforeseen embarrassment,

than ninety.nine in a hundred of those who have known only what is called

the civilized form of life. How far these points of inferiority of faculties are

compensated, and by what means they might be compensated still morecompletely, to the civilized man as an individual being, is a question

belonging to a different inquiry from the present. But to civilized human

beings collectively considered, the compensation is ample. What is lost in the

separate efficiency of each, is far more than made up by the greater capacity

of united action. In proportion as they put off the qualities of the savage, they

become amenable to discipline; capable of adhering to plans concerted

beforehand, and about which they may not have been consulted; of

subordinating their individual caprice to a preconceived determination, and

performing severally the parts allotted to them in a combined undertaking.

Works of all sorts, impracticable to the savage or the half-civilized, are daily

accomplished by civilized nations, not by any greatness of faculties in the

actual agents, but through the fact that each is able to rely with certainty on

the others for the portion of the work which they respectively undertake. The

peculiar characteristic, in short, of civilized beings, is the capacity of co-

operation; and this, like other faculties, tends to improve by practice, and

becomes capable of assuming a constantly wider sphere of action.

              Accordingly there is no more certain incident of the progressive

change taking place in society, than the continual growth of the principle and

practice of cooperation. Associations of individuals voluntarily combining

their small contributions, now perform works, both of an industrial and of

many other characters, which no one person or small number of persons are

rich enough to accomplish, or for the performance of which the few persons

capable of accomplishing them were formerly enabled to exact the most

inordinate remuneration. As wealth increases and business capacity

improves, we may look forward to a great extension of establishments, both

for industrial and other purposes, formed by the collective contributions of

large numbers; establishments like those called by the technical name of joint

stock companies, or the associations less formally constituted, which are so

numerous in England, to raise funds for public or philanthropic objects, or,

lastly, those associations of workpeople either for production, or to buy goods

for their common consumption, which are now specially known by the name

of cooperative societies.

              The progress which is to be expected in the physical sciences and

arts, combined with the greater security of property, and greater freedom in

disposing of it, which are obvious features in the civilization of modern

nations, and with the more extensive and more skilful employment of thejoint.stock principle, afford space and scope for an indefinite increase of

capital and production, and for the increase of population which is its

ordinary accompaniment. That the growth of population will overpass the

increase of production, there is not much reason to apprehend; and that it

should even keep pace with it, is inconsistent with the supposition of any real

improvement in the poorest classes of the people. It is, however, quite

possible that there might be a great progress in industrial improvement, and

in the signs of what is commonly called national prosperity; a great increase

of aggregate wealth, and even, in some respects, a better distribution of it;

that not only the rich might grow richer, but many of the poor might grow

rich, that the intermediate classes might become more numerous and

powerful, and the means of enjoyable existence be more and more largely

diffused, while yet the great class at the base of the whole might increase in

numbers only, and not in comfort nor in cultivation. We must, therefore, in

considering the effects of the progress of industry, admit as a supposition,

however greatly we deprecate as a fact, an increase of population as long-

continued, as indefinite, and possibly even as rapid, as the increase of

production and accumulation.

              With these preliminary observations on the causes of change at work

in a society which is in a state of economical progress, I proceed to a more

detailed examination of the changes themselves.

              Principles of Political Economy

 

 

   Chapter 2 – Influence of the Progress of Industry and Population on

                                  Values and Prices

 

 

              1. The changes which the progress of industry causes or presupposes

in the circumstances of production, are necessarily attended with changes in

the values of commodities.

              The permanent values of all things which are neither under a natural

nor under an artificial monopoly, depend, as we have seen, on their cost of

production. But the increasing power which mankind are constantly acquiring

over nature, increases more and more the efficiency of human exertion, or in

other words, diminishes cost of production. All inventions by which a greater

quantity of any commodity can be produced with the same labour, or the

same quantity with less labour, or which abridge the process, so that the

capital employed needs not be advanced for so long a time, lessen the cost of

production of the commodity. As, however, value is relative; if inventions

and improvements in production were made in all commodities, and all in the

same degree, there would be no alteration in values. Things would continue

to exchange for each other at the same rates as before; and mankind would

obtain a greater quantity of all things in return for their labour and abstinence,

without having that greater abundance measured and declared (as it is when it

affects only one thing) by the diminished exchange value of the commodity.

              As for prices, in these circumstances they would be affected or not,

according as the improvements in production did or did not extend to the

precious metals. If the materials of money were an exception to the general

diminution of cost of production, the values of all other things would fall in

relation to money, that is, there would be a fall of general prices throughout

the world. But if money, like other things, and in the same degree as other

things, were obtained in greater abundance and cheapness, prices would be

no more affected than values would: and there would be no visible sign in the

state of the markets, of any of the changes which had taken place; except that

there would be (if people continued to labour as much as before) a greater

quantity of all sorts of commodities, circulated at the same prices by a greater

quantity of money.              Improvements in production are not the only circumstance

accompanying the progress of industry, which tends to diminish the cost of

producing, or at least of obtaining, commodities. Another circumstance is the

increase of intercourse between different parts of the world. As commerce

extends, and the ignorant attempts to restrain it by tariffs become obsolete,

commodities tend more and more to be produced in the places in which their

production can be carried on at the least expense of labour and capital to

mankind. As civilization spreads, and security of person and property

becomes established, in parts of the world which have not hitherto had that

advantage, the productive capabilities of those places are called into fuller

activity, for the benefit both of their own inhabitants and of foreigners. The

ignorance and misgovernment in which many of the regions most favoured

by nature are still grovelling, afford work, probably, for many generations

before those countries will be raised even to the present level of the most

civilized parts of Europe. Much will also depend on the increasing migration

of labour and capital to unoccupied parts of the earth, of which the soil,

climate, and situation are found, by the ample means of exploration now

possessed, to promise not only a large return to industry, but great facilities of

producing commodities suited to the markets of old countries. Much as the

collective industry of the earth is likely to be increased in efficiency by the

extension of science and of the industrial arts, a still more active source of

increased cheapness of production will be found, probably, for some time to

come, in the gradually unfolding consequences of Free Trade, and in the

increasing scale on which Emigration and Colonization will be carried on.

              From the causes now enumerated, unless counteracted by others, the

progress of things enables a country to obtain at less and less of real cost, not

only its own productions but those of foreign countries. Indeed, whatever

diminishes the cost of its own productions, when of an exportable character,

enables it, as we have already seen, to obtain its imports at less real cost.

              2. But is it the fact, that these tendencies are not counteracted? Has

the progress of wealth and industry no effect in regard to cost of production,

but to diminish it? Are no causes of an opposite character brought into

operation by the same progress, sufficient in some cases not only to

neutralize, but to overcome the former, and convert the descending

movement of cost of production into an ascending movement? We are

already aware that there are such causes, and that, in the case of the mostimportant classes of commodities, food and materials, there is a tendency

diametrically opposite to that of which we have been speaking. The cost of

production of these commodities tends to increase.

              This is not a property inherent in the commodities themselves. If

population were stationary, and the produce of the earth never needed to be

augmented in quantity, there would be no cause for greater cost of

production. Mankind would, on the contrary, have the full benefit of all

improvements in agriculture, or in the arts subsidiary to it, and there would be

no difference, in this respect, between the products of agriculture and those of

manufactures. The only products of industry, which, if population did not

increase, would be liable to a real increase of cost of production, are those

which, depending on a material which is not renewed, are either wholly or

partially exhaustible; such as coal, and most if not all metals; for even iron,

the most abundant as well as most useful of metallic products, which forms

an ingredient of most minerals and of almost all rocks, is susceptible of

exhaustion so far as regards its richest and most tractable ores.

              When, however, population increases, as it has never yet failed to do

when the increase of industry and of the means of subsistence made room for

it, the demand for most of the productions of the earth, and particularly for

food, increases in a corresponding proportion. And then comes into effect

that fundamental law of production from the soil, on which we have so

frequently had occasion to expatiate; the law, that increased labour, in any

given state of agricultural skill, is attended with a less than proportional

increase of produce. The cost of production of the fruits of the earth

increases, caeteris paribus, with every increase of the demand.

              No tendency of a like kind exists with respect to manufactured

articles. The tendency is in the contrary direction. The larger the scale on

which manufacturing operations are carried on, the more cheaply they can in

general be performed. Mr Senior has gone the length of enunciating as an

inherent law of manufacturing industry, that in it increased production takes

place at a smaller cost, while in agricultural industry increased production

takes place at a greater cost. I cannot think, however, that even in

manufactures, increased cheapness follows increased production by anything

amounting to a law. It is a probable and usual, but not a necessary,

consequence.              As manufactures, however, depend for their materials either upon

agriculture, or mining, or the spontaneous produce of the earth,

manufacturing industry is subject, in respect of one of its essentials, to the

same law as agriculture. But the crude material generally forms so small a

portion of the total cost, that any tendency which may exist to a progressive

increase in that single item, is much over.balanced by the diminution

continually taking place in all the other elements; to which diminution it is

impossible at present to assign any limit.

              The tendency, then, being to a perpetual increase of the productive

power of labour in manufactures, while in agriculture and mining there is a

conflict between two tendencies, the one towards an increase of productive

power, the other towards a diminution of it, the cost of production being

lessened by every improvement in the processes, and augmented by every

addition to population; it follows that the exchange values of manufactured

articles, compared with the products of agriculture and of mines, have, as

population and industry advance, a certain and decided tendency to fall.

Money being a product of mines, it may also be laid down as a rule, that

manufactured articles tend, as society advances, to fall in money price. The

industrial history of modern nations, especially during the last hundred years,

fully bears out this assertion.

              3. Whether agricultural produce increases in absolute as well as

comparative cost of production, depends on the conflict of the two antagonist

agencies, increase of population, and improvement in agricultural skill. In

some, perhaps in most, states of society, (looking at the whole surface of the

earth,) both agricultural skill and population are either stationary, or increase

very slowly, and the cost of production of food, therefore, is nearly

stationary. In a society which is advancing in wealth, population generally

increases faster than agricultural skill, and food consequently tends to

become more costly; but there are times when a strong impulse sets in

towards agricultural improvement. Such an impulse has shown itself in Great

Britain during the last twenty or thirty years. In England and Scotland

agricultural skill has of late increased considerably faster than population,

insomuch that food and other agricultural produce, notwithstanding the

increase of people, can be grown at less cost than they were thirty years ago:

and the abolition of the Corn Laws has given an additional stimulus to the

spirit of improvement. In some other countries, and particularly in France, theimprovement of agriculture gains ground still more decidedly upon

population, because though agriculture, except in a few provinces, advances

slowly, population advances still more slowly, and even with increasing

slowness; its growth being kept down, not by poverty, which is diminishing,

but by prudence.

              Which of the two conflicting agencies is gaining upon the other at

any particular time, might be conjectured with tolerable accuracy from the

money price of agricultural produce (supposing bullion not to vary materially

in value), provided a sufficient number of years could be taken, to form an

average independent of the fluctuations of seasons. This, however, is hardly

practicable, since Mr Tooke has shown that even so long a period as half a

century may include a much greater proportion of abundant and a smaller of

deficient seasons than is properly due to it. A mere average, therefore, might

lead to conclusions only the more misleading, for their deceptive semblance

of accuracy. There would be less danger of error in taking the average of only

a small number of years, and correcting it by a conjectural allowance for the

character of the seasons, than in trusting to a longer average without any such

correction. It is hardly necessary to add, that in founding conclusions on

quoted prices, allowance must also be made as far as possible for any
                                                                        234
changes in the general exchange value of the precious metals.

              4. Thus far, of the effect of the progress of society on the permanent

or average values and prices of commodities. It remains to be considered, in

what manner the same progress affects their fluctuations. Concerning the

answer to this question there can be no doubt. It tends in a very high degree

to diminish them. In poor and backward societies, as in the East, and in

Europe during the Middle Ages, extraordinary differences in the price of the

same commodity might exist in places not very distant from each other,

because the want of roads and canals, the imperfection of marine navigation,

and the insecurity of communications generally, prevented things from being

transported from the places where they were cheap to those where they were

dear. The things most liable to fluctuations in value, those directly influenced

by the seasons, and especially food, were seldom carried to any great

distances. Each locality depended, as a general rule, on its own produce and

that of its immediate neighbourhood. In most years, accordingly, there was,

in some part or other of any large country, a real dearth. Almost every season

must be unpropitious to some among the many soils and climates to be foundin an extensive tract of country; but as the same season is also in general

more than ordinarily favourable to others, it is only occasionally that the

aggregate produce of the whole country is deficient, and even then in a less

degree than that of many separate portions; while a deficiency at all

considerable, extending to the whole world, is a thing almost un. known. In

modern times, therefore, there is only dearth, where there formerly would

have been famine, and sufficiency everywhere when anciently there would

have been scarcity in some places and superfluity in others.

              The same change has taken place with respect to all other articles of

commerce. The safety and cheapness of communications, which enable a

deficiency in one place to be supplied from the surplus of another, at a

moderate or even a small advance on the ordinary price, render the

fluctuations of prices much less extreme than formerly. This effect is much

promoted by the existence of large capitals, belonging to what are called

speculative merchants, whose business it is to buy goods in order to resell

them at a profit. These dealers naturally buying things when they are

cheapest, and storing them up to be brought again into the market when the

price has become unusually high; the tendency of their operations is to

equalize price, or at least to moderate its inequalities. The prices of things are

neither so much depressed at one time, nor so much raised at another, as they

would be if speculative dealers did not exist.

              Speculators, therefore, have a highly useful office in the economy of

society; and (contrary to common opinion) the most useful portion of the

class are those who speculate in commodities affected by the vicissitudes of

seasons. If there were no corn-dealers, not only would the price of corn be

liable to variations much more extreme than at present, but in a deficient

season the necessary supplies might not be forthcoming at all. Unless there

were speculators in corn, or unless, in default of dealers, the farmers became

speculators, the price in a season of abundance would fall without any limit

or check, except the wasteful consumption that would invariably follow. That

any part of the surplus of one year remains to supply the deficiency of

another, is owing either to farmers who withhold corn from the market, or to

dealers who buy it when at the cheapest and lay it up in store.

              5. Among persons who have not much considered the subject, there

is a notion that the gains of speculators are often made by causing an artificial

scarcity; that they create a high price by their own purchases, and then profitby it. This may easily be shown to be fallacious. If a corn-dealer makes

purchases on speculation, and produces a rise, when there is neither at the

time nor afterwards any cause for a rise of price except his own proceedings;

he no doubt appears to grow richer as long as his purchases continue, because

he is a holder of an article which is quoted at a higher and higher price: but

this apparent gain only seems within his reach so long as he does not attempt

to realize it. If he has bought, for instance, a million of quarters, and by with.

holding them from the market, has raised the price ten shillings a quarter; just

so much as the price has been raised by withdrawing a million quarters, will

it be lowered by bringing them back, and the best that he can hope is that he

will lose nothing except interest and his expenses. If by a gradual and

cautious sale he is able to realize, on some portion of his stores, a part of the

increased price, so also he will undoubtedly have had to pay a part of that

price on some portion of his purchases. He runs considerable risk of incurring

a still greater loss; for the temporary high price is very likely to have tempted

others, who had no share in causing it, and who might otherwise not have

found their way to his market at all, to bring their corn there, and intercept a

part of the advantage. So that instead of profiting by a scarcity caused by

himself, he is by no means unlikely, after buying in an average market, to be

forced to sell in a super-abundant one.

              As an individual speculator cannot gain by a rise of price solely of

his own creating, so neither can a number of speculators gain collectively by

a rise which their operations have artificially produced. Some among a

number of speculators may gain, by superior judgment or good fortune in

selecting the time for realizing, but they make this gain at the expense, not of

the consumer, but of the other speculators who are less judicious. They, in

fact, convert to their own benefit the high price produced by the speculations

of the others, leaving to these the loss resulting from the recoil. It is not to be

denied, therefore, that speculators may enrich themselves by other people’s

loss. But it is by the losses of other speculators. As much must have been lost

by one set of dealers as is gained by another set.

              When a speculation in a commodity proves profitable to the

speculators as a body, it is because, in the interval between their buying and

reselling, the price rises from some cause independent of them, their only

connexion with it consisting in having foreseen it. In this case, their

purchases make the price begin to rise sooner than it otherwise would do,thus spreading the privation of the consumers over a longer period, but

mitigating it at the time of its greatest height: evidently to the general

advantage. In this, however, it is assumed that they have not overrated the

rise which they looked forward to. For it often happens that speculative

purchases are made in the expectation of some increase of demand, or

deficiency of supply, which after all does not occur, or not to the extent

which the speculator expected. In that case the speculation, instead of

moderating fluctuation, has caused a fluctuation of price which otherwise

would not have happened, or aggravated one which would. But in that case,

the speculation is a losing one, to the speculators collectively, however much

some individuals may gain by it. All that part of the rise of price by which it

exceeds what there are independent grounds for, cannot give to the

speculators as a body any benefit, since the price is as much depressed by

their sales as it was raised by their purchases; and while they gain nothing by

it, they lose, not only their trouble and expenses, but almost always much

more, through the effects incident to the artificial rise of price, in checking

consumption, and bringing forward supplies from unforeseen quarters. The

operations, therefore, of speculative dealers, are useful to the public

whenever profitable to themselves; and though they are sometimes injurious

to the public, by heightening the fluctuations which their more usual office is

to alleviate, yet whenever this happens the speculators are the greatest losers.

The interest, in short, of the speculators as a body, coincides with the interest

of the public; and as they can only fail to serve the public interest in

proportion as they miss their own, the best way to promote the one is to leave

them to pursue the other in perfect freedom.

              I do not deny that speculators may aggravate a local scarcity. In

collecting corn from the villages to supply the towns, they make the dearth

penetrate into nooks and corners which might otherwise have escaped from

bearing their share of it. To buy and resell in the same place, tends to

alleviate scarcity; to buy in one place and resell in another, may increase it in

the former of the two places, but relieves it in the latter, where the price is

higher, and which, therefore, by the very supposition, is likely to be suffering

more. And these sufferings always fall hardest on the poorest consumers,

since the rich, by outbidding, can obtain their accustomed supply

undiminished if they choose. To no persons, therefore, are the operations of

corn-dealers on the whole so beneficial as to the poor. Accidentally and

exceptionally, the poor may suffer from them: it might sometimes be moreadvantageous to the rural poor to have corn cheap in winter, when they are

entirely dependent on it, even if the consequence were a dearth in spring,

when they can perhaps obtain partial substitutes. But there are no substitutes,

procurable at that season, which serve in any great degree to replace bread-

corn as the chief article of food: if there were, its price would fall in the

spring, instead of continuing, as it always does, to rise till the approach of

harvest.

              There is an opposition of immediate interest, at the moment of sale,

between the dealer in corn and the consumer, as there always is between the

seller and the buyer: and a time of dearth being that in which the speculator

makes his largest profits, he is an object of dislike and jealousy at that time,

to those who are suffering while he is gaining. It is an error, however, to

suppose that the corn.dealer’s business affords him any extraordinary profit:

he makes his gains not constantly, but at particular times, and they must

therefore occasionally be great, but the chances of profit in a business in

which there is so much competition, cannot on the whole be greater than in

other employments. A year of scarcity, in which great gains are made by

corn-dealers, rarely comes to an end without a recoil which places many of

them in the list of bankrupts. There have been few more promising seasons

for corn-dealers than the year 1847, and seldom was there a greater break-up

among the speculators than in the autumn of that year. The chances of failure,

in this most precarious trade, are a set off against great occasional profits. If

the corn-dealer were to sell his stores, during a dearth, at a lower price than

that which the competition of the consumers assigns to him, he would make a

sacrifice, to charity or philanthropy, of the fair profits of his employment,

which may be quite as reasonably required from any other person of equal

means. His business being a useful one, it is the interest of the public that the

ordinary motives should exist for carrying it on, and that neither law nor

opinion should prevent an operation beneficial to the public from being

attended with as much private advantage as is compatible with full and free

competition.

              It appears, then, that the fluctuations of values and prices arising

from variations of supply, or from alterations in real (as distinguished from

speculative) demand, may be expected to become more moderate as society

advances. With regard to those which arise from miscalculation, and

especially from the alterations of undue expansion and excessive contractionof credit, which occupy so conspicuous a place among commercial

phenomena, the same thing cannot be affirmed with equal confidence. Such

vicissitudes, beginning with irrational speculation and ending with a

commercial crisis, have not hitherto become either less frequent or less

violent with the growth of capital and extension of industry. Rather they may

be said to have become more so: in consequence, as is often said, of

increased competition; but, as I prefer to say, of a low rate of profits and

interest, which makes capitalists dissatisfied with the ordinary course of safe

mercantile gains. The connexion of this low rate of profit with the advance of

population and accumulation, is one of the points to be illustrated in the

ensuing chapters.

        225
               A still better criterion, perhaps, than that suggested in the text,

would be the increase or diminution of the amount of the labourer’s wages

estimated in agricultural produce.

 

 

   Chapter 3 – Influence of the Progress of Industry and Population on

                            Rents, Profits, and Wages

 

 

              1. Continuing the inquiry into the nature of the economical changes

taking place in a society which is in a state of industrial progress, we shall

next consider what is the effect of that progress on the distribution of the

produce among the various classes who share in it. We may confine our

attention to the system of distribution which is the most complex, and which

virtually includes all others — that in which the produce of manufactures is

shared between two classes, labourers and capitalists, and the produce of

agriculture among three, labourers, capitalists, and landlords.

              The characteristic features of what is commonly meant by industrial

progress, resolve themselves mainly into three, increase of capital, increase of

population, and improvements in production; understanding the last

expression in its widest sense, to include the process of procuring

commodities from a distance, as well as that of producing them. The other

changes which take place are chiefly consequences of these; as, for example,

the tendency to a progressive increase of the cost of production of food;

arising from an increased demand, which may be occasioned either by

increased population, or by an increase of capital and wages, enabling the

poorer classes to increase their consumption. It will be convenient to set out

by considering each of the three causes, as operating separately; after which

we can suppose them combined in any manner we think fit.

              Let us first suppose that population increases, capital and the arts of

production remaining stationary. One of the effects of this change of

circumstances is sufficiently obvious: wages will fall; the labouring class will

be reduced to an inferior condition. The state of the capitalist, on the contrary,

will be improved. With the same capital, he can purchase more labour, and

obtain more produce. His rate of profit is increased. The dependence of the

rate of profits on the cost of labour is here verified; for the labourer obtaining

a diminished quantity of commodities, and no alteration being supposed in

the circumstances of their production, the diminished quantity represents a

diminished cost. The labourer obtains not only a smaller real reward, but theproduct of a smaller quantity of labour. The first circumstance is the

important one to himself, the last to his employer.

              Nothing has occurred, thus far, to affect in any way the value of any

commodity; and no reason, therefore, has yet shown itself, why rent should

be either raised or lowered. But if we look forward another stage in the series

of effects, we may see our way to such a consequence. The labourers have

increased in numbers: their condition is reduced in the same proportion; the

increased numbers divide among them only the produce of the same amount

of labour as before. But they may economize in their other comforts, and not

in their food: each may consume as much food, and of as costly a quality as

previously; or they may submit to a reduction, but not in proportion to the

increase of numbers. On this supposition, notwithstanding the diminution of

real wages, the increased population will require an increased quantity of

food. But since industrial skill and knowledge are supposed to be stationary,

more food can only be obtained by resorting to worse land, or to methods of

cultivation which are less productive in proportion to the outlay. Capital for

this extension of agriculture will not be wanting; for though, by hypothesis,

no addition takes place to the capital in existence, a sufficient amount can be

spared from the industry which previously supplied the other and less

pressing wants which the labourers have been obliged to curtail. The

additional supply of food, therefore, will be produced, but produced at a

greater cost; and the exchange value of agricultural produce must rise. It may

be objected, that profits having risen, the extra cost of producing food can be

defrayed from profits, without any increase of price. It could, undoubtedly,

but it will not; because if it did, the agriculturist would be placed in an

inferior position to other capitalists. The increase of profits, being the effect

of diminished wages, is common to all employers of labour. The increased

expenses arising from the necessity of a more costly cultivation, affect the

agriculturist alone. For this peculiar burthen he must be peculiarly

compensated, whether the general rate of profit be high or low. He will not

submit indefinitely to a deduction from his profits, to which other capitalists

are not subject. He will not extend his cultivation by laying out fresh capital,

unless for a return sufficient to yield him as high a profit as could be obtained

by the same capital in other investments. The value, therefore, of his

commodity will rise, and rise in pro. portion to the increased cost. The farmer

will thus be indemnified for the burthen which is peculiar to himself, and will

also enjoy the augmented rate of profit which is common to all capitalists.              It follows, from principles with which we are already familiar, that

in these circumstances rent will rise. Any land can afford to pay, and under

free competition will pay, a rent equal to the excess of its produce above the

return to an equal capital on the worst land, or under the least favourable

conditions. Whenever, therefore, agriculture is driven to descend to worse

land, or more onerous processes, rent rises. Its rise will be twofold, for, in the

first place, rent in kind, or corn rent, will rise; and in the second, since the

value of agricultural produce has also risen, rent, estimated in manufactured

or foreign commodities (which is represented, caeteris paribus, by money

rent) will rise still more.

              The steps of the process (if, after what has been formerly said, it is

necessary to retrace them) are as follows. Corn rises in price, to repay with

the ordinary profit the capital required for producing additional corn on worse

land or by more costly processes. So far as regards this additional corn, the

increased price is but an equivalent for the additional expense; but the rise,

extending to all corn, affords on all, except the last produced, an extra profit.

If the farmer was accustomed to produce 100 quarters of wheat at 40s., and

120 quarters are now required, of which the last twenty cannot be produced

under 45s., he obtains the extra five shillings on the entire 120 quarters, and

not on the last twenty alone. He has thus an extra 25l. beyond the ordinary

profits, and this, in a state of free competition, he will not be able to retain.

He cannot however be compelled to give it up to the consumer, since a less

price than 45s. would be inconsistent with the production of the last twenty

quarters. The price, then, will remain at 45s., and the 25l. will be transferred

by competition not to the consumer but to the landlord. A rise of rents is

therefore inevitably consequent on an increased demand for agricultural

produce, when unaccompanied by increased facilities for its production. A

truth which, after this final illustration, we may henceforth take for granted.

              The new element now introduced — an increased demand for food

— besides occasioning an increase of rent, still further disturbs the

distribution of the produce between capitalists and labourers. The increase of

population will have diminished the reward of labour: and if its cost is

diminished as greatly as its real remuneration, profits will be increased by the

full amount. If, however, the increase of population leads to an increased

production of food, which cannot be supplied but at an enhanced cost of

production, the cost of labour will not be so much diminished as the realreward of it, and profits, therefore, will not be so much raised. It is even

possible that they might not be raised at all. The labourers may previously

have been so well provided for, that the whole of what they now lose may be

struck off from their other indulgences, and they may not, either by necessity

or choice, undergo any reduction in the quantity or quality of their food. To

produce the food for the increased number may be attended with such an

increase of expense, that wages, though reduced in quantity, may represent as

great a cost, may be the product of as much labour, as before, and the

capitalist may not be at all benefited. On this supposition the loss to the

labourer is partly absorbed in the additional labour required for producing the

last instalment of agricultural produce; and the remainder is gained by the

landlord, the only sharer who always benefits by an increase of population.

              2. Let us now reverse our hypothesis, and instead of supposing

capital stationary and population advancing, let us suppose capital advancing

and population stationary; the facilities of production, both natural and

acquired, being, as before, unaltered. The real wages of labour, instead of

falling, will now rise; and since the cost of production of the things consumed

by the labourer is not diminished, this rise of wages implies an equivalent

increase of the cost of labour, and diminution of profits. To state the same

deduction in other terms; the labourers not being more numerous, and the

productive power of their labour being only the same as before, there is no

increase of the produce; the increase of wages, therefore, must be at the

charge of the capitalist. It is not impossible that the cost of labour might be

increased in even a greater ratio than its real remuneration. The improved

condition of the labourers may increase the demand for food. The labourers

may have been so ill off before, as not to have food enough; and may now

consume more: or they may choose to expend their increased means partly or

wholly in a more costly quality of food, requiring more labour and more land;

wheat, for example, instead of oats, or potatoes. This extension of agriculture

implies, as usual, a greater cost of production and a higher price, so that

besides the increase of the cost of labour arising from the increase of its

reward, there will be a further increase (and an additional fall of profits) from

the increased costliness of the commodities of which that reward consists.

The same causes will produce a rise of rent. What the capitalists lose, above

what the labourers gain, is partly transferred to the landlord, and partly

swallowed up in the cost of growing food on worse land or by a less

productive process.              3. Having disposed of the two simple cases, an increasing population

and stationary capital, and an increasing capital and stationary population, we

are prepared to take into consideration the mixed case, in which the two

elements of expansion are combined, both population and capital increasing.

If either element increases faster than the other, the case is so far assimilated

with one or other of the two preceding: we shall suppose them, therefore, to

increase with equal rapidity; the test of equality being, that each labourer

obtains the same commodities as before, and the same quantity of those

commodities. Let us examine what will be the effect, on rent and profits, of

this double progress.

              Population having increased, without any falling off in the labourer’s

condition, there is of course a demand for more food. The arts of production

being supposed stationary, this food must be produced at an increased cost.

To compensate for this greater cost of the additional food, the price of

agricultural produce must rise. The rise extending over the whole amount of

food produced, though the increased expenses only apply to a part, there is a

greatly increased extra profit, which, by competition, is transferred to the

landlord. Rent will rise both in quantity of produce and in cost; while wages,

being supposed to be the same in quantity, will be greater in cost. The

labourer obtaining the same amount of necessaries, money wages have risen;

and as the rise is common to all branches of production, the capitalist cannot

indemnify himself by changing his employment, and the loss must be borne

by profits.

              It appears, then, that the tendency of an increase of capital and

population is to add to rent at the expense of profits: though rent does not

gain all that profits lose, a part being absorbed in increased expenses of

production, that is, in hiring or feeding a greater number of labourers to

obtain a given amount of agricultural produce. By profits, must of course be

understood the rate of profit; for a lower rate of profit on a larger capital may

yield a larger gross profit, considered absolutely, though a smaller in

proportion to the entire produce.

              This tendency of profits to fall, is from time to time counter. acted

by improvements in production: whether arising from increase of knowledge,

or from an increased use of the knowledge already possessed. This is the

third of the three elements, the effects of which on the distribution of the

produce we under. took to investigate; and the investigation will be facilitatedby supposing, as in the case of the other two elements, that it operates, in the

first instance, alone.

              4. Let us then suppose capital and population stationary, and a

sudden improvement made in the arts of production; by the invention of more

efficient machines, or less costly processes, or by obtaining access to cheaper

commodities through foreign trade.

              The improvement may either be in some of the necessaries or

indulgences which enter into the habitual consumption of the labouring class;

or it may be applicable only to luxuries consumed exclusively by richer

people. Very few, however, of the great industrial improvements are

altogether of this last description. Agricultural improvements, except such as

specially relate to some of the rarer and more peculiar products, act directly

upon the principal objects of the labourer’s expenditure. The steam.engine

and every other invention which affords a manageable power, are applicable

to all things, and of course to those consumed by the labourer. Even the

power-loom and the spinning jenny, though applied to the most delicate

fabrics, are available no less for the coarse cottons and woollens worn by the

labouring class. All improvements in locomotion cheapen the transport of

necessaries as well as of luxuries. Seldom is a new branch of trade opened,

without, either directly or in some indirect way, causing some of the articles

which the mass of the people consume to be either produced or imported at

smaller cost. It may safely be affirmed, therefore, that improvements in

production generally tend to cheapen the commodities on which the wages of

the labouring class are expended.

              In so far as the commodities affected by an improvement are those

which the labourers generally do not consume, the improvement has no effect

in altering the distribution of the produce. Those particular commodities,

indeed, are cheapened; being produced at less cost, they fall in value and in

price, and all who consume them, whether landlords, capitalists, or skilled

and privileged labourers, obtain increased means of enjoyment. The rate of

profits, however, is not raised. There is a larger gross profit, reckoned in

quantity of commodities. But the capital also, if estimated in those

commodities, has risen in value. The profit is the same percentage on the

capital that it was before. The capitalists are not benefited as capitalists, but

as consumers. The landlords and the privileged classes of labourers, if they

are consumers of the same commodities, share the same benefit.              The case is different with improvements which diminish the cost of

production of the necessaries of life, or of commodities which enter

habitually into the consumption of the great mass of labourers. The play of

the different forces being here rather complex, it is necessary to analyse it

with some minuteness.

              As formerly observed, there are two kinds of agricultural

improvements. Some consist in a mere saving of labour, and enable a given

quantity of food to be produced at less cost, but not on a smaller surface of

land than before. Others enable a given extent of land to yield not only the

same produce with less labour, but a greater produce; so that if no greater

produce is required, a part of the land already under culture may be dispensed

with. As the part rejected will be the least productive portion, the market will

thenceforth be regulated by a better description of land than what was

previously the worst under cultivation.

              To place the effect of the improvement in a clear light, we must

suppose it to take place suddenly, so as to leave no time during its

introduction, for any increase of capital or of population. Its first effect will

be a fall of the value and price of agricultural produce. This is a necessary

consequence of either kind of improvement, but especially of the last.

              An improvement of the first kind, not increasing the produce, does

not dispense with any portion of the land; the margin of cultivation (as Dr

Chalmers terms it) remains where it was; agriculture does not recede, either

in extent of cultivated land, or in elaborateness of method: and the price

continues to be regarded by the same land, and by the same capital, as before.

But since that land or capital, and all other land or capital which produces

food, now yields its produce at smaller cost, the price of food will fall

proportionally. If one-tenth of the expense of production has been saved, the

price of produce will fall one-tenth.

              But suppose the improvement to be of the second kind; enabling the

land to produce, not only the same corn with one-tenth less labour, but a tenth

more corn with the same labour. Here the effect is still more decided.

Cultivation can now be contracted, and the market supplied from a smaller

quantity of land. Even if this smaller surface of land were of the same

average quality as the larger surface, the price would fall one-tenth, because

the same produce would be obtained with a tenth less labour. But since theportion of land abandoned will be the least fertile portion, the price of

produce will thenceforth be regulated by a better quality of land than before.

In addition, therefore, to the original diminution of one-tenth in the cost of

production, there will be a further diminution, corresponding with the

recession of the ‘margin’ of agriculture to land of greater fertility. There will

thus be a twofold fall of price.

              Let us now examine the effect of the improvements, thus suddenly

made, on the division of the produce; and in the first place, on rent. By the

former of the two kinds of improvement, rent would be diminished. By the

second, it would be diminished still more.

              Suppose that the demand for food requires the cultivation of three

qualities of land, yielding, on an equal surface, and at an equal expense, 100,

80, and 60 bushels of wheat. The price of wheat will, on the average, be just

sufficient to enable the third quality to be cultivated with the ordinary profit.

The first quality therefore will yield forty and the second twenty bushels of

extra profit, constituting the rent of the landlord. And first, let an

improvement be made, which, without enabling more corn to be grown,

enables the same corn to be grown with one-fourth less labour. The price of

wheat will fall one.fourth, and 8o bushels will be sold for the price for which

6o were sold before. But the produce of the land which produces 6o bushels

is still required, and the expenses being as much reduced as the price, that

land can still be cultivated with the ordinary profit. The first and second

qualities will therefore continue to yield a surplus of 40 and 20 bushels, and

corn rent will remain the same as before. But corn having fallen in price

one.fourth, the same corn rent is equivalent to a fourth less of money and of

all other commodities. So far, therefore, as the landlord expends his income

in manufactured or foreign products, he is one.fourth worse off than before.

His income as landlord is reduced to three.quarters of its amount: it is only as

a consumer of corn that he is as well off.

              If the improvement is of the other kind, rent will fall in a still greater

ratio. Suppose that the amount of produce which the market requires, can be

grown not only with a fourth less labour, but on a fourth less land. If all the

land already in cultivation continued to be cultivated, it would yield a

produce much larger than necessary. Land, equivalent to a fourth of the

produce, must now be abandoned; and as the third quality yielded exactly

one.fourth, (being 60 out of 240,) that quality will go out of cultivation. The240 bushels can now be grown on land of the first and second qualities only;

being, on the first, 100 bushels plus one-third, or 133 1/3 bushels; on the

second, 80 bushels plus one-third, or 106 2/3 bushels; together 240. The

second quality of land, instead of the third, is now the lowest, and regulates

the price. Instead of 6o, it is sufficient if 106 2/3 bushels repay the capital

with the ordinary profit. The price of wheat will consequently fall, not in the

ratio of 6o to 8o, as in the other case, but in the ratio of 60 to 106 2/3 . Even

this gives an insufficient idea of the degree in which rent will be affected.

The whole produce of the second quality of land will now be required to

repay the expenses of production. That land, being the worst in cultivation,

will pay no rent. And the first quality will only yield the difference between

133 1/3 bushels and 106 2/3 , being 26 2/3 bushels instead of 40. The

landlords collectively will have lost 33 1/3 out of 60 bushels in corn rent

alone, while the value and price of what is left will have been diminished in

the ratio of 6o to 106 2/3.

              It thus appears, that the interest of the landlord is decidedly hostile to

the sudden and general introduction of agricultural improvements. This

assertion has been called a paradox, and made a ground for accusing its first

promulgator, Ricardo, of great intellectual perverseness, to say nothing

worse. I cannot discern in what the paradox consists; and the obliquity of

vision seems to me to be on the side of his assailants. The opinion is only

made to appear absurd by stating it unfairly. If the assertion were that a

landlord is injured by the improvement of his estate, it would certainly be

indefensible; but what is asserted is, that he is injured by the improvement of

the estates of other people, although his own is included. Nobody doubts that

he would gain greatly by the improvement if he could keep it to himself, and

unite the two benefits, an increased produce from his land, and a price as high

as before. But if the increase of produce took place simultaneously on all

lands, the price would not be as high as before; and there is nothing

unreasonable in supposing that the landlords would be, not benefited, but

injured. It is admitted that whatever permanently reduces the price of produce

diminishes rent: and it is quite in accordance with common notions to

suppose that if, by the increased productiveness of land, less land were

required for cultivation, its value, like that of other articles for which the

demand had diminished, would fall.

              I am quite willing to admit that rents have not really been lowered bythe progress of agricultural improvement; but why? Because improvement

has never in reality been sudden, but always slow; at no time much

outstripping, and often falling far short of, the growth of capital and

population, which tends as much to raise rent, as the other to lower it, and

which is enabled as we shall presently see, to raise it much higher, by means

of the additional margin afforded by improvements in agriculture. First,

however, we must examine in what manner the sudden cheapening of

agricultural produce would affect profits and wages.

              In the beginning, money wages would probably remain the same as

before, and the labourers would have the full benefit of the cheapness. They

would be enabled to increase their consumption either of food or of other

articles, and would receive the same cost, and a greater quantity. So far,

profits would be unaffected. But the permanent remuneration of the labourers

essentially depends on what we have called their habitual standard; the extent

of the requirements which, as a class, they insist on satisfying before they

choose to have children. If their tastes and requirements receive a durable

impress from the sudden improvement in their condition, the benefit to the

class will be permanent. But the same cause which enables them to purchase

greater comforts and indulgences with the same wages, would enable them to

purchase the same amount of comforts and indulgences with lower wages;

and a greater population may now exist, without reducing the labourers

below the condition to which they are accustomed. Hitherto this and no other

has been the use which the labourers have commonly made of any increase of

their means of living; they have treated it simply as convertible into food for

a greater number of children. It is probable, therefore, that population would

be stimulated, and that after the lapse of a generation the real wages of labour

would be no higher than before the improvement: the reduction being partly

brought about by a fall of money wages, and partly through the price of food,

the cost of which, from the demand occasioned by the increase of population,

would be increased. To the extent to which money wages fell, profits would

rise: the capitalist obtaining a greater quantity of equally efficient labour by

the same outlay of capital. We thus see that a diminution of the cost of living,

whether arising from agricultural improvements or from the importation of

foreign produce, if the habits and requirements of the labourers are not raised,

usually lowers money wages and rent, and raises the general rate of profit.

              What is true of improvements which cheapen the production of food,is true also of the substitution of a cheaper for a more costly variety of it. The

same land yields to the same labour a much greater quantity of human

nutriment in the form of maize or potatoes, than in the form of wheat. If the

labourers were to give up bread, and feed only on those cheaper products,

taking as their compensation not a greater quantity of other consumable

commodities, but earlier marriages and larger families, the cost of labour

would be much diminished, and if labour continued equally efficient, profits

would rise; while rent would be much lowered, since food for the whole

population could be raised on half or a third part of the land now sown with

corn. At the same time, it being evident that land too barren to be cultivated

for wheat might be made in case of necessity to yield potatoes sufficient to

support the little labour necessary for producing them, cultivation might

ultimately descend lower, and rent eventually rise higher, on a potato or

maize system, than on a corn system; because the land would be capable of

feeding a much larger population before reaching the limit of its powers.

              If the improvement, which we suppose to take place, is not in the

production of food, but of some manufactured article consumed by the

labouring class, the effect on wages and profits will at first be the same; but

the effect on rent very different. It will not be lowered; it will even, if the

ultimate effect of the improvement is an increase of population, be raised: in

which last case profits will be lowered. The reasons are too evident to require

statement.

              5. We have considered, on the one hand, the manner in which the

distribution of the produce into rent, profits, and wages, is affected by the

ordinary increase of population and capital, and on the other, how it is

affected by improvements in production, and more especially in agriculture.

We have found that the former cause lowers profits, and raises rent and the

cost of labour: while the tendency of agricultural improvements is to diminish

rent; and all improvements which cheapen any article of the labourer’s

consumption, tend to diminish the cost of labour and to raise profits. The

tendency of each cause in its separate state being thus ascertained, it is easy

to determine the tendency of the actual course of things, in which the two

movements are going on simultaneously, capital and population increasing

with tolerable steadiness, while improvements in agriculture are made from

time to time, and the knowledge and practice of improved methods become

diffused gradually through the community.              The habits and requirements of the labouring classes being given

(which determine their real wages), rents, profits, and money wages at any

given time, are the result of the composition of these rival forces. If during

any period agricultural improvement advances faster than population, rent

and money wages during that period will tend downward, and profits upward.

If population advances more rapidly than agricultural improvement, either the

labourers will submit to a reduction in the quantity or quality of their food, or

if not, rent and money wages will progressively rise, and profits will fall.

              Agricultural skill and knowledge are of slow growth, and still slower

diffusion. Inventions and discoveries, too, occur only occasionally, while the

increase of population and capital are continuous agencies. It therefore

seldom happens that improvement, even during a short time, has so much the

start of population and capital as actually to lower rent, or raise the rate of

profits. There are many countries in which the growth of population and

capital is not rapid, but in these agricultural improvement is less active still.

Population almost everywhere treads close on the heels of agricultural

improvement, and effaces its effects as fast as they are produced.

              The reason why agricultural improvement seldom lowers rent, is that

it seldom cheapens food, but only prevents it from growing dearer; and

seldom, if ever, throws lands out of cultivation, but only enables worse and

worse land to be taken in for the supply of an increasing demand. What is

sometimes called the natural state of a country which is but half cultivated,

namely, that the land is highly productive, and food obtained in great

abundance by little labour, is only true of unoccupied countries colonized by

a civilized people. In the United States the worst land in cultivation is of a

high quality (except sometimes in the immediate vicinity of markets or means

of conveyance, where a bad quality is compensated by a good situation); and

even if no further improvements were made in agriculture or locomotion,

cultivation would have many steps yet to descend, before the increase of

population and capital would be brought to a stand; but in Europe five

hundred years ago, though so thinly peopled in comparison to the present

population, it is probable that the worst land under the plough was, from the

rude state of agriculture, quite as unproductive as the worst land now

cultivated; and that cultivation had approached as near to the ultimate limit of

profitable tillage, in those times as in the present. What the agricultural

improvements since made have really done is, by increasing the capacity ofproduction of land in general, to enable tillage to extend downwards to a

much worse natural quality of land than the worst which at that time would

have admitted of cultivation by a capitalist for profit; thus rendering a much

greater increase of capital and population possible, and removing always a

little and a little further off, the barrier which restrains them; population

meanwhile always pressing so hard against the barrier, that there is never any

visible margin left for it to seize, every inch of ground made vacant for it by

improvement being at once filled up by its advancing columns. Agricultural

improvement may thus be considered to be not so much a counterforce

conflicting with increase of population, as a partial relaxation of the bonds

which confine that increase.

              The effects produced on the division of the produce by an increase

of production, under the joint influence of increase of population and capital

and improvements of agriculture, are very different from those deduced from

the hypothetical cases previously discussed. In particular, the effect on rent is

most materially different. We remarked that — while a great agricultural

improvement made suddenly and universally would in the first instance

inevitably lower rent — such improvements enable rent, in the progress of

society, to rise gradually to a much higher limit than it could otherwise attain,

since they enable a much lower quality of land to be ultimately cultivated.

But in the case we are now supposing, which nearly corresponds to the usual

course of things, this ultimate effect becomes the immediate effect. Suppose

cultivation to have reached, or almost reached, the utmost limit permitted by

the state of the industrial arts, and rent, therefore, to have attained nearly the

highest point to which it can be carried by the progress of population and

capital, with the existing amount of skill and knowledge. If a great

agricultural improvement were suddenly introduced, it might throw back rent

for a considerable space, leaving it to regain its lost ground by the progress of

population and capital, and afterwards to go on further. But, taking place, as

such improvement always does, very gradually, it causes no retrograde

movement of either rent or cultivation; it merely enables the one to go on

rising, and the other extending, long after they must otherwise have stopped.

It would do this even without the necessity of resorting to a worse quality of

land; simply by enabling the lands already in cultivation to yield a greater

produce, with no increase of the proportional cost. If by improvements of

agriculture all the lands in cultivation could be made, even with double

labour and capital, to yield a double produce, (supposing that in the meantimepopulation increased so as to require this double quantity) all rents would be

doubled.

              To illustrate the point, let us revert to the numerical example in a

former page. Three qualities of land yield respectively lOO, 8o, and 60

bushels to the same outlay on the same extent of surface. If No. 1 could be

made to yield 200, No. 2, 160, and No. 3, 120 bushels, at only double the

expense, and therefore without any increase of the cost of production, and if

the population, having doubled,required all this increased quantity, the rent of

No. 1 would be 80 bushels instead of 40, and of No. 2, 40 instead of 20,

while the price and value per bushel would be the same as before: so that

corn rent and money rent would both be doubled. I need not point out the

difference between this result, and what we have shown would take place if

there were an improvement in production without the accompaniment of an

increased demand for food.

              Agricultural improvement, then, is always ultimately, and in the

manner in which it generally takes place also immediately, beneficial to the

landlord. We may add, that when it takes place in that manner, it is beneficial

to no one else. When the demand for produce fully keeps pace with the

increased capacity of production, food is not cheapened; the labourers are

not, even temporarily, benefited; the cost of labour is not diminished, nor

profits raised. There is a greater aggregate production, a greater produce

divided among the labourers, and a larger gross profit; but the wages being

shared among a larger population, and the profits spread over a larger capital,

no labourer is better off, nor does any capitalist derive from the same amount

of capital a larger income.

              The result of this long investigation may be summed up as follows.

The economical progress of a society constituted of landlords, capitalists, and

labourers, tends to the progressive enrichment of the landlord class; while the

cost of the labourer’s subsistence tends on the whole to increase, and profits

to fall. Agricultural improvements are a counteracting force to the two last

effects; but the first, though a case is conceivable in which it would be

temporarily checked, is ultimately in a high degree promoted by those

improvements; and the increase of population tends to transfer all the benefits

derived from agricultural improvement to the landlords alone. What other

consequences, in addition to these, or in modification of them, arise from the

industrial progress of a society thus constituted, I shall endeavour to show inthe succeeding chapter.

 

 

          Chapter 4 – Of the Tendency of Profits to a Minimum

 

 

              1. The tendency of profits to fall as society advances, which has

been brought to notice in the preceding chapter, was early recognized by

writers on industry and commerce; but the laws which govern profits not

being then understood, the phenomenon was ascribed to a wrong cause.

Adam Smith considered profits to be determined by what he called the

competition of capital; and concluded that when capital increased, this

competition must likewise increase, and profits must fall. It is not quite

certain what sort of competition Adam Smith had here in view. His words in
                                  235
the chapter on Profits of Stock are, ‘When the stocks of many rich

merchants are turned into the same trade, their mutual competition naturally

tends to lower its profits; and when there is a like increase of stock in all the

different trades carried on in the same society, the same competition must

produce the same effect in them all.’ This passage would lead us to infer that,

in Adam Smith’s opinion, the manner in which the competition of capital

lowers profits is by lowering prices; that being usually the mode in which an

increased investment of capital in any particular trade, lowers the profits of

that trade. But if this was his meaning, he overlooked the circumstance, that

the fall of price, which if confined to one commodity really does lower the

profits of the producer, ceases to have that effect as soon as it extends to all

commodities; because, when all things have fallen, nothing has really fallen,

except nominally; and even computed in money, the expenses of every

producer have diminished as much as his returns. Unless indeed labour be the

one commodity which has not fallen in money price, when all other things

have: if so, what has really taken place is a rise of wages; and it is that, and

not the fall of prices, which has lowered the profits of capital. There is

another thing which escaped the notice of Adam Smith; that the supposed

universal fall of prices, through increased competition of capitals, is a thing

which cannot take place. Prices are not determined by the competition of the

sellers only, but also by that of the buyers; by demand as well as supply. Thedemand which affects money prices consists of all the money in the hands of

the community, destined to be laid out in commodities; and as long as the

proportion of this to the commodities is not diminished, there is no fall of

general prices. Now, howsoever capital may increase, and give rise to an

increased production of commodities, a full share of the capital will be drawn

to the business of producing or importing money, and the quantity of money

will be augmented in an equal ratio with the quantity of commodities. For if

this were not the case, and if money, therefore, were, as the theory supposes,

perpetually acquiring increased purchasing power, those who produced or

imported it would obtain constantly increasing profits; and this could not

happen without attracting labour and capital to that occupation from other

employments. If a general fall of prices, and increased value of money, were

really to occur, it could only be as a consequence of increased cost of

production, from the gradual exhaustion of the mines.

              It is not tenable, therefore, in theory, that the increase of capital

produces, or tends to produce, a general decline of money prices. Neither is it

true, that any general decline of prices, as capital increased, has manifested

itself in fact. The only things observed to fall in price with the progress of

society, are those in which there have been improvements in production,

greater than have taken place in the production of the precious metals; as for

example, all spun and woven fabrics. Other things, again, instead of falling,

have risen in price, because their cost of production, compared with that of

gold and silver, has increased. Among these are all kinds of food, comparison

being made with a much earlier period of history. The doctrine, therefore,

that competition of capital lowers profits by lowering prices, is incorrect in

fact, as well as unsound in principle.

              But it is not certain that Adam Smith really held that doctrine; for his

language on the subject is wavering and unsteady, denoting the absence of a

definite and well-digested opinion. Occasionally he seems to think that the

mode in which the competition of capital lowers profits, is by raising wages.

And when speaking of the rate of profit in new colonies, he seems on the

very verge of grasping the complete theory of the subject. ‘As the colony

increases, the profits of stock gradually diminish. When the most fertile and

best situated lands have been all occupied, less profit can be made by the

cultivators of what is inferior both in soil and situation.’ Had Adam Smith

meditated longer on the subject, and systematized his view of it byharmonizing with each other the various glimpses which he caught of it from

different points, he would have perceived that this last is the true cause of the

fall of profits usually consequent upon increase of capital.

              2. Mr Wakefield, in his Commentary on Adam Smith, and his

important writings on Colonization, takes a much clearer view of the subject,

and arrives, through a substantially correct series of deductions, at practical

conclusions which appear to me just and important; but he is not equally

happy in incorporating his valuable speculations with the results of previous

thought, and reconciling them with other truths. Some of the theories of Dr

Chalmers, in his chapter ‘On the Increase and Limits of Capital’, and the two

chapters which follow it, coincide in their tendency and spirit with those of

Mr Wakefield; but Dr Chalmers’ ideas, though delivered, as is his custom,

with a most attractive semblance of clearness, are really on this subject much

more confused than even those of Adam Smith, and more decidedly infected

with the often refuted notion that the competition of capital lowers general

prices; the subject of Money apparently not having been included among the

parts of Political Economy which this acute and vigorous writer had carefully

studied.

              Mr Wakefield’s explanation of the fall of profits is briefly this.

Production is limited not solely by the quantity of capital and of labour, but

also by the extent of the ‘field of employment’. The field of employment for

capital is twofold; the land of the country, and the capacity of foreign markets

to take its manufactured commodities. On a limited extent of land, only a

limited quantity of capital can find employment at a profit. As the quantity of

capital approaches this limit, profit falls; when the limit is attained, profit is

annihilated; and can only be restored through an extension of the field of

employment, either by the acquisition of fertile land, or by opening new

markets in foreign countries, from which food and materials can be

purchased with the products of domestic capital. These propositions are, in

my opinion, substantially true; and, even to the phraseology in which they are

expressed, considered as adapted to popular and practical rather than

scientific uses, I have nothing to object. The error which seems to me

imputable to Mr Wakefield is that of supposing his doctrines to be in

contradiction to the principles of the best school of preceding political

economists, instead of being, as they really are, corollaries from those

principles; though corollaries which, perhaps, would not always have beenadmitted by those political economists themselves.

              The most scientific treatment of the subject which I have met with, is

in an essay on the effects of Machinery, published in the Westminster Review
                                            236
for January 1826, by Mr William Ellis; which was doubtless unknown to

Mr Wakefield, but which had preceded him, though by a different path, in

several of his leading conclusions. This essay excited little notice, partly from

being published anonymously in a periodical, and partly because it was much

in advance of the state of political economy at the time. In Mr Ellis’s view of

the subject, the questions and difficulties raised by Mr Wakefield’s

speculations and by those of Dr Chalmers, find a solution consistent with the

principles of political economy laid down in the present treatise.

              3. There is at every time and place some particular rate of profit,

which is the lowest that will induce the people of that country and time to

accumulate savings, and to employ those savings productively. This

minimum rate of profit varies according to circumstances. It depends on two

elements. One is, the strength of the effective desire of accumulation; the

comparative estimate made by the people of that place and era, of future

interests when weighed against present. This element chiefly affects the

inclination to save. The other element, which affects not so much the

willingness to save as the disposition to employ savings productively, is the

degree of security of capital engaged in industrial operations. A state of

general insecurity, no doubt affects also the disposition to save. A hoard may

be a source of additional danger to its reputed possessor. But as it may also

be a powerful means of averting dangers, the effects in this respect may

perhaps be looked upon as balanced. But in employing any funds which a

person may possess as capital on his own account, or in lending it to others to

be so employed, there is always some additional risk, over and above that

incurred by keeping it idle in his own custody. This extra risk is great in

proportion as the general state of society is insecure: it may be equivalent to

twenty, thirty, or fifty per cent, or to no more than one or two; something,

however, it must always be: and for this, the expectation of profit must be

sufficient to compensate.

              There would be adequate motives for a certain amount of saving,

even if capital yielded no profit. There would be an inducement to lay by in

good times a provision for bad; to reserve something for sickness and

infirmity, or as a means of leisure and independence in the latter part of life,or a help to children in the outset of it. Savings, however, which have only

these ends in view, have not much tendency to increase the amount of capital

permanently in existence. These motives only prompt persons to save at one

period of life what they purpose to consume at another, or what will be

consumed by their children before they can completely provide for

themselves. The savings by which an addition is made to the national capital,

usually emanate from the desire of persons to improve what is termed their

condition in life, or to make a provision for children or others, independent of

their exertions. Now, to the strength of these inclinations it makes a very

material difference how much of the desired object can be effected by a given

amount and duration of self-denial; which again depends on the rate of profit.

And there is in every country some rate of profit, below which persons in

general will not find sufficient motive to save for the mere purpose of

growing richer, or of leaving others better off than themselves. Any

accumulation, therefore, by which the general capital is increased, requires as

its necessary condition a certain rate of profit; a rate which an average person

will deem to be an equivalent for abstinence, with the addition of a sufficient

insurance against risk. There are always some persons in whom the effective

desire of accumulation is above the average, and to whom less than this rate

of profit is a sufficient inducement to save; but these merely step into the

place of others whose taste for expense and indulgence is beyond the average,

and who, instead of saving, perhaps even dissipate what they have received.

              I have already observed that this minimum rate of profit, less than

which is not consistent with the further increase of capital, is lower in some

states of society than in others; and I may add, that the kind of social progress

characteristic of our present civilization tends to diminish it. In the first place,

one of the acknowledged effects of that progress is an increase of general

security. Destruction by wars, and spoliation by private or public violence,

are less and less to be apprehended; and the improvements which may be

looked for in education and in the administration of justice, or, in their

default, increased regard for opinion, afford a growing protection against

fraud and reckless mismanagement. The risks attending the investment of

savings in productive employment require, therefore, a smaller rate of profit

to compensate for them than was required a century ago, and will hereafter

require less than at present. In the second place, it is also one of the

consequences of civilization that mankind become less the slaves of the

moment, and more habituated to carry their desires and purposes forward intoa distant future. This increase of providence is a natural result of the

increased assurance with which futurity can be looked forward to; and is,

besides, favoured by most of the influences which an industrial life exercises

over the passions and inclinations of human nature. In proportion as life has

fewer vicissitudes, as habits become more fixed, and great prizes are less and

less to be hoped for by any other means than long perseverance, mankind

become more willing to sacrifice present indulgence for future objects. This

increased capacity of forethought and self-control may assuredly find other

things to exercise itself upon than increase of riches, and some considerations

connected with this topic will shortly be touched upon. The present kind of

social progress, however, decidedly tends, though not perhaps to increase the

desire of accumulation, yet to weaken the obstacles to it, and to diminish the

amount of profit which people absolutely require as an inducement to save

and accumulate. For these two reasons, diminution of risk and increase of

providence, a profit or interest of three or four per cent is as sufficient a

motive to the increase of capital in England at the present day, as thirty or

forty per cent in the Burmese Empire, or in England at the time of King John.

In Holland during the last century a return of two per cent, on government

security, was consistent with an undiminished, if not with an increasing

capital. But though the minimum rate of profit is thus liable to vary, and

though to specify exactly what it is would at any given time be impossible,

such a minimum always exists; and whether it be high or low, when once it is

reached, no further increase of capital can for the present take place. The

country has then attained what is known to political economists under the

name of the stationary state.

              4. We now arrive at the fundamental proposition which this chapter

is intended to inculcate. When a country has long possessed a large

production, and a large net income to make savings from, and when,

therefore, the means have long existed of making a great annual addition to

capital; (the country not having, like America, a large reserve of fertile land

still unused;) it is one of the characteristics of such a country, that the rate of

profit is habitually within, as it were, a hand’s breadth of the minimum, and

the country therefore on the very verge of the stationary state. By this I do not

mean that this state is likely, in any of the great countries of Europe, to be

soon actually reached, or that capital does not still yield a profit considerably

greater than what is barely sufficient to induce the people of those countries

to save and accumulate. My meaning is, that it would require but a short timeto reduce profits to the minimum, if capital continued to increase at its

present rate, and no circumstances having a tendency to raise the rate of profit

occurred in the meantime. The expansion of capital would soon reach its

ultimate boundary, if the boundary itself did not continually open and leave

more space.

              In England, the ordinary rate of interest on government securities, in

which the risk is next to nothing, may be estimated at a little more than three

per cent: in all other investments, therefore, the interest or profit calculated

upon (exclusively of what is properly a remuneration for talent or exertion)

must be as much more than this amount, as is equivalent to the degree of risk

to which the capital is thought to be exposed. Let us suppose that in England

even so small a net profit as one per cent, exclusive of insurance against risk,

would constitute a sufficient inducement to save, but that less than this would

not be a sufficient inducement. I now say, that the mere continuance of the

present annual increase of capital, if no circumstance occurred to counteract

its effect, would suffice in a small number of years to reduce the rate of net

profit to one per cent.

              To fulfil the conditions of the hypothesis, we must suppose an entire

cessation of the exportation of capital for foreign investment. No more capital

sent abroad for railways or loans; no more emigrants taking capital with

them, to the colonies, or to other countries; no fresh advances made, or

credits given, by bankers or merchants to their foreign correspondents. We

must also assume that there are no fresh loans for unproductive expenditure,

by the government, or on mortgage, or otherwise; and none of the waste of

capital which now takes place by the failure of undertaking, which people are

tempted to engage in by the hope of a better income than can be obtained in

safe paths at the present habitually low rate of profit. We must suppose the

entire savings of the community to be annually invested in really productive

employment within the country itself; and no new channels opened by

industrial inventions, or by a more extensive substitution of the best known

processes for inferior ones.

              Few persons would hesitate to say, that there would be great

difficulty in finding remunerative employment every year for so much new

capital, and most would conclude that there would be what used to be termed

a general glut; that commodities would be produced, and remain unsold, or

be sold only at a loss. But the full examination which we have already given                237
to this question, has shown that this is not the mode in which the

inconvenience would be experienced. The difficulty would not consist in any

want of a market. If the new capital were duly shared among many varieties

of employment, it would raise up a demand for its own produce, and there

would be no cause why any part of that produce should remain longer on

hand than formerly. What would really be, not merely difficult, but

impossible, would be to employ this capital without submitting to a rapid

reduction of the rate of profit.

              As capital increased, population either would also increase, or it

would not. If it did not, wages would rise, and a greater capital would be

distributed in wages among the same number of labourers. There being no

more labour than before, and no improvements to render the labour more

efficient, there would not be any increase of the produce; and as the capital,

however largely increased, would only obtain the same gross return, the

whole savings of each year would be exactly so much subtracted from the

profits of the next and of every following year. It is hardly necessary to say

that in such circumstances profits would very soon fall to the point at which

further increase of capital would cease. An augmentation of capital, much

more rapid than that of population, must soon reach its extreme limit, unless

accompanied by increased efficiency of labour (through inventions and

discoveries, or improved mental and physical education), or unless some of

the idle people, or of the unproductive labourers, became productive.

              If population did increase with the increase of capital, and in

proportion to it, the fall of profits would still be inevitable. Increased

population implies increased demand for agricultural produce. In the absence

of industrial improvements, this demand can only be supplied at an increased

cost of production, either by cultivating worse land, or by a more elaborate

and costly cultivation of the land already under tillage. The cost of the

labourer’s subsistence is therefore increased; and unless the labourer submits

to a deterioration of his condition, profits must fall. In an old country like

England, if, in addition to supposing all improvement in domestic agriculture

suspended, we suppose that there is no increased production in foreign

countries for the English market, the fall of profits would be very rapid. If

both these avenues to an increased supply of food were closed, and

population continued to increase, as it is said to do, at the rate of a thousand a

day, all waste land which admits of cultivation in the existing state ofknowledge would soon be cultivated, and the cost of production and price of

food would be so increased, that, if the labourers received the increased

money wages necessary to compensate for their increased expenses, profits

would very soon reach the minimum. The fall of profits would be retarded if

money wages did not rise, or rose in a less degree; but the margin which can

be gained by a deterioration of the labourers’ condition is a very narrow one:

in general they cannot bear much reduction; when they can, they have also a

higher standard of necessary requirements, and will not. On the whole,

therefore, we may assume that in such a country as England, if the present

annual amount of savings were to continue, without any of the counteracting

circumstances which now keep in check the natural influence of those

savings in reducing profit, the rate of profit would speedily attain the

minimum, and all further accumulation of capital would for the present cease.

              5. What, then, are these counteracting circumstances, which, in the

existing state of things, maintain a tolerably equal struggle against the

downward tendency of profits, and prevent the great annual savings which

take place in this country, from depressing the rate of profit much nearer to

that lowest point to which it is always tending, and which, left to itself, it

would so promptly attain? The resisting agencies are of several kinds.

              First among them, we may notice one which is so simple and so

conspicuous, that some political economists, especially M. de Sismondi and

Dr Chalmers, have attended to it almost to the exclusion. of all others. This

is, the waste of capital in periods of over.trading and rash speculation, and in

the commercial revulsions by which such times are always followed. It is true

that a great part of what is lost at such periods is not destroyed, but merely

transferred, like a gambler’s losses, to more successful speculators. But even

of these mere transfers, a large portion is always to foreigners, by the hasty

purchase of unusual quantities of foreign goods at advanced prices. And

much also is absolutely wasted. Mines are opened, railways or bridges made,

and many other works of uncertain profit commenced, and in these

enterprises much capital is sunk which yields either no return, or none

adequate to the outlay. Factories are built and machinery erected beyond what

the market requires, or can keep in employment. Even if they are kept in

employment, the capital is no less sunk; it has been converted from

circulating into fixed capital, and has ceased to have any influence on wages

or profits. Besides this, there is a great unproductive consumption of capital,during the stagnation which follows a period of general overtrading.

Establishments are shut up, or kept working without any profit, hands are

discharged, and numbers of persons in all ranks, being deprived of their

income, and thrown for support on their savings, find themselves, after the

crisis has passed away, in a condition of more or less impoverishment. Such

are the effects of a commercial revulsion: and that such revulsions are almost

periodical, is a consequence of the very tendency of profits which we are

considering. By the time a few years have passed over without a crisis, so

much additional capital has been accumulated, that it is no longer possible to

invest it at the accustomed profit: all public securities rise to a high price, the

rate of interest on the best mercantile security falls very low, and the

complaint is general among persons in business that no money is to be made.

Does not this demonstrate how speedily profit would be at the minimum, and

the stationary condition of capital would be attained, if these accumulations

went on without any counteracting principle? But the diminished scale of all

safe gains, inclines persons to give a ready ear to any projects which hold out,

though at the risk of loss, the hope of a higher rate of profit; and speculations

ensue, which, with the subsequent revulsions, destroy, or transfer to

foreigners, a considerable amount of capital, produce a temporary rise of

interest and profit, make room for fresh accumulations, and the same round is

recommenced.

              This, doubtless, is one considerable cause which arrests profits in

their descent to the minimum, by sweeping away from time to time a part of

the accumulated mass by which they are forced down. But this is not, as

might be inferred from the language of some writers, the principal cause. If it

were, the capital of the country would not increase; but in England it does

increase greatly and rapidly. This is shown by the increasing productiveness

of almost all taxes, by the continual growth of all the signs of national wealth,

and by the rapid increase of population, while the condition of the labourers

is certainly not declining, but on the whole improving. These things prove

that each commercial revulsion, however disastrous, is very far from

destroying all the capital which has been added to the accumulations of the

country since the last revulsion preceding it, and that, invariably, room is

either found or made for the profitable employment of a perpetually

increasing capital, consistently with not forcing down profits to a lower rate.

              6. This brings us to the second of the counter.agencies, namely,improvements in production. These evidently have the effect of extending

what Mr Wakefield terms the field of employment, that is, they enable a

greater amount of capital to be accumulated and employed without

depressing the rate of profit: provided always that they do not raise, to a

proportional extent, the habits and requirements of the labourer. If the

labouring class gain the full advantage of the increased cheapness, in other

words, if money wages do not fall, profits are not raised, nor their fall

retarded. But if the labourers people up to the improvement in their condition,

and so relapse to their previous state, profits will rise. All inventions which

cheapen any of the things consumed by the labourers, unless their

requirements are raised in an equivalent degree, in time lower money wages:

and by doing so, enable a greater capital to be accumulated and employed,

before profits fall back to what they were previously.

              Improvements which only affect things consumed exclusively by the

richer classes, do not operate precisely in the same manner. The cheapening

of lace or velvet has no effect in diminishing the cost of labour; and no mode

can be pointed out in which it can raise the rate of profit, so as to make room

for a larger capital before the minimum is attained. It, however, produces an

effect which is virtually equivalent; it lowers, or tends to lower, the minimum

itself. In the first place, increased cheapness of articles of consumption

promotes the inclination to save, by affording to all consumers a surplus

which they may lay by, consistently with their accustomed manner of living;

and unless they were previously suffering actual hardships, it will require

little self-denial to save some part at least of this surplus. In the next place,

whatever enables people to live equally well on a smaller income, inclines

them to lay by capital for a lower rate of profit. If people can live on an

independence of 500l. a year in the same manner as they formerly could on

one of 1000l., some persons will be induced to save in hopes of the one, who

would have been deterred by the more remote prospect of the other. All

improvements, therefore, in the production of almost any commodity, tend in

some degree to widen the interval which has to be passed before arriving at

the stationary state: but this effect belongs in a much greater degree to the

improvements which affect the articles consumed by the labourer, since these

conduce to it in two ways; they induce people to accumulate for a lower

profit, and they also raise the rate of profit itself.

              7. Equivalent in effect to improvements in production, is theacquisition of any new power of obtaining cheap commodities from foreign

countries. If necessaries are cheapened, whether they are so by improvements

at home or importation from abroad, is exactly the same thing to wages and

profits. Unless the labourer obtains, and by an improvement of his habitual

standard, keeps, the whole benefit, the cost of labour is lowered, and the rate

of profit raised. As long as food can continue to be imported for an increasing

population without any diminution of cheapness, so long the declension of

profits through the increase of population and capital is arrested, and

accumulation may go on without making the rate of profit draw nearer to the

minimum. And on this ground it is believed by some, that the repeal of the

corn laws has opened to this country a long era of rapid increase of capital

with an undiminished rate of profit.

              Before inquiring whether this expectation is reasonable, one remark

must be made, which is much at variance with commonly received notions.

Foreign trade does not necessarily in. crease the field of employment for

capital. It is not the mere opening of a market for a country’s productions,

that tends to raise the rate of profits. If nothing were obtained in exchange for

those productions but the luxuries of the rich, the expenses of no capitalist

would be diminished; profits would not be at all raised, nor room made for

the accumulation of more capital without submitting to a reduction of profits:

and if the attainment of the stationary state were at all retarded, it would only

be because the diminished cost at which a certain degree of luxury could be

enjoyed, might induce people, in that prospect, to make fresh savings for a

lower profit than they formerly were willing to do. When foreign trade makes

room for more capital at the same profit, it is by enabling the necessaries of

life, or the habitual articles of the labourer’s consumption, to be obtained at

smaller cost. It may do this in two ways; by the importation either of those

commodities themselves, or of the means and appliances for producing them.

Cheap iron has, in a certain measure, the same effect on profits and the cost

of labour as cheap corn, because cheap iron makes cheap tools for agriculture

and cheap machinery for clothing. But a foreign trade which neither directly,

nor by any indirect consequence, increases the cheapness of anything

consumed by the labourers, does not, any more than an invention or

discovery in the like case, tend to raise profits or retard their fall; it merely

substitutes the production of goods for foreign markets, in the room of the

home production of luxuries, leaving the employment for capital neither

greater nor less than before. It is true, that there is scarcely any export tradewhich, in a country that already imports necessaries or materials, comes

within these conditions: for every increase of exports enables the country to

obtain all its imports on cheaper terms than before.

              A country which, as is now the case with England, admits food of all

kinds, and all necessaries and the materials of necessaries, to be freely

imported from all parts of the world, no longer depends on the fertility of her

own soil to keep up her rate of profits, but on the soil of the whole world. It

remains to consider how far this resource can be counted upon, for making

head during a very long period against the tendency of profits to decline as

capital increases.

              It must, of course, be supposed that with the increase of capital,

population also increases; for if it did not, the consequent rise of wages

would bring down profits, in spite of any cheapness of food. Suppose then

that the population of Great Britain goes on increasing at its present rate, and

demands every year a supply of imported food considerably beyond that of

the year preceding. This annual increase in the food demanded from the

exporting countries, can only be obtained either by great improvements in

their agriculture, or by the application of a great additional capital to the

growth of food. The former is likely to be a very slow process, from the

rudeness and ignorance of the agricultural classes in the food-exporting

countries of Europe, while the British colonies and the United States are

already in possession of most of the improvements yet made, so far as

suitable to their circumstances. There remains as a resource, the extension of

cultivation. And on this it is to be remarked, that the capital by which any

such extension can take place, is mostly still to be created. In Poland, Russia,

Hungary, Spain, the increase of capital is extremely slow. In America it is

rapid, but not more rapid than the population. The principal fund at present

available for supplying this country with a yearly increasing importation of

food, is that portion of the annual savings of America which has heretofore

been applied to increasing the manufacturing establishments of the United

States, and which free trade in corn may possibly divert from that purpose to

growing food for our market. This limited source of supply, unless great

improvements take place in agriculture, cannot be expected to keep pace with

the growing demand of so rapidly increasing a population as that of Great

Britain; and if our population and capital continue to increase with their

present rapidity, the only mode in which food can continue to be suppliedcheaply to the one, is by sending the other abroad to produce it.

              8. This brings us to the last of the counter-forces which check the

downward tendency of profits, in a country whose capital increases faster

than that of its neighbours, and whose profits are therefore nearer to the

minimum. This is, the perpetual overflow of capital into colonies or foreign

countries, to seek higher profits than can be obtained at home. I believe this

to have been for many years one of the principal causes by which the decline

of profits in England has been arrested. It has a twofold operation. In the first

place, it does what a fire, or an inundation, or a commercial crisis would have

done: it carries off a part of the increase of capital from which the reduction

of profits proceeds. Secondly, the capital so carried off is not lost, but is

chiefly employed either in founding colonies, which become large exporters

of cheap agricultural produce, or in extending and perhaps improving the

agriculture of older communities. It is to the emigration of English capital,

that we have chiefly to look for keeping up a supply of cheap food and cheap

materials of clothing, proportional to the increase of our population; thus

enabling an increasing capital to find employment in the country, without

reduction of profit, in producing manufactured articles with which to pay for

this supply of raw produce. Thus, the exportation of capital is an agent of

great efficacy in extending the field of employment for that which remains:

and it may be said truly that, up to a certain point, the more capital we send

away, the more we shall possess and be able to retain at home.

              In countries which are further advanced in industry and population,

and have therefore a lower rate of profit, than others, there is always, long

before the actual minimum is reached, a practical minimum, viz. when profits

have fallen to much below what they are elsewhere, that, were they to fall

lower, all further accumulations would go abroad. In the present state of the

industry of the world, when there is occasion, in any rich and improving

country, to take the minimum of profits at all into consideration for practical

purposes, it is only this practical minimum that needs be considered. As long

as there are old countries where capital increases very rapidly, and new

countries where profit is still high, profits in the old countries will not sink to

the rate which would put a stop to accumulation; the fall is stopped at the

point which sends capital abroad. It is only, however, by improvements in

production, and even in the production of things consumed by labourers, that

the capital of a country like England is prevented from speedily reaching thatdegree of lowness of profit, which would cause all further savings to be sent

to find employment in the colonies, or in foreign countries.

        226
               Wealth of Nations, Bk. I, Ch. 9.

        227
               Now so much better known through his apostolic exertions, by

pen, purse, and person, for the improvement of popular education, and

especially for the introduction into it of the elements of practical Political

Economy.

        228
               Bk iii, Ch. XIV.

 

  Chapter 5 – Consequences of the Tendency of Profits to a Minimum

 

 

              1. The theory of the effect of accumulation on profits, laid down in

the preceding chapter, materially alters many of the practical conclusions

which might otherwise be supposed to follow from the general principles of

Political Economy, and which were, indeed, long admitted as true by the

highest authorities on the subject.

              It must greatly abate, or rather, altogether destroy, in countries where

profits are low, the immense importance which used to be attached by

political economists to the effects which an event or a measure of government

might have in adding to or subtracting from the capital of the country. We

have now seen that the lowness of profits is a proof that the spirit of

accumulation is so active, and that the increase of capital has proceeded at so

rapid a rate, as to outstrip the two counter-agencies, improvements in

production, and increased supply of cheap necessaries from abroad: and that

unless a considerable portion of the annual increase of capital were either

periodically destroyed, or exported for foreign investment, the country would

speedily attain the point at which further accumulation would cease, or at

least spontaneously slacken, so as no longer to overpass the march of

invention in the arts which produce the necessaries of life. In such a state of

things as this, a sudden addition to the capital of the country, unaccompanied

by any increase of productive power, would be but of transitory duration;

since by depressing profits and interest, it would either diminish by a

corresponding amount the savings which would be made from income in theyear or two following, or it would cause an equivalent amount to be sent

abroad, or to be wasted in rash speculations. Neither, on the other hand,

would a sudden abstraction of capital, unless of inordinate amount, have any

real effect in impoverishing the country. After a few months or years, there

would exist in the country just as much capital as if none had been taken

away. The abstraction, by raising profits and interest, would give a fresh

stimulus to the accumulative principle, which would speedily fill up the

vacuum. Probably, indeed, the only effect that would ensue, would be that for

some time afterwards less capital would be exported, and less thrown away in

hazardous speculation.

              In the first place, then, this view of things greatly weakens, in a

wealthy and industrious country, the force of the economical argument

against the expenditure of public money for really valuable, even though

industriously unproductive, purposes. If for any great object of justice or

philanthropic policy, such as the industrial regeneration of Ireland, or a

comprehensive measure of colonization or of public education, it were

proposed to raise a large sum by way of loan, politicians need not demur to

the abstraction of so much capital, as tending to dry up the permanent sources

of the country’s wealth, and diminish the fund which supplies the subsistence

of the labouring population. The utmost expense which could be requisite for

any of these purposes, would not in all probability deprive one labourer of

employment, or diminish the next year’s production by one ell of cloth or one

bushel of grain. In poor countries, the capital of the country requires the

legislator’s sedulous care; he is bound to be most cautious of encroaching

upon it, and should favour to the utmost its accumulation at home, and its

introduction from abroad. But in rich, populous, and highly cultivated

countries, it is not capital which is the deficient element, but fertile land; and

what the legislator should desire and promote, is not a greater aggregate

saving, but a greater return to savings, either by improved cultivation, or by

access to the produce of more fertile lands in other parts of the globe. In such

countries, the government may take any moderate portion of the capital of the

country and expend it as revenue, without affecting the national wealth: the

whole being either drawn from that portion of the annual savings which

would otherwise be sent abroad, or being subtracted from the unproductive

expenditure of individuals for the next year or two, since every million spent

makes room for another million to be saved before reaching the overflowing

point. When the object in view is worth the sacrifice of such an amount of theexpenditure that furnishes the daily enjoyments of the people, the only well-

grounded economical objection against taking the necessary funds directly

from capital, consists of the inconveniences attending the process of raising a

revenue by taxation, to pay the interest of a debt.

              The same considerations enable us to throw aside as unworthy of

regard, one of the common arguments against emigration as a means of relief

for the labouring class. Emigration, it is said, can do no good to the labourers,

if, in order to defray the cost, as much must be taken away from the capital of

the country as from its population. That anything like this proportion could

require to be abstracted from capital for the purpose even of the most

extensive colonization, few, I should think, would now assert: but even on

that untenable supposition, it is an error to suppose that no benefit would be

conferred on the labouring class. If one-tenth of the labouring people of

England were transferred to the colonies, and along with them one-tenth of

the circulating capital of the country, either wages, or profits, or both, would

be greatly benefited, by the diminished pressure of capital and population

upon the fertility of the land. There would be a reduced demand for food: the

inferior arable lands would be thrown out of cultivation, and would become

pasture; the superior would be cultivated less highly, but with a greater

proportional return; food would be lowered in price, and though money

wages would not rise, every labourer would be considerably improved in

circumstances, an improvement which, if no increased stimulus to population

and fall of wages ensued, would be permanent; while if there did, profits

would rise, and accumulation start forward so as to repair the loss of capital.

The landlords alone would sustain some loss of income; and even they, only

if colonization went to the length of actually diminishing capital and

population, but not if it merely carried off the annual increase.

              2. From the same principles we are now able to arrive at a final

conclusion respecting the effects which machinery, and generally the sinking

of capital for a productive purpose, produce upon the immediate and ultimate

interests of the labouring class. The characteristic property of this class of

industrial improvements is the conversion of circulating capital into fixed:

and it was shown in the first Book, that in a country where capital

accumulates slowly, the introduction of machinery, permanent improvements

of land, and the like, might be, for the time, extremely injurious; since the

capital so employed might be directly taken from the wages fund, thesubsistence of the people and the employment for labour curtailed, and the

gross annual produce of the country actually diminished. But in a country of

great annual savings and low profits, no such effects need be apprehended.

Since even the emigration of capital, or its unproductive expenditure, or its

absolute waste, do not in such a country, if confined within any moderate

bounds, at all diminish the aggregate amount of the wages fund — still less

can the mere conversion of a like sum into fixed capital, which continues to

be productive, have that effect. It merely draws off at one orifice what was

already flowing out at another; or if not, the greater vacant space left in the

reservoir does but cause a greater quantity to flow in. Accordingly, in spite of

the mischievous derangements of the money-market which were at one time

occasioned by the sinking of great sums in railways, I was never able to agree

with those who apprehended mischief, from this source, to the productive

resources of the country. Not on the absurd ground (which to any one

acquainted with the elements of the subject needs no confutation) that railway

expenditure is a mere transfer of capital from hand to hand, by which nothing

is lost or destroyed. This is true of what is spent in the purchase of the land; a

portion too of what is paid to parliamentary agents, counsel, engineers, and

surveyors, is saved by those who receive it, and becomes capital again: but

what is laid out in the bona fide construction of the railway itself, is lost and

gone; when once expended, it is incapable of ever being paid in wages or

applied to the maintenance of labourers again; as a matter of account, the

result is that so much food and clothing and tools have been consumed, and

the country has got a railway instead. But what I would urge is, that sums so

applied are mostly a mere appropriation of the annual overflowing which

would otherwise have gone abroad, or been thrown away unprofitably,

leaving neither a railway nor any other tangible result. The railway gambling

of 1844 and 1845 probably saved the country from a depression of profits and

interest, and a rise of all public and private securities, which would have

engendered still wilder speculations, and when the effects came afterwards to

be complicated by the scarcity of food, would have ended in a still more

formidable crisis than was experienced in the years immediately following. In

the poorer countries of Europe, the rage for railway construction might have

had worse consequences than in England, were it not that in those countries

such enterprises are in a great measure carried on by foreign capital. The

railway operations of the various nations of the world may be looked upon as

a sort of competition for the overflowing capital of the countries where profitis low and capital abundant, as England and Holland. The English railway

speculations are a struggle to keep our annual increase of capital at home;
                                                          238
those of foreign countries are an effort to obtain it.

              It already appears from these considerations, that the conversion of

circulating capital into fixed, whether by railways, or manufactories, or ships,

or machinery, or canals, or mines, or works of drainage and irrigation, is not

likely, in any rich country, to diminish the gross produce or the amount of

employment for labour. How much then is the case strengthened, when we

consider that these transformations of capital are of the nature of

improvements in production, which, instead of ultimately diminishing

circulating capital, are the necessary conditions of its increase, since they

alone enable a country to possess a constantly augmenting capital without

reducing profits to the rate which would cause accumulation to stop. There is

hardly any increase of fixed capital which does not enable the country to

contain eventually a larger circulating capital, than it otherwise could possess

and employ within its own limits; for there is hardly any creation of fixed

capital which, when it proves successful, does not cheapen the articles on

which wages are habitually expended. All capital sunk in the permanent

improvement of land, lessens the cost of food and materials; almost all

improvements in machinery cheapen the labourer’s clothing or lodging, or

the tools with which these are made; improvements in locomotion, such as

railways, cheapen to the consumer all things which are brought from a

distance. All these improvements make the labourers better off with the same

money wages, better off if they do not increase their rate of multiplication.

But if they do, and wages consequently fall, at least profits rise, and, while

accumulation receives an immediate stimulus, room is made for a greater

amount of capital before a sufficient motive arises for sending it abroad. Even

the improvements which do not cheapen the things consumed by the

labourer, and which, therefore, do not raise profits nor retain capital in the

country, nevertheless, as we have seen, by lowering the minimum of profit

for which people will ultimately consent to save, leave an ampler margin than

previously for eventual accumulation, before arriving at the stationary state.

              We may conclude, then, that improvements in production, and

emigration of capital to the more fertile soils and unworked mines of the

uninhabited or thinly peopled parts of the globe, do not, as appears to a

superficial view, diminish the gross produce and the demand for labour athome; but, on the contrary, are what we have chiefly to depend on for

increasing both, and are even the necessary conditions of any great or

prolonged augmentation of either. Nor is it any exaggeration to say, that

within certain, and not very narrow, limits, the more capital a country like

England expends in these two ways, the more she will have left.

        229
               It is hardly needful to point out how fully the remarks in the text

have been verified by subsequent facts. The capital of the country, far from

having been in any degree impaired by the large amount sunk in railway

construction, was soon again overflowing.

 

 

                       Chapter 6 – Of the Stationary State

 

 

              1. The preceding chapters comprise the general theory of the

economical progress of society, in the sense in which those terms are

commonly understood; the progress of capital, of population, and of the

productive arts. But in contemplating any progressive movement, not in its

nature unlimited, the mind is not satisfied with merely tracing the laws of the

movement; it cannot but ask the further question, to what goal? Towards

what ultimate point is society tending by its industrial progress? When the

progress ceases, in what condition are we to expect that it will leave

mankind?

              It must always have been seen, more or less distinctly, by political

economists, that the increase of wealth is not boundless: that at the end of

what they term the progressive state lies the stationary state, that all progress

in wealth is but a postponement of this, and that each step in advance is an

approach to it. We have now been led to recognize that this ultimate goal is at

all times near enough to be fully in view; that we are always on the verge of

it, and that if we have not reached it long ago, it is because the goal itself flies

before us. The richest and most prosperous countries would very soon attain

the stationary state, if no further improvements were made in the productive

arts, and if there were a suspension of the overflow of capital from those

countries into the uncultivated or ill-cultivated regions of the earth.

              This impossibility of ultimately avoiding the stationary state — this

irresistible necessity that the stream of human industry should finally spread

itself out into an apparently stagnant sea must have been, to the political

economists of the last two generations, an unpleasing and discouraging

prospect; for the tone and tendency of their speculations goes completely to

identify all that is economically desirable with the progressive state, and with

that alone. With Mr M’Culloch, for example, prosperity does not mean a

large production and a good distribution of wealth, but a rapid increase of it;

his test of prosperity is high profits; and as the tendency of that very increase

of wealth, which he calls prosperity, is towards low profits, economical

progress, according to him, must tend to the extinction of prosperity. Adam

Smith always assumes that the condition of the mass of the people, though itmay not be positively distressed, must be pinched and stinted in a stationary

condition of wealth, and can only be satisfactory in a progressive state. The

doctrine that, to however distant a time incessant struggling may put off our

doom, the progress of society must ‘end in shallows and in miseries’, far

from being, as many people still believe, a wicked invention of Mr Malthus,

was either expressly or tacitly affirmed by his most distinguished

predecessors, and can only be successfully combated on his principles.

Before attention had been directed to the principle of population as the active

force in determining the remuneration of labour, the increase of mankind was

virtually treated as a constant quantity; it was, at all events, assumed that in

the natural and normal state of human affairs population must constantly

increase, from which it followed that a constant increase of the means of

support was essential to the physical comfort of the mass of mankind. The

publication of Mr Malthus’ Essay is the era from which better views of this

subject must be dated; and notwithstanding the acknowledged errors of his

first edition, few writers have done more than himself, in the subsequent

editions, to promote these juster and more hopeful anticipations.

              Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a

conscientious or prudential restraint on population is indispensable, to

prevent the increase of numbers from outstripping the increase of capital, and

the condition of the classes who are at the bottom of society from being

deteriorated. Where there is not, in the people, or in some very large

proportion of them, a resolute resistance to this deterioration — a

determination to preserve an established standard of comfort — the condition

of the poorest class sinks, even in a progressive state, to the lowest point

which they will consent to endure. The same determination would be equally

effectual to keep up their condition in the stationary state, and would be quite

as likely to exist. Indeed, even now, the countries in which the greatest

prudence is manifested in the regulating of population, are often those in

which capital increases least rapidly. Where there is an indefinite prospect of

employment for increased numbers, there is apt to appear less necessity for

prudential restraint. If it were evident that a new hand could not obtain

employment but by displacing, or succeeding to, one already employed, the

combined influences of prudence and public opinion might in some measure

be relied on for restricting the coming generation within the numbers

necessary for replacing the present.              2. I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary state of capital and

wealth with the unaffected aversion so generally manifested towards it by

political economists of the old school. I am inclined to believe that it would

be, on the whole, a very considerable improvement on our present condition.

I confess I am not charmed with the ideal of life held out by those who think

that the normal state of human beings is that of struggling to get on; that the

trampling, crushing, elbowing, and treading on each other’s heels, which

form the existing type of social life, are the most desirable lot of human kind,

or anything but the disagreeable symptoms of one of the phases of industrial

progress. It may be a necessary stage in the progress of civilization, and those

European nations which have hitherto been so fortunate as to be preserved

from it, may have it yet to undergo. It is an incident of growth, not a mark of

decline, for it is not necessarily destructive of the higher aspirations and the

heroic virtues; as America, in her great civil war, has proved to the world,

both by her conduct as a people and by numerous splendid individual

examples, and as England, it is to be hoped, would also prove, on an equally

trying and exciting occasion. But it is not a kind of social perfection which

philanthropists to come will feel any very eager desire to assist in realizing.

Most fitting, indeed, is it, that while riches are power, and to grow as rich as

possible the universal object of ambition, the path to its attainment should be

open to all, without favour or partiality. But the best state for human nature is

that in which, while no one is poor, no one desires to be richer, nor has any

reason to fear being thrust back, by the efforts of others to push themselves

forward.

              That the energies of mankind should be kept in employment by the

struggle for riches, as they were formerly by the struggle of war, until the

better minds succeed in educating the others into better things, is undoubtedly

more desirable than that they should rust and stagnate. While minds are

coarse they require coarse stimuli, and let them have them. In the meantime,

those who do not accept the present very early stage of human improvement

as its ultimate type, may be excused for being comparatively indifferent to

the kind of economical progress which excites the congratulations of ordinary

politicians; the mere increase of production and accumulation. For the safety

of national independence it is essential that a country should not fall much

behind its neighbours in these things. But in themselves they are of little

importance, so long as either the increase of population or anything else

prevents the mass of the people from reaping any part of the benefit of them.I know not why it should be matter of congratulation that persons who are

already richer than any one needs to be, should have doubled their means of

consuming things which give little or no pleasure except as representative of

wealth; or that numbers of individuals should pass over, every year, from the

middle classes into a richer class, or from the class of the occupied rich to

that of the unoccupied. It is only in the backward countries of the world that

increased production is still an important object: in those most advanced,

what is economically needed is a better distribution, of which one

indispensable means is a stricter restraint on population. Levelling

institutions, either of a just or of an unjust kind, cannot alone accomplish it;

they may lower the heights of society, but they cannot, of themselves,

permanently raise the depths.

              On the other hand, we may suppose this better distribution of

property attained, by the joint effect of the prudence and frugality of

individuals, and of a system of legislation favouring equality of fortunes, so

far as is consistent with the just claim of the individual to the fruits, whether

great or small, of his or her own industry. We may suppose, for instance

(according to the suggestion thrown out in a former chapter), a limitation of

the sum which any one person may acquire by gift or inheritance, to the

amount sufficient to constitute a moderate independence. Under this twofold

influence, society would exhibit these leading features: a well-paid and

affluent body of labourers; no enormous fortunes, except what were earned

and accumulated during a single lifetime; but a much larger body of persons

than at present, not only exempt from the coarser toils, but with sufficient

leisure, both physical and mental, from mechanical details, to cultivate freely

the graces of life, and afford examples of them to the classes less favourably

circumstanced for their growth. This condition of society, so greatly

preferable to the present, is not only perfectly compatible with the stationary

state, but, it would seem, more naturally allied with that state than with any

other.

              There is room in the world, no doubt, and even in old countries, for a

great increase of population, supposing the arts of life to go on improving,

and capital to increase. But even if innocuous, I confess I see very little

reason for desiring it. The density of population necessary to enable mankind

to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the advantages both of co-operation and

of social intercourse, has, in all the most populous countries, been attained. Apopulation may be too crowded, though all be amply supplied with food and

raiment. It is not good for man to be kept perforce at all times in the presence

of his species. A world from which solitude is extirpated, is a very poor ideal.

Solitude, in the sense of being often alone, is essential to any depth of

meditation or of character; and solitude in the presence of natural beauty and

grandeur, is the cradle of thoughts and aspirations which are not only good

for the individual, but which society could ill do without. Nor is there much

satis. faction in contemplating the world with nothing left to the spontaneous

activity of nature; with every rood of land brought into cultivation, which is

capable of growing food for human beings; every flowery waste or natural

pasture ploughed up, all quadrupeds or birds which are not domesticated for

man’s use exterminated as his rivals for food, every hedgerow or superfluous

tree rooted out, and scarcely a place left where a wild shrub or flower could

grow without being eradicated as a weed in the name of improved

agriculture. If the earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness which

it owes to things that the unlimited increase of wealth and population would

extirpate from it, for the mere purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but

not a better or a happier population, I sincerely hope, for the sake of posterity,

that they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity compels them

to it.

              It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition of

capital and population implies no stationary state of human improvement.

There would be as much scope as ever for all kinds of mental culture, and

moral and social progress; as much room for improving the Art of Living,

and much more likelihood of its being improved, when minds ceased to be

engrossed by the art of getting on. Even the industrial arts might be as

earnestly and as successfully cultivated, with this sole difference, that instead

of serving no purpose but the increase of wealth, industrial improvements

would produce their legitimate effect, that of abridging labour. Hitherto it is

questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the

day’s toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to live

the same life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an in. creased number of

manufacturers and others to make fortunes. They have increased the comforts

of the middle classes. But they have not yet begun to effect those great

changes in human destiny, which it is in their nature and in their futurity to

accomplish. Only when, in addition to just institutions, the increase of

mankind shall be under the deliberate guidance of judicious foresight, can theconquests made from the powers of nature by the intellect and energy of

scientific discoverers, become the common property of the species, and the

means of improving and elevating the universal lot.

 

 

       Chapter 7 – On the Probable Futurity of the Labouring Classes

 

 

              1. The observations in the preceding chapter had for their principal

object to deprecate a false ideal of human society. Their applicability to the

practical purposes of present times, consists in moderating the inordinate

importance attached to the mere increase of production, and fixing attention

upon improved distribution, and a large remuneration of labour, as the two

desiderata. Whether the aggregate produce increases absolutely or not, is a

thing in which, after a certain amount has been obtained, neither the legislator

nor the philanthropist need feel any strong interest: but, that it should increase

relatively to the number of those who share in it, is of the utmost possible

importance; and this, (whether the wealth of mankind be stationary, or

increasing at the most rapid rate ever known in an old country), must depend

on the opinions and habits of the most numerous class, the class of manual

labourers.

              When I speak, either in this place or elsewhere, of ‘the labouring

classes’, or of labourers as a ‘class’, I use those phrases in compliance with

custom, and as descriptive of an existing, but by no means a necessary or

permanent, state of social relations. I do not recognize as either just or

salutary, a state of society in which there is any ‘class’ which is not

labouring; any human beings, exempt from bearing their share of the

necessary labours of human life, except those unable to labour, or who have

fairly earned rest by previous toil. So long, however, as the great social evil

exists of a non-labouring class, labourers also constitute a class, and may be

spoken of, though only provisionally, in that character.

              Considered in its moral and social aspect, the state of the labouring

people has latterly been a subject of much more speculation and discussion

than formerly; and the opinion that it is not now what it ought to be, has

become very general. The suggestions which have been promulgated, and the

controversies which have been excited, on detached points rather than on the

foundations of the subject, have put in evidence the existence of two

conflicting theories, respecting the social position desirable for manual

labourers. The one may be called the theory of dependence and protection,

the other that of self-dependence.              According to the former theory, the lot of the poor, in all things

which affect them collectively, should be regulated for them, not by them.

They should not be required or encouraged to think for themselves, or give to

their own reflection or forecast an influential voice in the determination of

their destiny. It is supposed to be the duty of the higher classes to think for

them, and to take the responsibility of their lot, as the commander and

officers of an army take that of the soldiers composing it. This function, it is

contended, the higher classes should prepare themselves to perform

conscientiously, and their whole demeanour should impress the poor with a

reliance on it, in order that, while yielding passive and active obedience to the

rules prescribed for them, they may resign themselves in all other respects to

a trustful insouciance, and repose under the shadow of their protectors. The

relation between rich and poor, according to this theory (a theory also applied

to the relation between men and women) should be only partly authoritative;

it should be amiable, moral, and sentimental: affectionate tutelage on the one

side, respectful and grateful deference on the other. The rich should be in

loco parentis to the poor, guiding and restraining them like children. Of

spontaneous action on their part there should be no need. They should be

called on for nothing but to do their day’s work, and to be moral and

religious. Their morality and religion should be provided for them by their

superiors, who should see them properly taught it, and should do all that is

necessary to ensure their being, in return for labour and attachment, properly

fed, clothed, housed, spiritually edified, and innocently amused.

              This is the ideal of the future, in the minds of those whose

dissatisfaction with the present assumes the form of affection and regret

towards the past. Like other ideals, it exercises an unconscious influence on

the opinions and sentiments of numbers who never consciously guide

themselves by any ideal. It has also this in common with other ideals, that it

has never been historically realized. It makes its appeal to our imaginative

sympathies in the character of a restoration of the good times of our

forefathers. But no times can be pointed out in which the higher classes of

this or any other country performed a part even distantly resembling the one

assigned to them in this theory. It is an idealization, grounded on the conduct

and character of here and there an individual. All privileged and powerful

classes, as such, have used their power in the interest of their own selfishness,

and have indulged their self.importance in despising, and not in lovingly

caring for, those who were, in their estimation, degraded by being under thenecessity of working for their benefit. I do not affirm that what has always

been must always be, or that human improvement has no tendency to correct

the intensely selfish fillings engendered by power; but though the evil may be

lessened, it cannot be eradicated, until the power itself is withdrawn. This, at

least, seems to me undeniable, that long before the superior classes could be

sufficiently improved to govern in the tutelary manner supposed, the inferior

classes would be too much improved to be so governed.

              I am quite sensible of all that is seductive in the picture of society

which this theory presents. Though the facts of it have no prototype in the

past, the feelings have. In them lies all that there is of reality in the

conception. As the idea is essentially repulsive of a society only held together

by the relations and feelings arising out of pecuniary interests, so there is

something naturally attractive in a form of society abounding in strong

personal attachments and disinterested self.devotion. Of such feelings it must

be admitted that the relation of protector and protected has hitherto been the

richest source. The strongest attachments of human beings in general, are

towards the things or the persons that stand between them and some dreaded

evil. Hence, in an age of lawless violence and insecurity, and general

hardness and roughness of manners, in which life is beset with dangers and

sufferings at every step, to those who have neither a commanding position of

their own, nor a claim on the protection of some one who has — a generous

giving of protection, and a grateful receiving of it, are the strongest ties which

connect human beings; the feelings arising from that relation are their

warmest feelings; all the enthusiasm and tenderness of the most sensitive

natures gather round it; loyalty on the one part and chivalry on the other are

principles exalted into passions. I do not desire to depreciate these qualities.

The error lies in not perceiving, that these virtues and sentiments, like the

clanship and the hospitality of the wandering Arab, belong emphatically to a

rude and imperfect state of the social union; and that the feelings between

protector and protected, whether between kings and subjects, rich and poor,

or men and women, can no longer have this beautiful and endearing

character, where there are no longer any serious dangers from which to

protect. What is there in the present state of society to make it natural that

human beings, of ordinary strength and courage, should glow with the

warmest gratitude and devotion in return for protection? The laws protect

them, wherever the laws do not criminally fail in their duty. To be under the

power of some one, instead of being as formerly the sole condition of safety,is now, speaking generally, the only situation which exposes to grievous

wrong. The so-called protectors are now the only persons against whom, in

any ordinary circumstances, protection is needed. The brutality and tyranny

with which every police report is filled, are those of husbands to wives, of

parents to children. That the law does not prevent these atrocities, that it is

only now making a first timid attempt to repress and punish them, is no

matter of necessity, but the deep disgrace of those by whom the laws are

made and administered. No man or woman who either possesses or is able to

earn an independent livelihood, requires any other protection than that which

the law could and ought to give. This being the case, it argues great ignorance

of human nature to continue taking for granted that relations founded on

protection must always subsist, and not to see that the assumption of the part

of protector, and of the power which belongs to it, without any of the

necessities which justify it, must engender feelings opposite to loyalty.

              Of the working men, at least in the more advanced countries of

Europe, it may be pronounced certain, that the patriarchal or paternal system

of government is one to which they will not again be subject. That question

was decided, when they were taught to read, and allowed access to

newspapers and political tracts; when dissenting preachers were suffered to

go among them, and appeal to their faculties and feelings in opposition to the

creeds professed and countenanced by their superiors; when they were

brought together in numbers, to work socially under the same roof; when

railways enabled them to shift from place to place, and change their patrons

and employers as easily as their coats; when they were encouraged to seek a

share in the government, by means of the electoral franchise. The working

classes have taken their interests into their own hands, and are perpetually

showing that they think the interests of their employers not identical with

their own, but opposite to them. Some among the higher classes flatter

themselves that these tendencies may be counteracted by moral and religious

education: but they have let the time go by for giving an education which can

serve their purpose. The principles of the Reformation have reached as low

down in society as reading and writing, and the poor will not much longer

accept morals and religion of other people’s prescribing. I speak more

particularly of this country, especially the town population, and the districts

of the most scientific agriculture or the highest wages, Scotland and the north

of England. Among the more inert and less modernized agricultural

population of the southern counties, it might be possible for the gentry toretain, for some time longer, something of the ancient deference and

submission of the poor, by bribing them with high wages and constant

employment; by insuring them support, and never requiring them to do

anything which they do not like. But these are two conditions which never

have been combined, and never can be, for long together. A guarantee of

subsistence can only be practically kept up, when work is enforced and

superfluous multiplication restrained by at least a moral compulsion. It is

then, that the would-be revivers of old times which they do not understand,

would feel practically in how hopeless a task they were engaged. The whole

fabric of patriarchal or seignorial influence, attempted to be raised on the

foundation of caressing the poor, would be shattered against the necessity of

enforcing a stringent Poor-law.

              2. It is on a far other basis that the well-being and well-doing of the

labouring people must henceforth rest. The poor have come out of

leading.strings, and cannot any longer be governed or treated like children.

To their own qualities must now be commended the care of their destiny.

Modern nations will have to learn the lesson, that the well-being of a people

must exist by means of the justice and self-government, the and of the

individual citizens. The theory of dependence attempts to dispense with the

necessity of these qualities in the dependent classes. But now, when even in

position they are becoming less and less dependent, and their minds less and

less acquiescent in the degree of dependence which remains, the virtues of

independence are those which they stand in need of. Whatever advice,

exhortation or guidance is held out to the labouring classes, must henceforth

be tendered to them as equals and accepted by them with their eyes open. The

prospect of the future depends on the degree in which they can be made

rational beings.

              There is no reason to believe that prospect other than hopeful. The

progress indeed has hitherto been, and still is, slow. But there is a

spontaneous education going on in the minds of the multitude, which may be

greatly accelerated and improved by artificial aids. The instruction obtained

from newspapers and political tracts may not be the most solid kind of

instruction, but it is an immense improvement upon none at all. What it does

for a people, has been admirably exemplified during the cotton crisis, in the

case of the Lancashire spinners and weavers, who have acted with the

consistent good sense and forbearance so justly applauded, simply because,being readers of newspapers, they understood the causes of the calamity

which had befallen them, and knew that it was in no way imputable either to

their employers or to the Government. It is not certain that their conduct

would have been as rational and exemplary, if the distress had preceded the

salutary measure of fiscal emancipation which gave existence to the penny

press. The institutions for lectures and discussion, the collective deliberations

on questions of common interest, the trades unions, the political agitation, all

serve to awaken public spirit, to diffuse variety of ideas among the mass, and

to excite thought and reflection in the more intelligent. Although the too early

attainment of political franchises by the least educated class might retard,

instead of promoting, their improvement, there can be little doubt that it has

been greatly stiPulated by the attempt to acquire them. In the meantime, the

working classes are now part of the public; in all discussions on matters of

general interest they, or a portion of them, are now partakers; all who use the

press as an instrument may, if it so happens, have them for an audience; the

avenues of instruction through which the middle classes acquire such ideas as

they have, are accessible to, at least, the operatives in the towns. With these

resources, it cannot be doubted that they will increase in intelligence, even by

their own unaided efforts; while there is reason to hope that great

improvements both in the quality and quantity of school education will be

effected by the exertions either of government or of individuals, and that the

progress of the mass of the people in mental cultivation, and in the virtues

which are dependent on it, will take place more rapidly, and with fewer

intermittences and aberrations, than if left to itself.

              From this increase of intelligence, several effects may be confidently

anticipated. First: that they will become even less willing than at present to be

led and governed, and directed into the way they should go, by the mere

authority and prestige of superiors. If they have not now, still less will they

have hereafter, any deferential awe, or religious principle of obedience,

holding them in mental subjection to a class above them. The theory of

dependence and protection will be more and more intolerable to them, and

they will require that their conduct and condition shall be essentially self-

governed. It is, at the same time, quite possible that they may demand, in

many cases, the intervention of the legislature in their affairs, and the

regulation by law of various things which concern them, often under very

mistaken ideas and suggestions, to which they will demand that effect should

be given, and not rules laid down for them by other people. It is quiteconsistent with this, that they should feel respect for superiority of intellect

and knowledge, and defer much to the opinions, on any subject, of those

whom they think well acquainted with it. Such deference is deeply grounded

in human nature; but they will judge for themselves of the persons who are

and are not entitled to it.

              3. It appears to me impossible but that the increase of intelligence, of

education, and of the love of independence among the working classes, must

be attended with a corresponding growth of the good sense which manifests

itself in provident habits of conduct, and that population, therefore, will bear

a gradually diminishing ratio to capital and employment. This most desirable

result would be much accelerated by another change, which lies in the direct

line of the best tendencies of the time; the opening of industrial occupations

freely to both sexes. The same reasons which make it no longer necessary

that the poor should depend on the rich, make it equally unnecessary that

women should depend on men; and the least which justice requires is that law

and custom should not enforce dependence (when the correlative protection

has become superfluous) by ordaining that a woman, who does not happen to

have a provision by inheritance, shall have scarcely any means open to her of

gaining a livelihood, except as a wife and mother. Let women who prefer that

occupation, adopt it; but that there should be no option, no other career

possible for the great majority of women, except in the humbler departments

of life, is a flagrant social injustice. The ideas and institutions by which the

accident of sex is made the groundwork of an inequality of legal rights, and a

forced dissimilarity of social functions, must ere long be recognized as the

greatest hindrance to moral, social, and even intellectual improvement. On

the present occasion I shall only indicate, among the probable consequences

of the industrial and social independence of women, a great diminution of the

evil of over-population. It is by devoting one-half of the human species to

that exclusive function, by making it fill the entire life of one sex, and

interweave itself with almost all the objects of the other, that the animal

instinct in question is nursed into the disproportionate preponderance which it

has hitherto exercised in human life.

              4. The political consequences of the increasing power and

importance of the operative classes, and of the growing ascendancy of

numbers, which, even in England and under the present institutions, is rapidly

giving to the will of the majority at least a negative voice in the acts ofgovernment, are too wide a subject to be discussed in this place. But,

confining ourselves to economical considerations, and notwithstanding the

effect which improved intelligence in the working classes, together with just

laws, may have in altering the distribution of the produce to their advantage, I

cannot think that they will be permanently contented with the condition of

labouring for wages as their ultimate state. They may be willing to pass

through the class of servants in their way to that of employers; but not to

remain in it all their lives. To begin as hired labourers, then after a few years

to work on their own account, and finally employ others, is the normal

condition of labourers in a new country, rapidly increasing in wealth and

population, like America or Australia. But in an old and fully peopled

country, those who begin life as labourers for hire, as a general rule, continue

such to the end, unless they sink into the still lower grade of recipients of

public charity. In the present stage of human progress, when ideas of equality

are daily spreading more widely among the poorer classes, and can no longer

be checked by anything short of the entire suppression of printed discussion

and even of freedom of speech, it is not to be expected that the division of the

human race into two hereditary classes, employers and employed, can be

permanently maintained. The relation is nearly as unsatisfactory to the payer

of wages as to the receiver. If the rich regard the poor as, by a kind of natural

law, their servants and dependents, the rich in their turn are regarded as a

mere prey and pasture for the poor; the subject of demands and expectations

wholly indefinite, increasing in extent with every concession made to them.

The total absence of regard for justice or fairness in the relations between the

two, is as marked on the side of the employed as on that of the employers.

We look in vain among the working classes in general for the just pride

which will choose to give good work for good wages; for the most part, their

sole endeavour is to receive as much, and return as little in the shape of

service, as possible. It will sooner or later become insupportable to the

employing classes, to live in close and hourly contact with persons whose

interests and feelings are in hostility to them. Capitalists are almost as much

interested as labourers in placing the operations of industry on such a footing,

that those who labour for them may feel the same interest in the work, which

is felt by those who labour on their own account.

              The opinion expressed in a former part of this treatise respect. ing

small landed properties and peasant proprietors, may have made the reader

anticipate that a wide diffusion of property in land is the resource on which Irely for exempting at least the agricultural labourers from exclusive

dependence on labour for hire. Such, however, is not my opinion. I indeed

deem that form of agricultural economy to be most groundlessly cried down,

and to be greatly preferable, in its aggregate effects on human happiness, to

hired labour in any form in which it exists at present; because the prudential

check to population acts more directly, and is shown by experience to be

more efficacious; and because, in point of security, of independence, of

exercise of any other than the animal faculties, the state of a peasant

proprietor is far superior to that of an agricultural labourer in this or any other

old country. Where the former system already exists, and works on the whole

satisfactorily, I should regret, in the present state of human intelligence, to

see it abolished in order to make way for the other, under a pedantic notion of

agricultural improvement as a thing necessarily the same in every diversity of

circumstances. In a backward state of industrial improvement, as in Ireland, I

should urge its introduction, in preference to an exclusive system of hired

labour; as a more powerful instrument for raising a population from semi-

savage listlessness and recklessness, to persevering industry and prudent

calculation.

              But a people who have once adopted the large system of production,

either in manufactures or in agriculture, are not likely to recede from it; and

when population is kept in due proportion to the means of support, it is not

desirable that they should. Labour is unquestionably more productive on the

system of large industrial enterprises; the produce, if not greater absolutely, is

greater in proportion to the labour employed: the same number of persons can

be supported equally well with less toil and greater leisure; which will be

wholly an advantage, as soon as civilization and improvement have so far

advanced, that what is a benefit to the whole shall be a benefit to each

individual composing it. And in the moral aspect of the question, which is

still more important than the economical, something better should be aimed

at as the goal of industrial improvement, than to disperse mankind over the

earth in single families, each ruled internally, as families now are, by a

patriarchal despot, and having scarcely any community of interest, or

necessary mental communion, with other human beings. The domination of

the head of the family over the other members, in this state of things, is

absolute; while the effect on his own mind tends towards concentration of all

interests in the family, considered as an expansion of self, and absorption of

all passions in that of exclusive possession, of all cares in those ofpreservation and acquisition. As a step out of the merely animal state into the

human, out of reckless abandonment to brute instincts into prudential

foresight and self-government, this moral condition may be seen without

displeasure. But if public spirit, generous sentiments, or true justice and

equality are desired, association, not isolation, of interests, is the school in

which these excellences are nurtured. The aim of improvement should be not

solely to place human beings in a condition in which they will be able to do

without one another, but to enable them to work with or for one another in

relations not involving dependence. Hitherto there has been no alternative for

those who lived by their labour, but that of labouring either each for himself

alone, or for a master. But the civilizing and improving influences of

association, and the efficiency and economy of production on a large scale,

may be obtained without dividing the producers into two parties with hostile

interests and feelings, the many who do the work being mere servants under

the command of the one who supplies the funds, and having no interest of

their own in the enterprise except to earn their wages with as little labour as

possible. The speculations and discussions of the last fifty years, and the

events of the last thirty, are abundantly conclusive on this point. If the

improvement which even triumphant military despotism has only retarded,

not stopped, shall continue its course, there can be little doubt that the status

of hired labourers will gradually tend to confine itself to the description of

work-people whose low moral qualities render them unfit for anything more

independent: and that the relation of masters and work-people will be

gradually superseded by partnership, in one of two forms: in some cases,

association of the labourers with the capitalist; in others, and perhaps finally

in all, association of labourers among themselves.

              5. The first of these forms of association has long been practised, not

indeed as a rule, but as an exception. In several departments of industry there

are already cases in which every one who contributes to the work, either by

labour or by pecuniary resources, has a partner’s interest in it, proportional to

the value of his contribution. It is already a common practice to remunerate

those in whom peculiar trust is reposed, by means of a percentage on the

profits: and cases exist in which the principle is, with excellent success,

carried down to the class of mere manual labourers. In the American ships

trading to China, it has long been the custom for every sailor to have an

interest in the profits of the voyage; and to this has been ascribed the general

good conduct of those seamen, and the extreme rarity of any collisionbetween them and the government or people of the country. An instance in

England, not so well known as it deserves to be, is that of the Cornish miners.

‘In Cornwall the mines are worked strictly on the system of joint adventure;

gangs of miners contracting with the agent, who represents the owner of the

mine, to execute a certain portion of a vein and fit the ore for market, at the

price of so much in the pound of the sum for which the ore is sold. These

contracts are put up at certain regular periods, generally every two months,

and taken by a voluntary partnership of men accustomed to the mine. This

system has its disadvantages, in consequence of the uncertainty and

irregularity of the earnings, and consequent necessity of living for long

periods on credit; but it has advantages which more than counterbalance these

drawbacks. It produces a degree of intelligence, independence, and moral

elevation, which raise the condition and character of the Cornish miner far

above that of the generality of the labouring class. We are told by Dr Carham,

that “they are not only, as a class, intelligent for labourers, but men of

considerable knowledge”. Also, that “they have a character of independence,

some. thing American, the system by which the contracts are let giving the

takers entire freedom to make arrangements among themselves; so that each

man feels, as a partner in his little firm, that he meets his employers on nearly

equal terms”... With this basis of intelligence and independence in their

character, we are not surprised when we hear that “a very great number of

miners are now located on possessions of their own, leased for three lives or

ninety-nine years, on which they have built houses”; or that “281,541l. are

deposited in saving banks in Cornwall, of which two-thirds are estimated to
                      239
belong to miners”.’

              Mr Babbage, who also gives an account of this system, observes that

the payment to the crews of whaling ships is governed by a similar principle;

and that ‘the profits arising from fishing with nets on the south coast of

England are thus divided: one-half the produce belongs to the owner of the

boat and net; the other half is divided in equal portions between the persons

using it, who are also bound to assist in repairing the net when required.’ Mr

Babbage has the great merit of having pointed out the practicability, and the
                                                                                        240
advantage, of extending the principle to manufacturing industry generally.

              Some attention has been excited by an experiment of this nature,

commenced above thirty years ago by a Paris tradesman, a house-painter, M.
        241
Leclaire, and described by him in a pamphlet published in the year 1842.M. Leclaire, according to his statement, employs on an average two hundred

workmen, whom he pays in the usual manner, by fixed wages or salaries. He

assigns to himself, besides interest for his capital, a fixed allowance for his

labour and responsibility as manager. At the end of the year, the surplus

profits are divided among the body, himself included, in the proportion of
              242
their salaries. The reasons by which M. Leclaire was led to adopt this

system are highly instructive. Finding the conduct of his workmen

unsatisfactory, he first tried the effect of giving higher wages, and by this he

managed to obtain a body of excellent workmen, who would not quit his

service for any other. ‘Having thus succeeded’ (I quote from an abstract of
                                        243
the pamphlet in Chambers’ Journal, ) ‘in producing some sort of stability in

the arrangement of his establishment, M. Leclaire expected, he says, to enjoy

greater peace of mind. In this, however, he was disappointed. So long as he

was able to superintend everything himself, from the general concerns of his

business down to its minutest details, he did enjoy a certain satisfaction; but

from the moment that, owing to the increase of his business, he found that he

could be nothing more than the centre from which orders were issued, and to

which reports were brought in, his former anxiety and discomfort returned

upon him.’ He speaks lightly of the other sources of anxiety to which a

tradesman is subject, but describes as an incessant cause of vexation the

losses arising from the misconduct of workmen. An employer ‘will find

workmen whose indifference to his interests is such that they do not perform

two-thirds of the amount of work which they are capable of; hence the

continual fretting of masters, who, seeing their interests neglected, believe

themselves entitled to suppose that workmen are constantly conspiring to ruin

those from whom they derive their livelihood. If the journeyman were sure of

constant employment, his position would in some respects be more enviable

than that of the master, because he is assured of a certain amount of day’s

wages, which he will get whether he works much or little. He runs no risk,

and has no other motive to stimulate him to do his best than his own sense of

duty. The master, on the other hand, depends greatly on chance for his

returns: his position is one of continual irritation and anxiety. This would no

longer be the case to the same extent, if the interests of the master and those

of the workmen were bound up with each other, connected by some bond of

mutual security, such as that which would be obtained by the plan of a yearly

division of profits.’

              Until the passing of the Limited Liability Act, it was held that anarrangement similar to M. Leclaire’s would have been impossible in England,

as the workmen could not, in the previous state of the law, have been

associated in the profits, without being liable for losses. One of the many

benefits of that great legislative improvement has been to render partnerships

of this description possible, and we may now expect to see them carried into

practice. Messrs Briggs, of the Whitwood and Methley collieries, near

Normanton in Yorkshire, have taken the first step. They now work these

mines by a company, two-thirds of the capital of which they themselves

continue to hold, but undertake, in the allotment of the remaining third, to

give the preference to the ‘officials and operatives employed in the concern’;

and, what is of still greater importance, whenever the annual profit exceeds

10 per cent, one-half the excess is divided among the work-people and

employes, whether shareholders or not, in proportion to their earnings during

the year. It is highly honourable to these important employers of labour to

have initiated a system so full of benefit both to the operatives employed and

to the general interest of social improvement: and they express no more than

a just confidence in the principle when they say, that ‘the adoption of the

mode of appropriation thus recommended would, it is believed, add so great

an element of success to the undertaking as to increase rather than diminish

the dividend to the shareholders.’

              6. The form of association, however, which if mankind continue to

improve, must be expected in the end to predominate, is not that which can

exist between a capitalist as chief, and work. people without a voice in the

management, but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of

equality, collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their

operations, and working under managers elected and removable by

themselves. So long as this idea remained in a state of theory, in the writings

of Owen or of Louis Blanc, it may have appeared, to the common modes of

judgment, incapable of being realized, and not likely to be tried unless by

seizing on the existing capital, and confiscating it for the benefit of the

labourers; which is even now imagined by many persons, and pretended by

more, both in England and on the Continent, to be the meaning and purpose

of Socialism. But there is a capacity of exertion and self-denial in the masses

of mankind, which is never known but on the rare occasions on which it is

appealed to in the name of some great idea or elevated sentiment. Such an

appeal was made by the French Revolution of 1848. For the first time it then

seemed to the intelligent and generous of the working classes of a greatnation, that they had obtained a government who sincerely desired the

freedom and dignity of the many, and who did not look upon it as their

natural and legitimate state to be instruments of production, worked for the

benefit of the possessors of capital. Under this encouragement, the ideas

sown by Socialist writers, of an emancipation of labour to be effected by

means of association, throve and fructified; and many working people came

to the resolution, not only that they would work for one another, instead of

working for a master tradesman or manufacturer, but that they would also

free themselves, at whatever cost of labour or privation, from the necessity of

paying, out of the produce of their industry, a heavy tribute for the use of

capital; that they would extinguish this tax, not by robbing the capitalists of

what they or their predecessors had acquired by labour and preserved by

economy, but by honestly acquiring capital for themselves. If only a few

operatives had attempted this arduous task, or if, while many attempted it, a

few only had succeeded, their success might have been deemed to furnish no

argument for their system as a permanent mode of industrial organization.

But, excluding all the instances of failure, there exist, or existed a short time

ago, upwards of a hundred successful, and many eminently prosperous,

associations of operatives in Paris alone, besides a considerable number in

the departments.

              The same admirable qualities by which the associations were carried

through their early struggles, maintained them in their increasing prosperity.

Their rules of discipline, instead of being more lax, are stricter than those of

ordinary workshops; but being rules self.imposed, for the manifest good of

the community, and not for the convenience of an employer regarded as

having an opposite interest, they are far more scrupulously obeyed, and the

voluntary obedience carries with it a sense of personal worth and dignity.

With wonderful rapidity the associated workpeople have learnt to correct

those of the ideas they set out with, which are in opposition to the teaching of

reason and experience. Almost all the associations, at first, excluded piece-

work, and gave equal wages whether the work done was more or less. Almost

all have abandoned this system, and after allowing to every one a fixed

minimum, sufficient for subsistence, they apportion all further remuneration

according to the work done: most of them even dividing the profits at the end

of the year, in the same proportion as the earnings.

              It is the declared principle of most of these associations, that they donot exist for the mere private benefit of the individual members, but for the

promotion of the co-operative cause. With every extension, therefore, of their

business, they take in additional members, not (when they remain faithful to

their original plan) to receive wages from them as hired labourers, but to

enter at once into the full benefits of the association, without being required

to bring anything in, except their labour: the only condition imposed is that of

receiving during a few years a smaller share in the annual division of profits,

as some equivalent for the sacrifices of the founders. When members quit the

association, which they are always at liberty to do, they carry none of the

capital with them: it remains an indivisible property, of which the members

for the time being have the use, but not the arbitrary disposal: by the

stipulations of most of the contracts, even if the association breaks up, the

capital cannot be divided, but must be devoted entire to some work of

beneficence or of public utility. A fixed, and generally a considerable,

proportion of the annual profits is not shared among the members, but added

to the capital of the association, or devoted to the repayment of advances

previously made to it: another portion is set aside to provide for the sick and

disabled, and another to form a fund for extending the practice of association,

or aiding other associations in their need. The managers are paid, like other

members, for the time which is occupied in management, usually at the rate

of the highest paid labour: but the rule is adhered to, that the exercise of

power shall never be an occasion of profit.

              Of the ability of the associations to compete successfully with

individual capitalists, even at an early period of their existence, M.
          244
Feugueray said, ‘Les associations qui ont ete fondees depuis deux annees,

avaient bien des obstacles a vaincre; la plupart manquaient presque

absolument de capital; toutes marchaient dans une voie encore inexploree;

elles bravaient les perils qui menacent toujours les novateurs et les debutants.

Et neanmoins, dans beaucoup d’industries ou elles se sont etablies, elles

constituent deja pour les anciennes maisons une rivalite redoutable, qui

suscite meme des plaintes nombreuses dans une partie de la bourgeoisie, non

pas seulement chez les traiteurs, les limonadiers et les coiffeurs, c’est-a-dire

dans les industries ou la nature des produits permet aux associations de

compter sur la clientele democratique, mais dans d’autres industries ou elles

n’ont pas les memes avantages. On n’a qu’a consulter par exemple les

fabricants de fauteuils, de chaises, de limes, et l’on saura d’eux si les

etablissements les plus importants en leurs genres de fabrication ne sont pasles etablissements des associes.’ The vitality of these associations must

indeed be great, to have enabled about twenty of them to survive not only the

anti-socialist reaction, which for the time discredited all attempts to enable

workpeople to be their own employers — not only the tracasseries of the

police, and the hostile policy of the government since the usurpation — but in

addition to these obstacles, all the difficulties arising from the trying

condition of financial and commercial affairs from 1854 to 1858. Of the

prosperity attained by some of them even while passing through this difficult

period, I have given examples which must be conclusive to all minds as to the

brilliant future reserved for the principle of cooperation.

              It is not in France alone that these associations have commenced a

career of prosperity. To say nothing at present of Germany, Piedmont, and

Switzerland (where the Konsum–Verein of Zurich is one of the most

prosperous cooperative associations in Europe), England can produce cases

of success rivalling even those which I have cited from France. Under the

impulse commenced by Mr Owen, and more recently propagated by the

writings and personal efforts of a band of friends, chiefly clergymen and

barristers, to whose noble exertions too much praise can scarcely be given,

the good seed was widely sown; the necessary alterations in the English law

of partnership were obtained from Parliament, on the benevolent and

public.spirited initiative of Mr Slaney; many industrial associations, and a

still greater number of cooperative stores for retail purchases, were founded.

Among these are already many instances of remarkable prosperity, the most

signal of which are the Leeds Flour Mill, and the Rochdale Society of

Equitable Pioneers. Of this last association, the most successful of all, the
                                                                                  245
history has been written in a very interesting manner by Mr Holyoake; and

the notoriety which by this and other means has been given to facts so

encouraging, is causing a rapid extension of associations with similar objects

in Lancashire, Yorkshire, London, and elsewhere. It is not necessary to enter

into any details respecting the sub. sequent history of English Co-operation;

the less so, as it is now one of the recognized elements in the progressive

movement of the age, and, as such, has latterly been the subject of elaborate

articles in most of our leading periodicals, one of the most recent and best of

which was in the Edinburgh Review for October 1864: and the progress of

Cooperation from month to month is regularly chronicled in the Co-operator.

I must not, however, omit to mention the last great step in advance in

reference to the Cooperative Stores, the formation in the North of England(and another is in course of formation in London) of a Wholesale Society, to

dispense with the services of the wholesale merchant as well as of the retail

dealer, and extend to the Societies the advantage which each society gives to

its own members, by an agency for cooperative purchases, of foreign as well

as domestic commodities, direct from the producers.

              It is hardly possible to take any but a hopeful view of the prospects

of mankind, when, in two leading countries of the world, the obscure depths

of society contain simple working men whose integrity, good sense, self-

command, and honourable confidence in one another, have enabled them to

carry these noble experiments to the triumphant issue which the facts

recorded in the preceding pages attest. From the progressive advance of the

co-operative movement, a great increase may be looked for even in the

aggregate productiveness of industry. The sources of the increase are

twofold. In the first place, the class of mere distributors, who are not

producers but auxiliaries of production, and whose inordinate numbers, far

more than the gains of capitalists, are the cause why so great a portion of the

wealth produced does not reach the producers — will be reduced to more

modest dimensions. Distributors differ from producers in this, that when

producers increase, even though in any given department of industry they

may be too numerous, they actually produce more: but the multiplication of

distributors does not make more distribution to be done, more wealth to be

distributed; it does but divide the same work among a greater number of

persons, seldom even cheapening the process. By limiting the distributors to

the number really required for making the commodities accessible to the

consumers which is the direct effect of the cooperative system — a vast

number of hands will be set free for production, and the capital which feeds

and the gains which remunerate them will be applied to feed and remunerate

producers. This great economy of the world’s resources would be realized

even if co-operation stopped at associations for purchase and consumption,

without extending to production.

              The other mode in which cooperation tends, still more efficaciously,

to increase the productiveness of labour, consists in the vast stimulus given to

productive energies, by placing the labourers, as a mass, in a relation to their

work which would make it their principle and their interest — at present it is

neither — to do the utmost, instead of the least possible, in exchange for their

remuneration. It is scarcely possible to rate too highly this material benefit,which yet is as nothing compared with the moral revolution in society that

would accompany it: the healing of the standing feud between capital and

labour; the transformation of human life, from a conflict of classes struggling

for opposite interests, to a friendly rivalry in the pursuit of a good common to

all; the elevation of the dignity of labour; a new sense of security and

independence in the labouring class; and the conversion of each human

being’s daily occupation into a school of the social sympathies and the

practical intelligence.

              Such is the noble idea which the promoters of Co-operation should

have before them. But to attain, in any degree, these objects, it is

indispensable that all, and not some only, of those who do the work should be

identified in interest with the prosperity of the undertaking. Associations

which, when they have been successful, renounce the essential principle of

the system, and become joint-stock companies of a limited number of

shareholders, who differ from those of other companies only in being

working men; associations which employ hired labourers without any interest

in the profits (and I grieve to say that the Manufacturing Society even of

Rochdale has thus degenerated) are, no doubt, exercising a lawful right in

honestly employing the existing system of society to improve their position

as individuals, but it is not from them that anything need be expected towards

replacing that system by a better. Neither will such societies, in the long run,

succeed in keeping their ground against individual competition. Individual

management, by the one person principally interested, has great advantages

over every description of collective management. Co-operation has but one

thing to oppose to those advantages — the common interest of all the workers

in the work. When individual capitalists, as they will certainly do, add this to

their other points of advantage; when, even if only to increase their gains,

they take up the practice which these cooperative societies have dropped, and

connect the pecuniary interest of every person in their employment with the

most efficient and most economical management of the concern; they are

likely to gain an easy victory over societies which retain the defects, while

they cannot possess the full advantages, of the old system.

              Under the most favourable supposition, it will be desirable, and

perhaps for a considerable length of time, that individual capitalists,

associating their work-people in the profits, should coexist with even those

cooperative societies which are faithful to the cooperative principle. Unity ofauthority makes many things possible, which could not or would not be

undertaken subject to the chance of divided councils or changes in the

management. A private capitalist, exempt from the control of a body, if he is

a person of capacity, is considerably more likely than almost any association

to run judicious risks, and originate costly improvements. Co-operative

societies may be depended on for adopting improvements after they have

been tested by success, but individuals are more likely to commence things

previously untried. Even in ordinary business, the competition of capable

persons who in the event of failure are to have all the loss, and in the case of

success the greater part of the gain, will be very useful in keeping the

managers of cooperative societies up to the due pitch of activity and

vigilance.

              When, however, cooperative societies shall have sufficiently

multiplied, it is not probable that any but the least valuable work-people will

any longer consent to work all their lives for wages merely; both private

capitalists and associations will gradually find it necessary to make the entire

body of labourers participants in profits. Eventually, and in perhaps a less

remote future than may be supposed, we may, through the cooperative

principle, see our way to a change in society, which would combine the

freedom and independence of the individual, with the moral, intellectual, and

economical advantages of aggregate production; and which, without violence

or spoliation, or even any sudden disturbance of existing habits and

expectations, would realize, at least in the industrial department, the best

aspirations of the democratic spirit, by putting an end to the division of

society into the industrious and the idle, and effacing all social distinctions

but those fairly earned by personal services and exertions. Associations like

those which we have described, by the very process of their success, are a

course of education in those moral and active qualities by which alone

success can be either deserved or attained. As associations multiplied, they

would tend more and more to absorb all work-people, except those who have

too little understanding, or too little virtue, to be capable of learning to act on

any other system than that of narrow selfishness. As this change proceeded,

owners of capital would gradually find it to their advantage, instead of

maintaining the struggle of the old system with work-people of only the

worst description, to lend their capital to the associations; to do this at a

diminishing rate of interest, and at last, perhaps, even to exchange their

capital for terminable annuities. In this or some such mode, the existingaccumulations of capital might honestly, and by a kind of spontaneous

process, become in the end the joint property of all who participate in their

productive employment: a transformation which, thus effected, (and

assuming of course that both sexes participate equally in the rights and in the
                                  246
government of the association) would be the nearest approach to social

justice, and the most beneficial ordering of industrial affairs for the universal

good, which it is possible at present to foresee.

              7. I agree, then with the Socialist writers in their conception of the

form which industrial operations tend to assume in the advance of

improvement; and I entirely share their opinion that the time is ripe for

commencing this transformation, and that it should by all just and effectual

means be aided and encouraged. But while I agree and sympathize with

Socialists in this practical portion of their aims, I utterly dissent from the

most conspicuous and vehement part of their teaching, their declamations

against competition. With moral conceptions in many respects far ahead of

the existing arrangements of society, they have in general very confused and

erroneous notions of its actual working; and one of their greatest errors, as I

conceive, is to charge upon competition all the economical evils which at

present exist. They forget that wherever competition is not, monopoly is; and

that monopoly, in all its forms, is the taxation of the industrious for the

support of indolence, if not of plunder. They forget, too, that with the

exception of competition among labourers, all other competition is for the

benefit of the labourers, by cheapening the articles they consume; that

competition even in the labour market is a source not of low but of high

wages, wherever the competition for labour exceeds the competition of

labour, as in America, in the colonies, and in the skilled trades; and never

could be a cause of low wages, save by the overstocking of the labour market

through the too great numbers of the labourers’ families; while, if the supply

of labourers is excessive, not even Socialism can prevent their remuneration

from being low. Besides, if association were universal, there would be no

competition between labourer and labourer; and that between association and

association would be for the benefit of the consumers, that is, of the

associations; of the industrious classes generally.

              I do not pretend that there are no inconveniences in competition, or

that the moral objections urged against it by Socialist writers, as a source of

jealousy and hostility among those engaged in the same occupation, arealtogether groundless. But if competition has its evils, it prevents greater

evils. As M. Feugueray well says, ‘La racine la plus profonde des maux et

des iniquites qui couvrent le monde industriel, n’est pas la concurrence, mais

bien l’exploitation due travail par le capital, et la part enorme que les

possesseurs des instruments de travail prelevent sur les produits... Si la

concurrence a beaucoup de puissance pour le mal, elle n’a pas moins de

fecondite pour le bien, surtout en ce qui concerne le developpement des

facultes individuelles, et le succes des innovations.’ It is the common error of

Socialists to overlook the natural indolence of mankind; their tendency to be

passive, to be the slaves of habit, to persist indefinitely in a course once

chosen. Let them once attain any state of existence which they consider

tolerable, and the danger to be apprehended is that they will thenceforth

stagnate; will not exert themselves to improve, and by letting their faculties

rust, will lose even the energy required to preserve them from deterioration.

Competition may not be the best conceivable stimulus, but it is at present a

necessary one, and no one can foresee the time when it will not be

indispensable to progress. Even confining ourselves to the industrial

department, in which, more than in any other, the majority may be supposed

to be competent judges of improvements; it would be difficult to induce the

general assembly of an association to submit to the trouble and inconvenience

of altering their habits by adopting some new and promising invention, unless

their knowledge of the existence of rival associations made them apprehend

that what they would not consent to do, others would, and that they would be

left behind in the race.

              Instead of looking upon competition as the baneful and anti-social

principle which it is held to be by the generality of Socialists, I conceive that,

even in the present state of society and industry, every restriction of it is an

evil, and every extension of it, even if for the time injuriously affecting some

class of labourers, is always an ultimate good. To be protected against

competition is to be protected in idleness, in mental dulness; to be saved the

necessity of being as active and as intelligent as other people; and if it is also

to be protected against being underbid for employment by a less highly paid

class of labourers, this is only where old custom, or local and partial

monopoly, has placed some particular class of artisans in a privileged

position as compared with the rest; and the time has come when the interest

of universal improvement is no longer promoted by prolonging the privileges

of a few. If the slopsellers and others of their class have lowered the wages oftailors, and some other artisans, by making them an affair of competition

instead of custom, so much the better in the end. What is now required is not

to bolster up old customs, whereby limited classes of labouring people obtain

partial gains which interest them in keeping up the present organization of

society, but to introduce new general practices beneficial to all; and there is

reason to rejoice at whatever makes the privileged classes of skilled artisans

feel that they have the same interests, and depend for their remuneration on

the same general causes, and must resort for the improvement of their

condition to the same remedies, as the less fortunately circumstanced and

comparatively helpless multitude.

        230
               This passage is from the Prize Essay on the Causes and Remedies

of National Distress, by Mr Samuel Laing. The extracts which it includes are

from the Appendix to the Report of the Children’s Employment Commission.

        231
               Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 3rd edition, Ch. 26.

        232
               His establishment is 11, Rue Saint Georges.

        233
               It appears, however, that the workmen whom M. Leclaire had

admitted to this participation of profits, were only a portion (rather less than

half) of the whole number whom he employed. This is explained by another

part of his system. M. Leclaire pays the full market rate of wages to all his

workmen. The share of profit assigned to them is, therefore, a clear addition

to the ordinary gains of their class, which he very laudably uses as an

instrument of improvement, by making it the reward of desert, or the

recompense for peculiar trust.

        234
               For 27 September, 1845.

        235
               L’Association Ouvriere Industrielle et Agricole, pp. 37–8.

        236
               ‘Self-help by the People — History of Co-operation in Rochdale.’

An instructive account of this and other co-operative associations has also

been written in the ‘Companion to the Almanack’ for 1862, by Mr John

Plummer, of Kettering; himself one of the most inspiring examples of mental

cultivation and high principle in a self-instructed working man.

        237
               In this respect also the Rochdale Society has given an example of

reason and justice, worthy of the good sense and good feeling manifested in

their general proceedings. ‘The Rochdale Story.’ says Mr Holyoake, ‘renders

incidental but valuable aid towards realizing the civil independence ofwomen. Women may be members of this Store, and vote in its proceedings.

Single and married women join. Many married women become members

because their husbands will not take the trouble, and others join in it in self-

defence, to prevent the husband from spending their money in drink. The

husband cannot withdraw the savings at the Store standing in the wife’s

name, unless she signs the order.

 

 

               Book 5: On The Influence of Government

 

 

 

 

           Chapter 1 – Of the Functions of Government in General

 

 

              1. One of the most disputed questions both in political science and in

practical statesmanship at this particular period, relates to the proper limits of

the functions and agency of governments. At other times it has been a subject

of controversy how governments should be constituted, and according to

what principles and rules they should exercise their authority; but it is now

almost equally a question, to what departments of human affairs that

authority should extend. And when the tide sets so strongly towards changes

in government and legislation, as a means of improving the condition of

mankind, this discussion is more likely to increase than to diminish in

interest. On the one hand, impatient reformers, thinking it easier and shorter

to get possession of the government than of the intellects and dispositions of

the public, are under a constant temptation to stretch the province of

government beyond due bounds: while, on the other, mankind have been so

much accustomed by their rulers to interference for purposes other than the

public good, or under an erroneous conception of what that good requires,

and so many rash proposals are made by sincere lovers of improvement, for

attempting, by compulsory regulation, the attainment of objects which can

only be effectually or only usefully compassed by opinion and discussion,

that there has grown up a spirit of resistance in limine to the interference of

government, merely as such, and a disposition to restrict its sphere of action

within the narrowest bounds. From differences in the historical development

of different nations, not necessary to be here dwelt upon, the former excess,

that of exaggerating the province of government, prevails most, both in

theory and in practice, among the Continental nations, while in England the

contrary spirit has hitherto been predominant.

              The general principles of the question, in so far as it is a question of

principle, I shall make an attempt to determine in a later chapter of this Book:

after first considering the effects produced by the conduct of government in

the exercise of the functions universally acknowledged to belong to it. For

this purpose, there must be a specification of the functions which are either

inseparable from the idea of a government, or are exercised habitually and

without objection by all governments; as distinguished from those respectingwhich it has been considered questionable whether governments should

exercise them or not. The former may be termed the necessary, the latter the

optional, functions of government. By the term optional it is not meant to

imply, that it can ever be a matter of indifference, or of arbitrary choice,

whether the government should or should not take upon itself the functions in

question; but only that the expediency of its exercising them does not amount

to necessity, and is a subject on which diversity of opinion does or may exist.

              2. In attempting to enumerate the necessary functions of

government, we find them to be considerably more multifarious than most

people are at first aware of, and not capable of being circumscribed by those

very definite lines of demarcation, which, in the inconsiderateness of popular

discussion, it is often attempted to draw round them. We sometimes, for

example, hear it said that governments ought to confine themselves to

affording protection against force and fraud: that, these two things apart,

people should be free agents, able to take care of themselves, and that so long

as a person practises no violence or deception, to the injury of others in

person or property, legislatures and governments are in no way called on to

concern themselves about him. But why should people be protected by their

government, that is, by their own collective strength, against violence and

fraud, and not against other evils, except that the expediency is more

obvious? If nothing, but what people cannot possibly do for themselves, can

be fit to be done for them by government, people might be required to protect

themselves by their skill and courage even against force, or to beg or buy

protection against it, as they actually do where the government is not capable

of protecting them: and against fraud every one has the protection of his own

wits. But without further anticipating the discussion of principles, it is

sufficient on the present occasion to consider facts.

              Under which of these heads, the repression of force or of fraud, are

we to place the operation, for example, of the laws of inheritance? Some such

laws must exist in all societies. It may be said, perhaps, that in this matter

government has merely to give effect to the disposition which an individual

makes of his own property by will. This, however, is at least extremely

disputable; there is probably no country by whose laws the power of

testamentary disposition is perfectly absolute. And suppose the very common

case of there being no will: does not the law, that is, the government, decide

on principles of general expediency, who shall take the succession? and incase the successor is in any manner incompetent, does it not appoint persons,

frequently officers of its own, to collect the property and apply it to his

benefit? There are many other cases in which the government undertakes the

administration of property, because the public interest, or perhaps only that of

the particular persons concerned, is thought to require it. This is often done in

case of litigated property; and in cases of judicially declared insolvency. It

has never been contended that in doing these things, a government exceeds its

province.

              Nor is the function of the law in defining property itself, so simple a

thing as may be supposed. It may be imagined, perhaps, that the law has only

to declare and protect the right of every one to what he has himself produced,

or acquired by the voluntary consent, fairly obtained, of those who produced

it. But is there nothing recognized as property except what has been

produced? Is there not the earth itself, its forests and waters, and all other

natural riches, above and below the surface? These are the inheritance of the

human race, and there must be regulations for the common enjoyment of it.

What rights, and under what conditions, a person shall be allowed to exercise

over any portion of this common inheritance, cannot be left undecided. No

function of government is less optional than the regulation of these things, or

more completely involved in the idea of civilized society.

              Again, the legitimacy is conceded of repressing violence or

treachery; but under which of these heads are we to place the obligation

imposed on people to perform their contracts? Nonperformance does not

necessarily imply fraud; the person who entered into the contract may have

sincerely intended to fulfil it: and the term fraud, which can scarcely admit of

being extended even to the case of voluntary breach of contract when no

deception was practised, is certainly not applicable when the omission to

perform is a case of negligence. Is it no part of the duty of governments to

enforce contracts? Here the doctrine of non-interference would no doubt be

stretched a little, and it would be said, that enforcing contracts is not

regulating the affairs of individuals at the pleasure of government, but giving

effect to their own expressed desire. Let us acquiesce in this enlargement of

the restrictive theory, and take it for what it is worth. But governments do not

limit their concern with contracts to a simple enforcement. They take upon

themselves to determine what contracts are fit to be enforced. It is not enough

that one person, not being either cheated or compelled, makes a promise toanother. There are promises by which it is not for the public good that

persons should have the power of binding themselves. To say nothing of

engagements to do something contrary to law, there are engagements which

the law refuses to enforce, for reasons connected with the interest of the

promiser, or with the general policy of the state. A contract by which a

person sells himself to another as a slave, would be declared void by the

tribunals of this and of most other European countries. There are few nations

whose laws enforce a contract for what is looked upon as prostitution, or any

matrimonial engagement of which the conditions vary in any respect from

those which the law has thought fit to prescribe. But when once it is admitted

that there are any engagements which for reasons of expediency the law

ought not to enforce, the same question is necessarily opened with respect to

all engagements. Whether, for example, the law should enforce a contract to

labour, when the wages are too low or the hours of work too severe: whether

it should enforce a contract by which a person binds himself to remain, for

more than a very limited period, in the service of a given individual: whether

a contract of marriage, entered into for life, should continue to be enforced

against the deliberate will of the persons, or of either of the persons, who

entered into it. Every question which can possibly arise as to the policy of

contracts, and of the relations which they establish among human beings, is a

question for the legislator; and one which he cannot escape from considering,

and in some way or other deciding.

              Again, the prevention and suppression of force and fraud afford

appropriate employment for soldiers, policemen, and criminal judges; but

there are also civil tribunals. The punishment of wrong is one business of an

administration of justice, but the decision of disputes is another. innumerable

disputes arise between persons, without mala fides on either side, through

misconception of their legal rights, or from not being agreed about the facts,

on the proof of which those rights are legally dependent. Is it not for the

general interest that the State should appoint persons to clear up these

uncertainties and terminate these disputes? It cannot be said to be a case of

absolute necessity. People might appoint an arbitrator, and engage to submit

to his decision; and they do so where there are no courts of justice, or where

the courts are not trusted, or where their delays and expenses, or the

irrationality of their rules of evidence, deter people from resorting to them.

Still, it is universally thought right that the State should establish civil

tribunals; and if their defects often drive people to have recourse tosubstitutes, even then the power held in reserve of carrying the case before a

legally constituted court, gives to the substitutes their principal efficacy.

              Not only does the State undertake to decide disputes, it takes

precautions beforehand that disputes may not arise. The laws of most

countries lay down rules for determining many things, not because it is of

much consequence in what way they are determined, but in order that they

may be determined somehow, and there may be no question on the subject.

The law prescribes forms of words for many kinds of contract, in order that

no dispute or misunderstanding may arise about their meaning: it makes

provision that if a dispute does arise, evidence shall be procurable for

deciding it, by requiring that the document be attested by witnesses and

executed with certain formalities. The law preserves authentic evidence of

facts to which legal consequences are attached, by keeping a registry of such

facts; as of births, deaths, and marriages, of wills and contracts, and of

judicial proceedings. In doing these things, it has never been alleged that

government oversteps the proper limits of its functions.

              Again, however wide a scope we may allow to the doctrine that

individuals are the proper guardians of their own interests, and that

government owes nothing to them but to save them from being interfered

with by other people, the doctrine can never be applicable to any persons but

those who are capable of acting in their own behalf. The individual may be an

infant, or a lunatic, or fallen into imbecility. The law surely must look after

the interests of such persons. It does not necessarily do this through officers

of its own. It often devolves the trust upon some relative or connexion. But in

doing so is its duty ended? Can it make over the interests of one person to the

control of another, and be excused from supervision, or from holding the

person thus trusted, responsible for the discharge of the trust?

              There is a multitude of cases in which governments, with general

approbation, assume powers and execute functions for which no reason can

be assigned except the simple one, that they conduce to general convenience.

We may take as an example, the function (which is a monopoly too) of

coining money. This is assumed for no more recondite purpose than that of

saving to individuals the trouble, delay, and expense of weighing and

assaying. No one, however, even of those most jealous of state interference,

has objected to this as an improper exercise of the powers of government.

Prescribing a set of standard weights and measures is another instance.Paving, lighting, and cleansing the streets and thoroughfares, is another;

whether done by the general government, or as is more usual, and generally

more advisable, by a municipal authority. Making or improving harbours,

building lighthouses, making surveys in order to have accurate maps and

charts, raising dykes to keep the sea out, and embankments to keep rivers in,

are cases in point.

              Examples might be indefinitely multiplied without intruding on any

disputed ground. But enough has been said to show that the admitted

functions of government embrace a much wider field than can easily be

included within the ring-fence of any restrictive definition, and that it is

hardly possible to find any ground of justification common to them all,

except the comprehensive one of general expediency; nor to limit the

interference of government by any universal rule, save the simple and vague

one, that it should never be admitted but when the case of expediency is

strong.

              3. Some observations, however, may be usefully bestowed on the

nature of the considerations on which the question of government

interference is most likely to turn, and on the mode of estimating the

comparative magnitude of the expediencies involved. This will form the last

of the three parts, into which our discussion of the principles and effects of

government interference may conveniently be divided. The following will be

our division of the subject.

              We shall first consider the economical effects arising from the

manner in which governments perform their necessary and acknowledged

functions.

              We shall then pass to certain governmental interferences of what I

have termed the optional kind (i.e. overstepping the boundaries of the

universally acknowledged functions) which have heretofore taken place, and

in some cases still take place, under the influence of false general theories.

              It will lastly remain to inquire whether, independently of any false

theory, and consistently with a correct view of the laws which regulate

human affairs, there be any cases of the optional class in which governmental

interference is really advisable, and what are those cases.

              The first of these divisions is of an extremely miscellaneouscharacter: since the necessary functions of government, and those which are

so manifestly expedient that they have never or very rarely been objected to,

are, as already pointed out, too various to be brought under any very simple

classification. Those, however, which are of principal importance, which

alone it is necessary here to consider, may be reduced to the following

general heads.

              First, the means adopted by governments to raise the revenue which

is the condition of their existence.

              Secondly, the nature of the laws which they prescribe on the two

great subjects of Property and Contracts.

              Thirdly, the excellences or defects of the system of means by which

they enforce generally the execution of their laws, namely, their judicature

and police.

              We commence with the first head, that is, with the theory of

Taxation.

 

            Chapter 2 – On the General Principles of Taxation

 

 

              1. The qualities desirable, economically speaking, in a system of

taxation, have been embodied by Adam Smith in four maxims or principles,

which, having been generally concurred by subsequent writers, may be said

to have become classical, and this chapter cannot be better commenced than
                  247
by quoting them.

              ‘1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute to the support of

the government, as nearly as possible in proportion to their respective

abilities: that is, in proportion to the revenue which they respectively enjoy

under the protection of the state. In the observation or neglect of this maxim

consists what is called the equality or inequality of taxation.

              ‘2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be

certain, and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of payment, the

quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to the contributor, and to

every other person. Where it is otherwise, every person subject to the tax isput more or less in the power of the tax-gatherer, who can either aggravate

the tax upon any obnoxious contributor, or extort by the terror of such

aggravation, some present or perquisite to himself. The uncertainty of

taxation encourages the insolence and favours the corruption of an order of

men who are naturally unpopular, even when they are neither insolent nor

corrupt. The certainty of what each individual ought to pay is, in taxation, a

matter of so great importance, that a very considerable degree of inequality, it

appears, I believe, from the experience of all nations, is not near so great an

evil, as a very small degree of uncertainty.

              ‘3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in

which it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay it. A tax

upon the rent of land or of houses, payable at the same term at which such

rents are usually paid, is levied at a time when it is most likely to be

convenient for the contributor to pay; or when he is most likely to have

wherewithal to pay. Taxes upon such consumable goods as are articles of

luxury, are all finally paid by the consumer, and generally in a manner that is

very convenient to him. He pays them by little and little, as he has occasion

to buy the goods. As he is at liberty, too, either to buy or not to buy, as he

pleases, it must be his own fault if he ever suffers any considerable

inconvenience from such taxes.

              ‘4. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to keep

out of the pockets of the people as little as possible over and above what it

brings into the public treasury of the state. A tax may either take out or keep

out of the pockets of the people a great deal more than it brings into the

public treasury, in the four following ways. First, the levying of it may

require a great number of officers, whose salaries may eat up the greater part

of the produce of the tax, and whose perquisites may impose another

additional tax upon the people. Secondly, it may divert a portion of the labour

and capital of the community from a more to a less productive employment.

Thirdly, by the forfeitures and other penalties which those unfortunate

individuals incur who attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax, it may

frequently ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which the

community might have derived from the employment of their capitals. An

injudicious tax offers a great temptation to smuggling. Fourthly, by

subjecting the people to the frequent visits and the odious examination of the

tax-gatherers, it may expose them to much unnecessary trouble, vexation, andoppression’: to which may be added, that the restrictive regulations to which

trades and manufactures are often subjected to prevent evasion of a tax, are

not only in themselves troublesome and expensive, but often oppose

insuperable obstacles to making improvements in the processes. The last

three of these four maxims require little other explanation or illustration than

is contained in the passage itself. How far any given tax conforms to, or

conflicts with them, is a matter to be considered in the discussion of

particular taxes. But the first of the four points, equality of taxation, requires

to be more fully examined, being a thing often imperfectly understood, and

on which many false notions have become to a certain degree accredited,

through the absence of any definite principles of judgment in the popular

mind.

              2. For what reason ought equality to be the rule in matters of

taxation? For the reason, that it ought to be so in all affairs of government. As

a government ought to make no distinction of persons or classes in the

strength of their claims on it, whatever sacrifices it requires from them should

be made to bear as nearly as possible with the same pressure upon all, which,

it must be observed, is the mode by which least sacrifice is occasioned on the

whole. If any one bears less than his fair share of the burthen, some other

person must suffer more than his share, and the alleviation to the one is not,

caeteris paribus, so great a good to him, as the increased pressure upon the

other is an evil. Equality of taxation, therefore, as a maxim of politics, means

equality of sacrifice. It means apportioning the contribution of each person

towards the expenses of government, so that he shall feel neither more nor

less inconvenience from his share of the payment than every other person

experiences from his. This standard, like other standards of perfection, cannot

be completely realized; but the first object in every practical discussion

should be to know what perfection is.

              There are persons, however, who are not content with the general

principles of justice as a basis to ground a rule of finance upon, but must have

something, as they think, more specifically appropriate to the subject. What

best pleases them is, to regard the taxes paid by each member of the

community as an equivalent for value received, in the shape of service to

himself; and they prefer to rest the justice of making each contribute in

proportion to his means, upon the ground, that he who has twice as much

property to be protected, receives, on an accurate calculation, twice as muchprotection, and ought, on the principles of bargain and sale, to pay twice as

much for it. Since, however, the assumption that government exists solely for

the protection of property, is not one to be deliberately adhered to; some

consistent adherents of the quid pro quo principle go on to observe, that

protection being required for person as well as property, and everybody’s

person receiving the same amount of protection, a poll-tax of a fixed sum per

head is a proper equivalent for this part of the benefits of government, while

the remaining part, protection to property, should be paid for in proportion to

property. There is in this adjustment a false air of nice adaptation, very

acceptable to some minds. But in the first place, it is not admissible that the

protection of persons and that of property are the sole purposes of

government. The ends of government are as comprehensive as those of the

social union. They consist of all the good, and all the immunity from evil,

which the existence of government can be made either directly or indirectly

to bestow. In the second place, the practice of setting definite values on

things essentially indefinite, and making them a ground of practical

conclusions, is peculiarly fertile in false views of social questions. It cannot

be admitted, that to be protected in the ownership of ten times as much

property, is to be ten times as much protected. Neither can it be truly said that

the protection of 1000l. a year costs the state ten times as much as that of

100l. a year, rather than twice as much, or exactly as much. The same judges,

soldiers, and sailors who protect the one protect the other, and the larger

income does not necessarily, though it may sometimes, require even more

policemen. Whether the labour and expense of the protection, or the feelings

of the protected person, or any other definite thing be made the standard,

there is no such proportion as the one supposed, nor any other definable

proportion. If we wanted to estimate the degrees of benefit which different

persons derive from the protection of government, we should have to

consider who would suffer most if that protection were withdrawn: to which

question if any answer could be made, it must be, that those would suffer

most who were weakest in mind or body, either by nature or by position.

Indeed, such persons would almost infallibly be slaves. If there were any

justice, therefore, in the theory of justice now under consideration, those who

are least capable of helping or defending themselves, being those to whom

the protection of government is the most indispensable, ought to pay the

greatest share of its price: the reverse of the true idea of distributive justice,

which consists not in imitating but in redressing the inequalities and wrongsof nature.

              Government must be regarded as so pre.eminently a concern of all,

that to determine who are most interested in it is of no real importance. If a

person or class of persons receive so small a share of the benefit as makes it

necessary to raise the question, there is something else than taxation which is

amiss, and the thing to be done is to remedy the defect, instead of recognizing

it and making it a ground for demanding less taxes. As, in a case of voluntary

subscription for a purpose in which all are interested, all are thought to have

done their part fairly when each has contributed according to his means, that

is, has made an equal sacrifice for the common object; in like manner should

this be the principle of compulsory contributions: and it is superfluous to look

for a more ingenious or recondite ground to rest the principle upon.

              3. Setting out, then, from the maxim that equal sacrifices ought to be

demanded from all, we have next to inquire whether this is in fact done, by

making each contribute the same percentage on his pecuniary means. Many

persons maintain the negative, saying that a tenth part taken from a small

income is a heavier burthen than the same fraction deducted from one much

larger: and on this is grounded the very popular scheme of what is called a

graduated property tax, viz. an income tax in which the percentage rises with

the amount of the income.

              On the best consideration I am able to give to this question, it

appears to me that the portion of truth which the doctrine contains, arises

principally from the difference between a tax which can be saved from

luxuries, and one which trenches, in ever so small a degree, upon the

necessaries of life. To take a thousand a year from the possessor of ten

thousand, would not deprive him of anything really conducive either to the

support or to the comfort of existence; and if such would be the effect of

taking five pounds from one whose income is fifty, the sacrifice required

from the last is not only greater than, but entirely incommensurable with, that

imposed upon the first. The mode of adjusting these inequalities of pressure,

which seems to be the most equitable, is that recommended by Bentham, of

leaving a certain minimum of income, sufficient to provide the necessaries of

life, untaxed. Suppose 50l. a year to be sufficient to provide the number of

persons ordinarily supported from a single income, with the requisites of life

and health, and with protection against habitual bodily suffering, but not with

any indulgence. This then should be made the minimum, and incomesexceeding it should pay taxes not upon their whole amount, but upon the

surplus. If the tax be ten per cent, an income of 60l. should be considered as a

net income of 10l., and charged with 1l. a year, while an income of 1000l.

should be charged as one of 950l. Each would then pay a fixed proportion,
                                                      248
not of his whole means, but of his superfluities. An income not exceeding

50l. should not be taxed at all, either directly or by taxes on necessaries; for

as by supposition this is the smallest income which labour ought to be able to

command, the government ought not to be a party to making it smaller. This

arrangement however would constitute a reason, in addition to others which

might be stated, for maintaining taxes on articles of luxury consumed by the

poor. The immunity extended to the income required for necessaries, should

depend on its being actually expended for that purpose; and the poor who, not

having more than enough for necessaries, divert any part of it to indulgences,

should like other people contribute their quota out of those indulgences to the

expenses of the state.

              The exemption in favour of the smaller incomes should not, I think,

be stretched further than to the amount of income needful for life, health, and

immunity from bodily pain. If 50l. a year is sufficient (which may be

doubted) for these purposes, an income of 100l. a year would, as it seems to

me, obtain al1 the relief it is entitled to, compared with one of 1000l., by

being taxed only on 50l. of its amount. It may be said, indeed, that to take

100l. from 1000l. (even giving back five pounds) is a heavier impost than

1000l. taken from 10,000l. (giving back the same five pounds). But this

doctrine seems to me too disputable altogether, and even if true at all, not true

to a sufficient extent, to be made the foundation of any rule of taxation.

Whether the person with 10,000l. a year cares less for 1000l. than the person

with only 1000l. a year cares for 100l., and if so, how much less, does not

appear to me capable of being decided with the degree of certainty on which

a legislator or a financier ought to act.

              Some indeed contend that the rule of proportional taxation bears

harder upon the moderate than upon the large incomes, because the same

proportional payment has more tendency in the former case than in the latter,

to reduce the payer to a lower grade of social rank. The fact appears to me

more than questionable. But even admitting it, I object to its being considered

incumbent on government to shape its course by such considerations, or to

recognize the notion that social importance is or can be determined byamount of expenditure. Government ought to set an example of rating all

things at their true value, and riches, therefore, at the worth, for comfort or

pleasure, of the things which they will buy: and ought not to sanction the

vulgarity of prizing them for the pitiful vanity of being known to possess

them, or the paltry shame of being suspected to be without them, the

presiding motives of three-fourths of the expenditure of the middle classes.

The sacrifices of real comfort or indulgence which government requires, it is

bound to apportion among all persons with as much equality as possible; but

their sacrifices of the imaginary dignity dependent on expense, it may spare

itself the trouble of estimating.

              Both in England and on the Continent a graduated property tax

(l’impot progressif) has been advocated, on the avowed ground that the state

should use the instrument of taxation as a means of mitigating the inequalities

of wealth. I am as desirous as any one, that means should be taken to

diminish those inequalities, but not so as to relieve the prodigal at the

expense of the prudent. To tax the larger incomes at a higher percentage than

the smaller, is to lay a tax on industry and economy; to impose a penalty on

people for having worked harder and saved more than their neighbours. It is

not the fortunes which are earned, but those which are unearned, that it is for

the public good to place under limitation. A just and wise legislation would

abstain from holding out motives for dissipating rather than saving the

earnings of honest exertion. Its impartiality between competitors would

consist in endeavouring that they should all start fair, and not in hanging a

weight upon the swift to diminish the distance between them and the slow.

Many, indeed, fail with greater efforts than those with which others succeed,

not from difference of merits, but difference of opportunities; but if all were

done which it would be in the power of a good government to do, by

instruction and by legislation, to diminish this inequality of opportunities, the

differences of fortune arising from people’s own earnings could not justly

give umbrage. With respect to the large fortunes acquired by gift or

inheritance, the power of bequeathing is one of those privileges of property

which are fit subjects for regulation on grounds of general expediency; and I

have already suggested, as a possible mode of restraining the accumulation of

large fortunes in the hands of those who have not earned them by exertion, a

limitation of the amount which any one person should be permitted to acquire

by gift, bequest, or inheritance. Apart from this, and from the proposal of

Bentham (also discussed in a former chapter) that collateral inheritance abintestato should cease, and the property escheat to the state, I conceive that

inheritances and legacies, exceeding a certain amount, are highly proper

subjects for taxation: and that the revenue from them should be as great as it

can be made without giving rise to evasions, by donation inter vivos or

concealment of property, such as it would be impossible adequately to check.

The principle of graduation (as it is called,) that is, of levying a larger

percentage on a larger sum, though its application to general taxation would

be in my opinion objectionable, seems to me both just and expedient as

applied to legacy and inheritance duties.

              The objection to a graduated property tax applies in an aggravated

degree to the proposition of an exclusive tax on what is called ‘realized

property’, that is, property not forming a part of any capital engaged in

business, or rather in business under the superintendence of the owner: as

land, the public funds, money lent on mortgage, and shares (I presume) in

joint-stock companies. Except the proposal of applying a sponge to the

national debt, no such palpable violation of common honesty has found

sufficient support in this country, during the present generation, to be

regarded as within the domain of discussion. It has not the palliation of a

graduated property tax, that of lay. ing the burthen on those best able to bear

it; for ‘realized property’ includes the far larger portion of the provision made

for those who are unable to work, and consists, in great part, of extremely

small fractions. I can hardly conceive a more shameless pretension, than that

the major part of the property of the country, that of merchants,

manufacturers, farmers, and shopkeepers, should be exempted from its share

of taxation; that these classes should only begin to pay their proportion after

retiring from business, and if they never retire should be excused from it

altogether. But even this does not give an adequate idea of the injustice of the

proposition. The burthen thus exclusively thrown on the owners of the

smaller portion of the wealth of the community, would not even be a burthen

on that class of persons in perpetual succession, but would fall exclusively on

those who happened to compose it when the tax was laid on. As land and

those particular securities would thenceforth yield a smaller net income,

relatively to the general interest of capital and to the profits of trade; the

balance would rectify itself by a permanent depreciation of those kinds of

property. Future buyers would acquire land and securities at a reduction of

price, equivalent to the peculiar tax, which tax they would, therefore, escape

from paying; while the original possessors would remain burthened with iteven after parting with the property, since they would have sold their land or

securities at a loss of value equivalent to the fee-simple of the tax. Its

imposition would thus be tantamount to the confiscation for public uses of a

percentage of their property, equal to the percentage laid on their income by

the tax. That such a proposition should find any favour, is a striking instance

of the want of conscience in matters of taxation, resulting from the absence of

any fixed principles in the public mind, and of any indication of a sense of

justice on the subject in the general conduct of governments. Should the

scheme ever enlist a large party in its support, the fact would indicate a laxity

of pecuniary integrity in national affairs, scarcely inferior to American

repudiation.

              4. Whether the profits of trade may not rightfully be taxed at a lower

rate than incomes derived from interest or rent, is part of the more

comprehensive question, so often mooted on the occasion of the present

income tax, whether life incomes should be subjected to the same rate of

taxation as perpetual incomes: whether salaries, for example, or annuities, or

the gains of professions, should pay the same percentage as the income from

inheritable property.

              The existing tax treats all kinds of incomes exactly alike, taking its

sevenpence (now fourpence) in the pound, as well from the person whose

income dies with him, as from the landholder, stockholder, or mortgagee,

who can transmit his fortune undiminished to his descendants. This is a

visible injustice: yet it does not arithmetically violate the rule that taxation

ought to be in proportion to means. When it is said that a temporary income

ought to be taxed less than a permanent one, the reply is irresistible, that it is

taxed less; for the income which lasts only ten years pays the tax only ten

years, while that which lasts for ever pays for ever. On this point some

financial reformers are guilty of a great fallacy. They contend that incomes

ought to be assessed to the income tax not in proportion to their annual

amount, but to their capitalized value: that, for example, if the value of a

perpetual annuity of 100l. is 3000l., and a life annuity of the same amount,

being worth only half the number of years’ purchase, could only be sold for

1500l., the perpetual income should pay twice as much per cent income tax as

the terminable income; if the one pays 10l. a year the other should pay only

5l. But in this argument there is the obvious oversight, that it values the

incomes by one standard and the payments by another; it capitalizes theincomes, but forgets to capitalize the payments. An annuity worth 3000l.

ought, it is alleged, to be taxed twice as highly as one which is only worth

1500l., and no assertion can be more unquestionable; but it is forgotten that

the income worth 3000l. pays to the supposed income tax 10l. a year in

perpetuity, which is equivalent, by supposition, to 300l., while the terminable

income pays the same 10l. only during the life of its owner, which on the

same calculation is a value of 150l., and could actually be bought for that

sum. Already, therefore, the income which is only half as valuable, pays only

half as much to the tax; and if in addition to this its annual quota were

reduced from 10l. to 5l., it would pay, not half, but a fourth part only of the

payment demanded from the perpetual income. To make it just that the one

income should pay only half as much per annum as the other, it would be

necessary that it should pay that half for the same period, that is, in

perpetuity.

              The rule of payment which this school of financial reformers

contend for, would be very proper if the tax were only to be levied once, to

meet some national emergency. On the principle of requiring from all payers

an equal sacrifice, every person who had anything belonging to him,

reversioners included, would be called on for a payment proportioned to the

present value of his property. I wonder it does not occur to the reformers in

question, that precisely because this principle of assessment would be just in

the case of a payment made once for all, it cannot possibly be just for a

permanent tax. When each pays only once, one person pays no oftener than

another. and the proportion which would be just in that case, cannot also be

just if one person has to make the payment only once, and the other several

times. This, however, is the type of the case which actually occurs. The

permanent incomes pay the tax as much oftener than the temporary ones, as a

perpetuity exceeds the certain or uncertain length of time which forms the

duration of the income for life or years.

              All attempts to establish a claim in favour of terminable incomes on

numerical grounds — to make out, in short, that a proportional tax is not a

proportional tax — are manifestly absurd. The claim does not rest on grounds

of arithmetic, but of human wants and feelings. It is not because the

temporary annuitant has smaller means, but because he has greater

necessities, that he ought to be assessed at a lower rate.

              In spite of the nominal equality of income, A, an annuitant of 1000l.a year, cannot so well afford to pay 100l. out of it, as B who derives the same

annual sum from heritable property; A having usually a demand on his

income which B has not, namely, to provide by saving for children or others;

to which, in the case of salaries or professional gains, must generally be

added a provision for his own later years; while B may expend his whole

income without injury to his old age, and still have it all to bestow on others

after his death. If A, in order to meet these exigencies, must lay by 300l. of

his income, to take 100l. from him as income tax is to take 100l. from 700l.,

since it must be retrenched from that part only of his means which he can

afford to spend on his own consumption. Were he to throw it rateably on

what he spends and on what he saves, abating 70l. from his consumption and

30l. from his annual saving, then indeed his immediate sacrifice would be

proportionately the same as B’s: but then his children or his old age would be

worse provided for in consequence of the tax. The capital sum which would

be accumulated for them would be one-tenth less, and on the reduced income

afforded by this reduced capital, they would be a second time charged with

income tax; while B’s heirs would only be charged once.

              The principle, therefore, of equality of taxation, interpreted in its

only just sense, equality of sacrifice, requires that a person who has no means

of providing for old age, or for those in whom he is interested, except by

saving from income, should have the tax remitted on all that part of his

income which is really and bona fide applied to that purpose.

              If, indeed, reliance could be placed on the conscience of the

contributors, or sufficient security taken for the correctness of their

statements by collateral precautions, the proper mode of assessing an income

tax would be to tax only the part of income devoted to expenditure,

exempting that which is saved. For when saved and invested (and all savings,

speaking generally, are invested) it thenceforth pays income tax on the

interest or profit which it brings, notwithstanding that it has already been

taxed on the principal. Unless, therefore, savings are exempted from income

tax, the contributors are twice taxed on what they save, and only once on

what they spend. A person who spends all he receives, pays 7d. in the pound,

or say three per cent, to the tax, and no more; but if he saves part of the year’s

income and buys stock, then in addition to the three per cent which he has

paid on the principal, and which diminishes the interest in the same ratio, he

pays three per cent annually on the interest itself, which is equivalent to animmediate payment of a second three per cent on the principal. So that while

unproductive expenditure pays only three per cent, savings pay six per cent:

or more correctly, three per cent on the whole, and another three per cent on

the remaining ninety-seven. The difference thus created to the disadvantage

of prudence and economy, is not only impolitic but unjust. To tax the sum

invested, and afterwards tax also the proceeds of the investment, is to tax the

same portion of the contributor’s means twice over. The principal and the

interest cannot both together form part of his resources; they are the same

portion twice counted: if he has the interest, it is because he abstains from

using the principal; if he spends the principal, he does not receive the interest.

Yet because he can do either of the two, he is taxed as if he could do both,

and could have the benefit of the saving and that of the spending,

concurrently with one another.

              It has been urged as an objection to exempting savings from

taxation, that the law ought not to disturb, by artificial interference, the

natural competition between the motives for saving and those for spending.

But we have seen that the law disturbs this natural competition when it taxes

savings, not when it spares them; for as the savings pay at any rate the full tax

as soon as they are invested, their exemption from payment in the earlier

stage is necessary to prevent them from paying twice, while money spent in

unproductive consumption pays only once. It has been further objected, that

since the rich have the greatest means of saving, any privilege given to

savings is an advantage bestowed on the rich at the expense of the poor. I

answer, that it is bestowed on them only in proportion as they abdicate the

personal use of their riches; in proportion as they divert their income from the

supply of their own wants, to a productive investment, through which, instead

of being consumed by themselves, it is distributed in wages among the poor.

If this be favouring the rich, I should like to have it pointed out, what mode

of assessing taxation can deserve the name of favouring the poor.

              No income tax is really just, from which savings are not exempted;

and no income tax ought to be voted without that provision, if the form of the

returns, and the nature of the evidence required, could be so arranged as to

prevent the exemption from being taken fraudulent advantage of, by saving

with one hand and getting into debt with the other, or by spending in the

following year what had been passed tax-free as saving in the year preceding.

If this difficulty could be surmounted, the difficulties and complexitiesarising from the comparative claims of temporary and permanent incomes,

would disappear; for, since temporary incomes have no just claim to lighter

taxation than permanent incomes, except in so far as their possessors are

more called upon to save, the exemption of what they do save would fully

satisfy the claim. But if no plan can be devised for the exemption of actual

savings, sufficiently free from liability to fraud, it is necessary, as the next

thing in point of justice, to take into account in assessing the tax, what the

different classes of contributors ought to save. And there would probably be

no other mode of doing this than the rough expedient of two different rates of

assessment. There would be great difficulty in taking into account differences

of duration between one terminable income and another; and in the most

frequent case, that of incomes dependent on life, differences of age and health

would constitute such extreme diversity as it would be impossible to take

proper cognizance of. It would probably be necessary to be content with one

uniform rate for all incomes of inheritance, and another uniform rate for all

those which necessarily terminate with the life of the individual. In fixing the

proportion between the two rates, there must inevitably be something

arbitrary; perhaps a deduction of one-fourth in favour of life-incomes would

be as little objectionable as any which could be made, it being thus assumed

that one-fourth of a life-income is, on the average of all ages and states of

health, a suitable proportion to be laid by as a provision for successors and
            249
for old age.

              Of the net profits of persons in business, a part, as before observed,

may be considered as interest on capital, and of a perpetual character, and the

remaining part as remuneration for the skill and labour of superintendence.

The surplus beyond interest depends on the life of the individual, and even on

his continuance in business, and is entitled to the full amount of exemption

allowed to terminable incomes. It has also, I conceive, a just claim to a

further amount of exemption in consideration of its precariousness. An

income which some not unusual vicissitude may reduce to nothing, or even

convert into a loss, is not the same thing to the feelings of the possessor as a

permanent income of 1000l. a year, even though on an average of years it

may yield 1000l. a year. If life.incomes were assessed at three-fourths of their

amount, the profits of business, after deducting interest on capital, should not

only be assessed at three-fourths, but should pay, on that assessment, a lower

rate. Or perhaps the claims of justice in this respect might be sufficiently met

by allowing the deduction of a fourth on the entire income, interest included.              These are the chief cases, of ordinary occurrence, in which any

difficulty arises in interpreting the maxim of equality of taxation. The proper

sense to be put upon it, as we have seen in the preceding example, is, that

people should be taxed, not in proportion to what they have, but to what they

can afford to spend. It is no objection to this principle that we cannot apply it

consistently to all cases. A person with a life-income and precarious health,

or who has many persons depending on his exertions, must, if he wishes to

provide for them after his death, be more rigidly economical than one who

has a life-income of equal amount, with a strong constitution, and few claims

upon him; and if it be conceded that taxation cannot accommodate itself to

these distinctions, it is argued that there is no use in attending to any

distinctions, where the absolute amount of income is the same. But the

difficulty of doing perfect justice is no reason against doing as much as we

can. Though it may be a hardship to an annuitant whose life is only worth

five years’ purchase, to be allowed no greater abatement than is granted to

one whose life is worth twenty, it is better for him even so, than if neither of

them were allowed any abatement at all.

              5. Before leaving the subject of Equality of Taxation, I must remark

that there are cases in which exceptions may be made to it, consistently with

that equal justice which is the groundwork of the rule. Suppose that there is a

kind of income which constantly tends to increase, without any exertion or

sacrifice on the part of the owners: those owners constituting a class in the

community, whom the natural course of things progressively enriches,

consistently with complete passiveness on their own part. In such a case it

would be no violation of the principles on which private property is

grounded, if the state should appropriate this increase of wealth, or part of it,

as it arises. This would not properly be taking anything from anybody; it

would merely be applying an accession of wealth, created by circumstances,

to the benefit of society, instead of allowing it to become an unearned

appendage to the riches of a particular class.

              Now this is actually the case with rent. The ordinary progress of a

society which increases in wealth, is at all times tending to augment the

incomes of landlords; to give them both a greater amount and a greater

proportion of the wealth of the community, independently of any trouble or

outlay incurred by themselves. They grow richer, as it were in their sleep,

without working, risking, or economizing. What claim have they, on thegeneral principle of social justice, to this accession of riches? In what would

they have been wronged if society had, from the beginning, reserved the right

of taxing the spontaneous increase of rent, to the highest amount required by

financial exigencies? I admit that it would be unjust to come upon each

individual estate, and lay hold of the increase which might be found to have

taken place in its rental; because there would be no means of distinguishing

in individual cases, between an increase owing solely to the general

circumstances of society, and one which was the effect of skill and

expenditure on the part of the proprietor. The only admissible mode of

proceeding would be by a general measure. The first step should be a

valuation of all the land in the country. The present value of all land should

be exempt from the tax; but after an interval had elapsed, during which

society had increased in population and capital, a rough estimate might be

made of the spontaneous increase which had accrued to rent since the

valuation was made. Of this the average price of produce would be some

criterion: if that had risen, it would be certain that rent had increased, and (as

already shown) even in a greater ratio than the rise of price. On this and other

data, an approximate estimate might be made, how much value had been

added to the land of the country by natural causes; and in laying on a general

land-tax, which for fear of miscalculation should be considerably within the

amount thus indicated, there would be an assurance of not touching any

increase of income which might be the result of capital expended or industry

exerted by the proprietor.

              But though there could be no question as to the justice of taxing the

increase of rent, if society had avowedly reserved the right, has not society

waived that right by not exercising it? In England, for example, have not all

who bought land for the last century or more, given value not only for the

existing income, but for the prospects of increase, under an implied assurance

of being only taxed in the same proportion with other incomes? This

objection, in so far as valid, has a different degree of validity in different

countries; depending on the degree of desuetude into which society has

allowed a right to fall, which, as no one can doubt, it once fully possessed. In

most countries of Europe, the right to take by taxation, as exigency might

require, an indefinite portion of the rent of land, has never been allowed to

slumber. In several parts of the Continent, the land-tax forms a large

proportion of the public revenues, and has always been confessedly liable to

be raised or lowered without reference to other taxes. In these countries noone can pretend to have become the owner of land on the faith of never being

called upon to pay an increased land-tax. In England the land-tax has not

varied since the early part of the last century. The last act of the legislature in

relation to its amount, was to diminish it; and though the subsequent increase

in the rental of the country has been immense, not only from agriculture, but

from the growth of towns and the increase of buildings, the ascendancy of

landholders in the legislature has prevented any tax from being imposed, as it

so justly might, upon the very large portion of this increase which was

unearned, and, as it were, accidental. For the expectations thus raised, it

appears to me that an amply sufficient allowance is made, if the whole

increase of income which has accrued during this long period from a mere

natural law, without exertion or sacrifice, is held sacred from any peculiar

taxation. From the present date, or any subsequent time at which the

legislature may think fit to assert the principle, I see no objection to declaring

that the future increment of rent should be liable to special taxation; in doing

which all injustice to the landlords would be obviated, if the present market-

price of their land were secured to them; since that includes the present value

of all future expectations. With reference to such a tax, perhaps a safer

criterion than either a rise of rents or a rise of the price of corn, would be a

general rise in the price of land. It would be easy to keep the tax within the

amount which would reduce the market value of land below the original

valuation: and up to that point, whatever the amount of the tax might be, no

injustice would be done to the proprietors.

              6. But whatever may be thought of the legitimacy of making the

State a sharer in all future increase of rent from natural causes, the existing

land-tax (which in this country unfortunately is very small) ought not to be

regarded as a tax, but as a rent-charge in favour of the public; a portion of the

rent, reserved from the beginning by the State, which has never belonged to

or formed part of the income of the landlords, and should not therefore be

counted to them as part of their taxation, so as to exempt them from their fair

share of every other tax. As well might the tithe be regarded as a tax on the

landlords: as well, in Bengal, where the State, though entitled to the whole

rent of the land, gave away one-tenth of it to individuals, retaining the other

nine-tenths, might those nine-tenths be considered as an unequal and unjust

tax on the grantees of the tenth. That a person owns part of the rent, does not

make the rest of it his just right, injuriously withheld from him. The landlords

originally held their estates subject to feudal burthens, for which the presentland-tax is an exceedingly small equivalent, and for their relief from which

they should have been required to pay a much higher price. All who have

bought land since the tax existed have bought it subject to the tax. There is

not the smallest pretence for looking upon it as a payment exacted from the

existing race of landlords.

              These observations are applicable to a land-tax, only in so far as it is

a peculiar tax, and not when it is merely a mode of levying from the landlords

the equivalent of what is taken from other classes. In France, for example,

there are peculiar taxes on other kinds of property and income (the mobilier

and the patente), and supposing the land-tax to be not more than equivalent to

these, there would be no ground for contending that the State had reserved to

itself a rent-charge on the land. But wherever and in so far as income derived

from land is prescriptively subject to a deduction for public purposes, beyond

the rate of taxation levied on other incomes, the surplus is not properly

taxation, but a share of the property in the soil, reserved by the state. In this

country there are no peculiar taxes on other classes, corresponding to, or

intended to countervail, the land-tax. The whole of it, therefore, is not

taxation, but a rent-charge, and is as if the state had retained, not a portion of

the rent, but a portion of the land. It is no more a burthen on the landlord,

than the share of one joint tenant is a burthen on the other. The landlords are

entitled to no compensation for it, nor have they any claim to its being

allowed for, as part of their taxes. Its continuance on the existing footing is
                                                            250
no infringement of the principle of Equal Taxation.

              We shall hereafter consider, in treating of Indirect Taxation, how far,

and with what modifications, the rule of equality is applicable to that

department.

              7. In addition to the preceding rules, another general rule of taxation

is sometimes laid down, namely, that it should fall on income, and not on

capital. That taxation should not encroach upon the amount of the national

capital, is indeed of the greatest importance; but this encroachment, when it

occurs, is not so much a consequence of any particular mode of taxation, as

of its excessive amount. Over-taxation, carried to a sufficient extent, is quite

capable of ruining the most industrious community, especially when it is in

any degree arbitrary, so that the payer is never certain how much or how little

he shall be allowed to keep; or when it is so laid on as to render industry and

economy a bad calculation. But if these errors be avoided, and the amount oftaxation be not greater than it is at present even in the most heavily taxed

country of Europe, there is no danger lest it should deprive the country of a

portion of its capital.

              To provide that taxation shall fall entirely on income, and not at all

on capital, is beyond the power of any system of fiscal arrangements. There is

no tax which is not partly paid from what would otherwise have been saved;

no tax, the amount of which, if remitted, would be wholly employed in

increased expenditure, and no part whatever laid by as an addition to capital.

All taxes, therefore, are in some sense partly paid out of capital; and in a poor

country it is impossible to impose any tax which will not impede the increase

of the national wealth. But in a country where capital abounds, and the spirit

of accumulation is strong, this effect of taxation is scarcely felt. Capital

having reached the stage in which, were it not for a perpetual succession of

improvements in production, any further increase would soon be stopped —

and having so strong a tendency even to outrun those improvements, that

profits are only kept above the minimum by emigration of capital, or by a

periodical sweep called a commercial crisis; to take from capital by taxation

what emigration would remove, or a commercial crisis destroy, is only to do

what either of those causes would have done, namely, to make a clear space

for further saving.

              I cannot, therefore, attach any importance, in a wealthy country, to

the objection made against taxes on legacies and inheritances, that they are

taxes on capital. It is perfectly true that they are so. As Ricardo observes, if

100l. are taken from any one in a tax on houses or on wine, he will probably

save it, or a part of it, by living in a cheaper house, consuming less wine, or

retrenching from some other of his expenses; but if the same sum be taken

from him because he has received a legacy of l000l., he considers the legacy

as only 900l., and feels no more inducement than at any other time (probably

feels rather less inducement) to economize in his expenditure. The tax,

therefore, is wholly paid out of capital: and there are countries in which this

would be a serious objection. But in the first place, the argument cannot

apply to any country which has a national debt, and devotes any portion of

revenue to paying it off; since the produce of the tax, thus applied, still

remains capital, and is merely transferred from the taxpayer to the

fundholder. But the objection is never applicable in a country which increases

rapidly in wealth. The amount which would be derived, even from a veryhigh legacy duty, in each year, is but a small fraction of the annual increase

of capital in such a country; and its abstraction would but make room for

saving to an equivalent amount: while the effect of not taking it, is to prevent

that amount of saving, or cause the savings, when made, to be sent abroad for

investment. A country which, like England, accumulates capital not only for

itself, but for half the world, may be said to defray the whole of its public

expenses from its overflowings; and its wealth is probably at this moment as

great as if it had no taxes at all. What its taxes really do is, to subtract from its

means, not of production, but of enjoyment; since whatever any one pays in

taxes, he could, if it were not taken for that purpose, employ in indulging his

ease, or in gratifying some want or taste which at present remains unsatisfied.

        238
               Wealth of Nations, Bk V, Ch. 2.

        239
               This principle of assessment has been partially adopted by Mr

Gladstone in renewing the income-tax. From 100l., at which the tax begins,

up to 200l., the income only pays tax on the excess above 60l.

        240
               Mr Hubbard, the first person who, as a practical legislator, has

attempted the rectification of the income tax on principles of unimpeachable

justice, and whose well-conceived plan wants little of being as near an

approximation to a just assessment as it is likely that means could be found of

carrying into practical effect, proposes a deduction not of a fourth but of a

third, in favour of industrial and professional incomes. He fixes on this ratio,

on the ground that, independently of all consideration as to what the

industrial and professional classes ought to save, the attainable evidence goes

to prove that a third of their incomes is what on an average they do save, over

and above the proportion saved by other classes. ‘The savings’ (Mr Hubbard

observes) ‘effected out of incomes derived from invested property are

estimated at one-tenth. The savings effected out of industrial incomes are

estimated at four-tenths. The amounts which would be assessed under these

two classes being nearly equal, the adjustment is simplified by striking off

one-tenth on either side, and then reducing by three-tenths, or one.third, the

assessable amount of industrial incomes.’ Proposed Report (p. xiv of the

Report and Evidence of the Committee of 1861). In such an estimate there

must be a large element of conjecture; but in so far as it can be substantiated,

it affords a valid ground for the practical conclusion which Mr Hubbard

founds on it.              Several writers on the subject, including Mr Mill in his Elements of

Political Economy, and Mr M’Culloch in his work on Taxation, have

contended that as much should be deducted as would be sufficient to insure

the possessor’s life for a sum which would give to his successors for ever an

income equal to what he reserves for himself; since this is what the possessor

of heritable property can do without saving at all: in other words, that

temporary incomes should be converted into perpetual incomes of equal

present value, and taxed as such. If the owners of life-incomes actually did

save this large proportion of their income, or even a still larger. I would

gladly grant them an exemption from taxation on the whole amount, since, if

practical means could be found of doing it, I would exempt savings

altogether. But I cannot admit that they have a claim to exemption on the

general assumption of their being obliged to save this amount. Owners of

life-incomes are not bound to forego the enjoyment of them for the sake of

leaving to a perpetual line of successors an independent provision equal to

their own temporary one; and no one ever dreams of doing so. Least of all is

it to be required or expected from those whose incomes are the fruits of

personal exertion, that they should leave to their posterity for ever, without

any necessity for exertion, the same incomes which they allow to themselves.

All they are bound to do, even for their children, is to place them in

circumstances in which they will have favourable chances of earning their

own living. To give, however, either to children or to others, by bequest,

being a legitimate inclination, which these persons cannot indulge without

laying by a part of their income, while the owners of heritable property can;

this real inequality in cases where the incomes themselves are equal, should

be considered, to a reasonable degree, in the adjustment of taxation, so as to

require from both, as nearly as practicable, an equal sacrifice.

        241
               The same remarks obviously apply to those local taxes, of the

peculiar pressure of which on landed property so much has been said by the

remnant of the Protectionists. As much of these burthrens as is of old

standing, ought to be regarded as a prescriptive deduction or reservation, for

public purposes, of a portion of the rent. And any recent additions have either

been incurred for the benefit of the owners of landed property, or occasioned

by their fault: in neither case giving them any just ground of complaint.

 

                             Chapter 3 – Of Direct Taxes

 

 

              1. Taxes are either direct or indirect. A direct tax is one which is

demanded from the very persons who, it is intended or desired, should pay it.

Indirect taxes are those which are demanded from one person in the

expectation and intention that he shall indemnify himself at the expense of

another: such as the excise or customs. The producer or importer of a

commodity is called upon to pay a tax on it, not with the intention to levy a

peculiar contribution upon him, but to tax through him the consumers of the

commodity, from whom it is supposed that he will recover the amount by

means of an advance in price. Direct taxes are either on income, or on

expenditure. Most taxes on expenditure are indirect, but some are direct,

being imposed not on the producer or seller of an article, but immediately on

the consumer. A house-tax, for example, is a direct tax on expenditure, if

levied, as it usually is, on the occupier of the house. If levied on the builder or

owner, it would be an indirect tax. A window-tax is a direct tax on

expenditure; so are the taxes on horses and carriages, and the rest of what are

called the assessed taxes.

              The sources of income are rent, profits, and wages. This includes

every sort of income, except gift or plunder. Taxes may be laid on any one of

the three kinds of income, or an uniform tax on all of them. We will consider

these in their order.

              2. A tax on rent falls wholly on the landlord. There are no means by

which he can shift the burthen upon any one else. It does not affect the value

or price of agricultural produce, for this is determined by the cost of

production in the most unfavourable circumstances, and in those

circumstances, as we have so often demonstrated, no rent is paid. A tax on

rent, therefore, has no effect, other than its obvious one. It merely takes so

much from the landlord, and transfers it to the state.

              This, however, is, in strict exactness, only true of the rent which is

the result either of natural causes, or of improvements made by tenants.

When the landlord makes improvements which increase the productive power

of his land, he is remunerated for them by an extra payment from the tenant;

and this payment, which to the landlord is properly a profit on capital, isblended and confounded with rent; which indeed it really is, to the tenant, and

in respect of the economical laws which determine its amount. A tax on rent,

if extending to this portion of it, would discourage landlords from making

improvements: but it does not follow that it would raise the price of

agricultural produce. The same improvements might be made with the

tenant’s capital, or even with the landlord’s if lent by him to the tenant;

provided he is willing to give the tenant so long a lease as will enable him to

indemnify himself before it expires. But whatever hinders improvements

from being made in the manner in which people prefer to make them, will

often prevent them from being made at all: and on this account a tax on rent

would be inexpedient, unless some means could be devised of excluding

from its operation that portion of the nominal rent which may be regarded as

landlord’s profit. This argument, however, is not needed for the

condemnation of such a tax. A peculiar tax on the income of any class, not

balanced by taxes on other classes, is a violation of justice, and amounts to a

partial confiscation. I have already shown grounds for excepting from this

censure a tax which, sparing existing rents, should content itself with

appropriating a portion of any future increase arising from the mere action of

natural causes. But even this could not be justly done, without offering as an

alternative the market price of the land. In the case of a tax on rent which is

not peculiar, but accompanied by an equivalent tax on other incomes, the

objection grounded on its reaching the profit arising from improvements is

less applicable: since, profits being taxed as well as rent, the profit which

assumes the form of rent is liable to its share in common with other profits;

but since profits altogether ought, for reasons formerly stated, to be taxed

somewhat lower than rent properly so called, the objection is only

diminished, not removed.

              3. A tax on profits, like a tax on rent, must, at least in its immediate

operation, fall wholly on the payer. All profits being alike affected, no relief

can be obtained by a change of employment. If a tax were laid on the profits

of any one branch of productive employment, the tax would be virtually an

increase of the cost of production, and the value and price of the article would

rise accordingly; by which the tax would be thrown upon the consumers of

the commodity, and would not affect profits. But a general and equal tax on

all profits would not affect general prices, and would fall, at least in the first

instance, on capitalists alone.              There is, however, an ulterior effect, which, in a rich and prosperous

country, requires to be taken into account. When the capital accumulated is

so great and the rate of annual accumulation so rapid, that the country is only

kept from attaining the stationary state by the emigration of capital, or by

continual improvements in production; any circumstance which virtually

lowers the rate of profit cannot be without a decided influence on these

phenomena. It may operate in different ways. The curtailment of profit, and

the consequent increased difficulty in making a fortune or obtaining a

subsistence by the employment of capital, may act as a stimulus to

inventions, and to the use of them when made. If improvements in production

are much accelerated, and if these improvements cheapen, directly or

indirectly, any of the things habitually consumed by the labourer, profits may

rise, and rise sufficiently to make up for all that is taken from them by the

tax. In that case the tax will have been realized without loss to any one, the

produce of the country being increased by an equal, or what would in that

case be a far greater amount. The tax, however, must even in this case be

considered as paid from profits, because the receivers of profits are those who

would be benefited if it were taken off.

              But though the artificial abstraction of a portion of profits would

have a real tendency to accelerate improvements in production, no

considerable improvements might actually result, or only of such a kind as

not to raise general profits at all, or not to raise them so much as the tax had

diminished them. If so, the rate of profit would be brought closer to that

practical minimum, to which it is constantly approaching: and this diminished

return to capital would either give a decided check to further accumulation, or

would cause a greater proportion than before of the annual increase to be sent

abroad, or wasted in unprofitable speculations. At its first imposition the tax

falls wholly on profits: but the amount of increase of capital, which the tax

prevents, would, if it had been allowed to continue, have tended to reduce

profits to the same level; and at every period of ten or twenty years there will

be found less difference between profits as they are, and profits as they would

in that case have been: until at last there is no difference, and the tax is

thrown either upon the labourer or upon the landlord. The real effect of a tax

on profits is to make the country possess at any given period, a smaller

capital and a smaller aggregate production, and to make the stationary state

be attained earlier, and with a smaller sum of national wealth. It is possible

that a tax on profits might even diminish the existing capital of the country. Ifthe rate of profit is already at the practical minimum, that is, at the point at

which all that portion of the annual increment which would tend to reduce

profits is carried off either by exportation or by speculation; then if a tax is

imposed which reduces profits still lower, the same causes which previously

carried off the increase would probably carry off a portion of the existing

capital. A tax on profits is thus, in a state of capital and accumulation like that

in England, extremely detrimental to the national wealth. And this effect is

not confined to the case of a peculiar, and therefore intrinsically unjust, tax

on profits. The mere fact that profits have to bear their share of a heavy

general taxation, tends, in the same manner as a peculiar tax, to drive capital

abroad, to stimulate imprudent speculations by diminishing safe gains, to

discourage further accumulation, and to accelerate the attainment of the

stationary state. This is thought to have been the principal cause of the

decline of Holland, or rather of her having ceased to make progress.

              Even in countries which do not accumulate so fast as to be always

within a short interval of the stationary state, it seems impossible that, if

capital is accumulating at all, its accumulation should not be in some degree

retarded by the abstraction of a portion of its profit; and unless the effect in

stimulating improvements be a full counter-balance, it is inevitable that a part

of the burthen will be thrown off the capitalist, upon the labourer or the

landlord. One or other of these is always the loser by a diminished rate of

accumulation. If population continues to increase as before, the labourer

suffers: if not, cultivation is checked in its advance, and the landlords lose the

accession of rent which would have accrued to them. The only countries in

which a tax on profits seems likely to be permanently a burthen on capitalists

exclusively, are those in which capital is stationary, because there is no new

accumulation. In such countries the tax might not prevent the old capital from

being kept up through habit, or from unwillingness to submit to

impoverishment, and so the capitalist might continue to bear the whole of the

tax. It is seen from these considerations that the effects of a tax on profits are

much more complex, more various, and in some points more uncertain, than

writers on this subject have commonly supposed.

              4. We now turn to Taxes on Wages. The incidence of these is very

different, according as the wages taxed are those of ordinary unskilled labour,

or are the remuneration of such skilled or privileged employments, whether

manual or intellectual, as are taken out of the sphere of competition by anatural or conferred monopoly.

              I have already remarked, that in the present low state of popular

education, all the higher grades of mental or educated labour are at a

monopoly price; exceeding the wages of common workmen in a degree very

far beyond that which is due to the expense, trouble, and loss of time required

in qualifying for the employment. Any tax levied on these gains, which still

leaves them above (or not below) their just proportion, falls on those who pay

it; they have no means of relieving themselves at the expense of any other

class. The same thing is true of ordinary wages, in cases like that of the

United States, or of a new colony, where, capital increasing as rapidly as

population can increase, wages are kept up by the increase of capital, and not

by the adherence of the labourers to a fixed standard of comforts. In such a

case some deterioration of their condition, whether by a tax or otherwise,

might possibly take place without checking the increase of population. The

tax would in that case fall on the labourers themselves, and would reduce

them prematurely to that lower state to which, on the same supposition with

regard to their habits, they would in any case have been reduced ultimately,

by the inevitable diminution in the rate of increase of capital, through the

occupation of all the fertile land.

              Some will object that, even in this case, a tax on wages cannot be

detrimental to the labourers, since the money raised by it, being expended in

the country, comes back to the labourers again through the demand for

labour. The fallacy, however, of this doctrine has been so completely

exhibited in the First Book, that I need do little more than refer to that

exposition. It was there shown that funds expended unproductively have no

tendency to raise or keep up wages, unless when expended in the direct

purchase of labour. If the government took a tax of a shilling a week from

every labourer, and laid it all out in hiring labourers for military service,

public works, or the like, it would, no doubt, indemnify the labourers as a

class for all that the tax took from them. That would really be ‘spending the

money among the people’. But if it expended the whole in buying goods, or

in adding to the salaries of employes who bought goods with it, this would

not increase the demand for labour, or tend to raise wages. Without, however,

reverting to general principles, we may rely on an obvious reductio ad

absurdum. If to take money from the labourers and spend it in commodities is

giving it back to the labourers, then, to take money from other classes, andspend it in the same manner, must be giving it to the labourers; consequently,

the more a government takes in taxes, the greater will be the demand for

labour, and the more opulent the condition of the labourers. A proposition the

absurdity of which no one can fail to see.

              In the condition of most communities, wages are regulated by the

habitual standard of living to which the labourers adhere, and on less than

which they will not multiply. Where there exists such a standard, a tax on

wages will indeed for a time be borne by the labourers themselves; but unless

this temporary depression has the effect of lowering the standard itself, the

increase of population will receive a check, which will raise wages, and

restore the labourers to their previous condition. On whom, in this case, will

the tax fall? According to Adam Smith, on the community generally, in their

character of consumers; since the rise of wages, he thought, would raise

general prices. We have seen, however, that general prices depend on other

causes, and are never raised by any circumstance which affects all kinds of

productive employment in the same manner and degree. A rise of wages

occasioned by a tax, must, like any other increase of the cost of labour, be

defrayed from profits. To attempt to tax day.labourers, in an old country, is

merely to impose an extra tax upon all employers of common labour; unless

the tax has the much worse effect of permanently lowering the standard of

comfortable subsistence in the minds of the poorest class.

              We find in the preceding considerations an additional argument for

the opinion already expressed, that direct taxation should stop short of the

class of incomes which do not exceed what is necessary for healthful

existence. These very small incomes are mostly derived from manual labour;

and, as we now see, any tax imposed on these, either permanently degrades

the habits of the labouring class, or falls on profits, and burthens capitalists

with an indirect tax, in addition to their share of the direct taxes; which is

doubly objectionable, both as a violation of the fundamental rule of equality,

and for the reasons which, as already shown, render a peculiar tax on profits

detrimental to the public wealth, and consequently to the means which

society possesses of paying any taxes whatever.

              5. We now pass, from taxes on the separate kinds of income, to a tax

attempted to be assessed fairly upon all kinds; in other words, an Income Tax.

The discussion of the conditions necessary for making this tax consistent with

justice, has been anticipated in the last chapter. We shall suppose, therefore,that these conditions are complied with. They are, first, that incomes below a

certain amount should be altogether untaxed. This minimum should not be

higher than the amount which suffices for the necessaries of the existing

population. The exemption from the present income tax, of all incomes under

100 l. a year, and the lower percentage formerly levied on those between 100

l. and 150 l., are only defensible on the ground that almost all the indirect

taxes press more heavily on incomes between 50 l. and 150 l. than on any

others whatever. The second condition is, that incomes above the limit should

be taxed only in proportion to the surplus by which they exceed the limit.

Thirdly, that all sums saved from income and invested, should be exempt

from the tax: or if this be found impracticable, that life incomes, and incomes

from business and professions, should be less heavily taxed than inheritable

incomes, in a degree as nearly as possible equivalent to the increased need of

economy arising from their terminable character: allowance being also made,

in the case of variable incomes, for their precariousness.

              An income-tax, fairly assessed on these principles, would be, in

point of justice, the least exceptionable of all taxes. The objection to it, in the

present low state of public morality, is the impossibility of ascertaining the

real incomes of the contributors. The supposed hardship of compelling people

to disclose the amount of their incomes, ought not, in my opinion, to count

for much. One of the social evils of this country is the practice, amounting to

a custom, of maintaining, or attempting to maintain, the appearance to the

world of a larger income than is possessed; and it would be far better for the

interest of those who yield to this weakness, if the extent of their means were

universally and exactly known, and the temptation removed to expending

more than they can afford, or stinting real wants in order to make a false

show externally. At the same time, the reason of the case, even on this point,

is not so exclusively on one side of the argument as is sometimes supposed.

So long as the vulgar of any country are in the debased state of mind which

this national habit presupposes — so long as their respect (if such a word can

be applied to it) is proportioned to what they suppose to be each person’s

pecuniary means — it may be doubted whether anything which would

remove all uncertainty as to that point, would not considerably increase the

presumption and arrogance of the vulgar rich, and their insolence towards

those above them in mind and character, but below them in fortune.

              Notwithstanding, too, what is called the inquisitorial nature of thetax, no amount of inquisitorial power which would be tolerated by a people

the most disposed to submit to it, could enable the revenue officers to assess

the tax from actual knowledge of the circumstances of contributors. Rent,

salaries, annuities, and all fixed incomes, can be exactly ascertained. But the

variable gains of professions, and still more the profits of business, which the

person interested cannot always himself exactly ascertain, can still less be

estimated with any approach to fairness by a tax-collector. The main reliance

must be placed, and always has been placed, on the returns made by the

person himself. No production of accounts is of much avail, except against

the more flagrant cases of falsehood; and even against these the check is very

imperfect, for if fraud is intended, false accounts can generally be framed

which it will baffle any means of inquiry possessed by the revenue officers to

detect: the easy re. source of omitting entries on the credit side being often

sufficient without the aid of fictitious debts or disbursements. The tax,

therefore, on whatever principles of equality it may be imposed, is in practice

unequal in one of the worst ways, falling heaviest on the most conscientious.

The unscrupulous succeed in evading a great proportion of what they should

pay; even persons of integrity in their ordinary transactions are tempted to

palter with their consciences, at least to the extent of deciding in their own

favour all points on which the smallest doubt or discussion could arise: while

the strictly veracious may be made to pay more than the state intended, by the

powers of arbitrary assessment necessarily intrusted to the Commssioners, as

the last defence against the tax-payer’s power of concealment.

              It is to be feared, therefore, that the fairness which belongs to the

principle of an income tax, cannot be made to attach to it in practice: and that

this tax, while apparently the most just of all modes of raising a revenue, is in

effect more unjust than many others which are prima facie more

objectionable. This consideration would lead us to concur in the opinion

which, until of late, has usually prevailed — that direct taxes on income

should be reserved as an extraordinary resource for great national

emergencies, in which the necessity of a large additional revenue overrules

all objections.

              The difficulties of a fair income tax have elicited a proposition for a

direct tax of so much per cent, not on income but on expenditure; the

aggregate amount of each person’s expenditure being ascertained, as the

amount of income now is, from statements furnished by the contributorsthemselves. The author of this suggestion, Mr Revans, in a clever pamphlet
                251
on the subject, contends that the returns which persons would furnish of

their expenditure would be more trustworthy than those which they now

make of their income, inasmuch as expenditure is in its own nature more

public than income, and false representations of it more easily detected. He

cannot, I think, have sufficiently considered, how few of the items in the

annual expenditure of most families can be judged of with any approximation

to correctness from the external signs. The only security would still be the

veracity of individuals, and there is no reason for supposing that their

statements would be more trustworthy on the subject of their expenses than

that of their revenues; especially as, the expenditure of most persons being

composed of many more items than their income, there would be more scope

for concealment and suppression in the detail of expenses than even of

receipts.

              The taxes on expenditure at present in force, either in this or in other

countries, fall only on particular kinds of expenditure, and differ no otherwise

from taxes on commodities than in being paid directly by the person who

consumes or uses the article, instead of being advanced by the producer or

seller, and reimbursed in the price. The taxes on horses and carriages, on

dogs, on servants, are all of this nature. They evidently fall on the persons

from whom they are levied — those who use the commodity taxed. A tax of a

similar description, and more important, is a house-tax; which must be

considered at somewhat greater length.

              6. The rent of a house consists of two parts, the ground-rent, and

what Adam Smith calls the building-rent. The first is determined by the

ordinary principles of rent. It is the remuneration given for the use of the

portion of land occupied by the house and its appurtenances; and varies from

a mere equivalent for the rent which the ground would afford in agriculture,

to the monopoly rents paid for advantageous situations in populous

thoroughfares. The rent of the house itself, as distinguished from the ground,

is the equivalent given for the labour and capital expended on the building.

The fact of its being received in quarterly or half.yearly payments, makes no

difference in the principles by which it is regulated. It comprises the ordinary

profit on the builder’s capital, and an annuity, sufficient at the current rate of

interest, after paying for all repairs chargeable on the proprietor, to replace

the original capital by the time the house is worn out, or by the expiration ofthe usual term of a building lease.

              A tax of so much per cent on the gross rent, falls on both those

portions alike. The more highly a house is rented, the more it pays to the tax,

whether the quality of the situation or that of the house itself is the cause. The

incidence, however, of these two portions of the tax must be considered

separately.

              As much of it as is a tax on building-rent, must ultimately fall on the

consumer, in other words the occupier. For as the profits of building are

already not above the ordinary rate, they would, if the tax fell on the owner

and not on the occupier, become lower than the profits of untaxed

employments, and houses would not be built. It is probable however that for

some time after the tax was first imposed, a great part of it would fall, not on

the renter, but on the owner of the house. A large proportion of the

consumers either could not afford, or would not choose, to pay their former

rent with the tax in addition, but would content themselves with a lower scale

of accommodation. Houses therefore would be for a time in excess of the

demand. The consequence of such excess, in the case of most other articles,

would be an almost immediate diminution of the supply: but so durable a

commodity as houses does not rapidly diminish in amount. New buildings

indeed, of the class for which the demand had decreased, would cease to be

erected, except for special reasons; but in the meantime the temporary

superfluity would lower rents, and the consumers would obtain perhaps

nearly the same accommodation as formerly, for the same aggregate

payment, rent and tax together. By degrees, however, as the existing houses

wore out, or as increase of population demanded a greater supply, rents

would again rise; until it became profitable to recommence building, which

would not be until the tax was wholly transferred to the occupier. In the end,

therefore, the occupier bears that portion of a tax on rent, which falls on the

payment made for the house itself, exclusively of the ground it stands on.

              The case is partly different with the portion which is a tax on

ground-rent. As taxes on rent, properly so called, fall on the landlord, a tax on

ground-rent, one would suppose, must fall on the ground-landlord, at least

after the expiration of the building lease. It will not however fall wholly on

the landlord, unless with the tax on ground-rent there is combined an

equivalent tax on agricultural rent. The lowest rent of land let for building is

very little above the rent which the same ground would yield in agriculture:since it is reasonable to suppose that land, unless in case of exceptional

circumstances, is let or sold for building as soon as it is decidedly worth more

for that purpose than for cultivation. If, therefore, a tax were laid on ground-

rents without being also laid on agricultural rents, it would, unless of trifling

amount, reduce the return from the lowest ground-rents below the ordinary

return from land, and would check further building quite as effectually as if it

were a tax on building-rents, until either the increased demand of a growing

population, or a diminution of supply by the ordinary causes of destruction,

had raised the rent by a full equivalent for the tax. But whatever raises the

lowest ground-rents, raises all others, since each exceeds the lowest by the

market value of its peculiar advantages. If, therefore, the tax on ground-rents

were a fixed sum per square foot, the more valuable situations paying no

more than those least in request, this fixed payment would ultimately fall on

the occupier. Suppose the lowest ground-rent to be 10 l. per acre, and the

highest 1000 l., a tax of 1l. per acre on ground-rents would ultimately raise

the former to 11 l., and the latter consequently to 1001 l., since the difference

of value between the two situations would be exactly what it was before: the

annual pound, therefore, would be paid by the occupier. But a tax on ground-

rent is supposed to be a portion of a house-tax, which is not a fixed payment,

but a percentage on the rent. The cheapest site, therefore, being supposed as

before to pay 1 l., the dearest would pay 100 l., of which only the 1 l. could

be thrown upon the occupier, since the rent would still be only raised to 100 l.

Consequently, 99 l. of the 100 l. levied from the expensive site, would fall on

the ground-landlord. A house-tax thus requires to be considered in a double

aspect, as a tax on all occupiers of houses, and a tax on ground-rents.

              In the vast majority of houses, the ground-rent forms but a small

proportion of the annual payment made for the house, and nearly all the tax

falls on the occupier. It is only in exceptional cases, like that of the favourite

situations in large towns, that the predominant element in the rent of the

house is the ground-rent; and among the very few kinds of income which are

fit subjects for peculiar taxation, these ground-rents hold the principal place,

being the most gigantic example extant of enormous accessions of riches

acquired rapidly, and in many cases unexpectedly, by a few families, from

the mere accident of their possessing certain tracts of land, without their

having themselves aided in the acquisition by the smallest exertion, outlay, or

risk. So far therefore as a house-tax falls on the ground-landlord, it is liable to

no valid objection.              In so far as it falls on the occupier, if justly proportioned to the value

of the house, it is one of the fairest and most unobjectionable of all taxes. No

part of a person’s expenditure is a better criterion of his means, or bears, on

the whole, more nearly the same proportion to them. A house-tax is a nearer

approach to a fair income tax, than a direct assessment on income can easily

be; having the great advantage, that it makes spontaneously all the

allowances which it is so difficult to make, and so impracticable to make

exactly, in assessing an income tax: for if what a person pays in house-rent is

a test of anything, it is a test not of what he possesses, but of what he thinks

he can afford to spend. The equality of this tax can only be seriously

questioned on two grounds. The first is, that a miser may escape it. This

objection applies to all taxes on expenditure: nothing but a direct tax on

income can reach a miser. But as misers do not now hoard their treasure, but

invest it in productive employments, it not only adds to the national wealth,

and consequently to the general means of paying taxes, but the payment

claimable from itself is only transferred from the principal sum to the income

afterwards derived from it, which pays taxes as soon as it comes to be

expended. The second objection is, that a person may require a larger and

more expensive house, not from having greater means, but from having a

larger family. Of this, however, he is not entitled to complain; since having a

large family is at a person’s own choice: and, so far as concerns the public
                                                                    252
interest, is a thing rather to be discouraged than promoted. A large portion

of the taxation of this country is raised by a house-tax. The parochial taxation

of the towns entirely, and of the rural districts partially, consists of an

assessment on house-rent. The window-tax, which was also a house-tax, but

of a bad kind, operating as a tax on light, and a cause of deformity in

building, was exchanged in 1851 for a house-tax properly so called, but on a

much lower scale than that which existed previously to 1834. It is to be

lamented that the new tax retains the unjust principle on which the old house-

tax was assessed, and which contributed quite as much as the selfishness of

the middle classes to produce the outcry against the tax. The public were

justly scandalized on learning that residences like Chatsworth or Belvoir were

only rated on an imaginary rent of perhaps 200 l. a year, under the pretext

that owing to the great expense of keeping them up, they could not be let for

more. Probably, indeed, they could not be let even for that, and if the

argument were a fair one, they ought not to have been taxed at all. But a

house. tax is not intended as a tax on incomes derived from houses, but onexpenditure incurred for them. The thing which it is wished to ascertain is

what a house costs to the person who lives in it, not what it would bring in if

let to some one else. When the occupier is not the owner, and does not hold

on a repairing lease, the rent he pays is the measure of what the house costs

him: but when he is the owner, some other measure must be sought. A

valuation should be made of the house, not at what it would sell for, but at

what would be the cost of rebuilding it, and this valuation might be

periodically corrected by an allowance for what it had lost in value by time,

or gained by repairs and improvements. The amount of the amended

valuation would form a principal sum, the interest of which, at the current

price of the public funds, would form the annual value at which the building

should be assessed to the tax.

              As incomes below a certain amount ought to be exempt from income

tax, so ought houses below a certain value, from house-tax, on the universal

principle of sparing from all taxation the absolute necessaries of healthful

existence. In order that the occupiers of lodgings, as well as of houses, might

benefit, as in justice they ought, by this exemption, it might be optional with

the owners to have every portion of a house which is occupied by a separate

tenant, valued and assessed separately, as is now usually the case with

chambers.

        242
               ‘A Percentage Tax on Domestic Expenditure to supply the whole

of the Public Revenue.’ By John Revans. Published by Hatchard, in 1847.

        243
               Another common objection is that large and expensive

accommodation is often required, not as a residence, but for business. But it

is an admitted principle that buildings or portions of buildings occupied

exclusively for business, such as shops, warehouses, or manufactories, ought

to be exempted from house-tax. The plea that persons in business may be

compelled to live in situations, such as the great thoroughfares of London,

where house-rent is at a monopoly rate, seems to me unworthy of regard:

since no one does so but because the extra profit which he expects to derive

from the situation, is more than an equivalent to him for the extra cost. But in

any case, the bulk of the tax on this extra rent will not fall on him, but on the

ground-landlord.

              It has been also objected that house-rent in the rural districts is much

lower than in towns, and lower in some towns and in some rural districts thanin others: so that a tax proportioned to it would have a corresponding

inequality of pressure. To this, however, it may be answered, that in places

where house-rent is low, persons of the same amount of income usually live

in larger and better houses, and thus expend in house-rent more nearly the

same proportion of their incomes than might at first sight appear. Or if not,

the probability will be, that many of them live in those places precisely

because they are too poor to live elsewhere, and have therefore the strongest

claim to be taxed lightly. In some cases, it is precisely because the people are

poor, that house-rent remains low.

 

 

                     Chapter 4 – Of Taxes on Commodities

 

 

              1. By taxes on commodities are commonly meant, those which are

levied either on the producers, or on the carriers or dealers who intervene

between them and the final purchasers for consumption. Taxes imposed

directly on the consumers of particular commodities, such as a house-tax, or

the tax in this country on horses and carriages, might be called taxes on

commodities, but are not; the phrase being, by custom, confined to indirect

taxes those which are advanced by one person, to be, as is expected and

intended, reimbursed by another. Taxes on commodities are either on

production within the country, or on importation into it, or on conveyance or

sale within it; and are classed respectively as excise, customs, or tolls and

transit duties. To whichever class they belong, and at whatever stage in the

progress of the community they may be imposed, they are equivalent to an

increase of the cost of production; using that term in its most enlarged sense,

which includes the cost of transport and distribution, or, in common phrase,

of bringing the commodity to market.

              When the cost of production is increased artificially by a tax, the

effect is the same as when it is increased by natural causes. If only one or a

few commodities are affected, their value and price rise, so as to compensate

the producer or dealer for the peculiar burthen; but if there were a tax on all

commodities, exactly proportioned to their value, no such compensation

would be obtained: there would neither be a general rise of values, which is

an absurdity, nor of prices, which depend on causes entirely different. There

would, however, as Mr M’Culloch has pointed out, be a disturbance of

values, some falling, others rising, owing to a circumstance, the effect of

which on values and prices we formerly discussed; the different durability of

the capital employed in different occupations. The gross produce of industry

consists of two parts; one portion serving to replace the capital consumed,

while the other portion is profit. Now equal capitals in two branches of

production must have equal expectations of profit; but if a greater portion of

the one than of the other is fixed capital, or if that fixed capital is more

durable, there will be a less consumption of capital in the year, and less will

be required to replace it, so that the profit, if absolutely the same, will form agreater proportion of the annual returns. To derive from a capital of 1000 l. a

profit of 100 l., the one producer may have to sell produce to the value of

1100 l., the other only to the value of 500 l. If on these two branches of

industry a tax be imposed of five per cent ad valorem, the last will be charged

only with 25 l., the first with 55 l.; leaving to the one 75 l. profit, to the other

only 45 l. To equalize, therefore, their expectation of profit, the one

commodity must rise in price, or the other must fall, or both: commodities

made chiefly by immediate labour must rise in value, as compared with those

which are chiefly made by machinery. It is unnecessary to prosecute this

branch of the inquiry any further.

              2. A tax on any one commodity, whether laid on its production, its

importation, its carriage from place to place, or its sale, and whether the tax

be a fixed sum of money for a given quantity of the commodity, or an ad

valorem duty, will, as a general rule, raise the value and price of the

commodity by at least the amount of the tax. There are few cases in which it

does not raise them by more than that amount. In the first place, there are few

taxes on production on account of which it is not found or deemed necessary

to impose restrictive regulations on the manufacturers or dealers, in order to

check evasions of the tax. These regulations are always sources of trouble

and annoyance, and generally of expense, for all of which, being peculiar

disadvantages, the producers or dealers must have compensation in the price

of their commodity. These restrictions also frequently interfere with the

processes of manufacture, requiring the producer to carry on his operations in

the way most convenient to the revenue, though not the cheapest, or most

efficient for purposes of production. Any regulations whatever, enforced by

law, make it difficult for the producer to adopt new and improved processes.

Further, the necessity of advancing the tax obliges producers and dealers to

carry on their business with larger capitals than would otherwise be

necessary, on the whole of which they must receive the ordinary rate of

profit, though a part only is employed in defraying the real expenses of

production or importation. The price of the article must be such as to afford a

profit on more than its natural value, instead of a profit on only its natural

value. A part of the capital of the country, in short, is not employed in

production, but in advances to the state, repaid in the price of goods; and the

consumers must give an indemnity to the sellers, equal to the profit which
                                                                                        253
they could have made on the same capital if really employed in production.

Neither ought it to be forgotten, that whatever renders a larger capitalnecessary in any trade or business, limits the competition in that business;

and by giving something like a monopoly to a few dealers, may enable them

either to keep up the price beyond what would afford the ordinary rate of

profit, or to obtain the ordinary rate of profit with a less degree of exertion for

improving and cheapening their commodity. In these several modes, taxes on

commodities often cost to the consumer, through the increased price of the

article, much more than they bring into the treasury of the state. There is still

another consideration. The higher price necessitated by the tax, almost always

checks the demand for the commodity; and since there are many

improvements in production which, to make them practicable, require a

certain extent of demand, such improvements are obstructed, and many of

them prevented altogether. It is a well.known fact that the branches of

production in which fewest improvements are made, are those with which the

revenue officer interferes; and that nothing, in general, gives a greater

impulse to improvements in the production of a commodity, than taking off a

tax which narrowed the market for it.

              3. Such are the effects of taxes on commodities, considered

generally;. but as there are some commodities (those composing the

necessaries of the labourer) of which the values have an influence on the

distribution of wealth among different classes of the community, it is

requisite to trace the effects of taxes on those particular articles somewhat

farther. If a tax be laid, say on corn, and the price rises in proportion to the

tax, the rise of price may operate in two ways. First: it may lower the

condition of the labouring classes; temporarily indeed it can scarcely fail to

do so. If it diminishes their consumption of the produce of the earth, or makes

them resort to a food which the soil produces more abundantly, and therefore

more cheaply, it to that extent contributes to throw back agriculture upon

more fertile lands or less costly processes, and to lower the value and price of

corn; which therefore ultimately settles at a price, increased not by the whole

amount of the tax, but by only a part of its amount. Secondly, however, it

may happen that the dearness of the taxed food does not lower the habitual

standard of the labourer’s requirements, but that wages, on the contrary,

through an action on population, rise, in a shorter or longer period, so as to

compensate the labourers for their portion of the tax; the compensation being

of course at the expense of profits. Taxes on necessaries must thus have one

of two effects. Either they lower the condition of the labouring classes; or

they exact from the owners of capital, in addition to the amount due to thestate on their own necessaries, the amount due on those consumed by the

labourers. In the last case, the tax on necessaries, like a tax on wages, is

equivalent to a peculiar tax on profits; which is, like all other partial taxation,

unjust, and is specially prejudicial to the increase of the national wealth.

              It remains to speak of the effect on rent. Assuming (what is usually

the fact,) that the consumption of food is not diminished, the same cultivation

as before will be necessary to supply the wants of the community; the margin

of cultivation, to use Dr Chalmers, expression, remains where it was; and the

same land or capital which, as the least productive, already regulated the

value and price of the whole produce, will continue to regulate them. The

effect which a tax on agricultural produce will have on rent, depends on its

affecting or not affecting the difference between the return to this least

productive land or capital, and the returns to other lands and capitals. Now

this depends on the manner in which the tax is imposed. If it is an ad valorem

tax, or what is the same thing, a fixed proportion of the produce, such as tithe

for example, it evidently lowers corn-rents. For it takes more corn from the

better lands than from the worse; and exactly in the degree in which they are

better; land of twice the productiveness paying twice as much to the tithe.

Whatever takes more from the greater of two quantities than from the less,

diminishes the difference between them. The imposition of a tithe on corn

would take a tithe also from corn-rent: for if we reduce a series of numbers

by a tenth each, the differences between them are reduced one-tenth.

              For example, let there be five qualities of land, which severally

yield, on the same extent of ground, and with the same expenditure, 100, 90,

80, 70, and 60 bushels of wheat; the last of these being the lowest quality

which the demand for food renders it necessary to cultivate. The rent of these

lands will be as follows:

              The land producing 100 bushels will yield a rent of 100–60 or 40

bushels. That producing 90 bushels will yield a rent of 90–60 or 30 bushels.

That producing 80 bushels will yield a rent of 80–60 or 20 bushels. That

producing 70 bushels will yield a rent of 70–60 or 10 bushels. That producing

60 bushels will yield a rent of no rent.

              Now let a tithe be imposed, which takes from these five pieces of

land lO, 9, 8, 7, and 6 bushels respectively, the fifth quality still being the one

which regulates the price, but returning to the farmer, after payment of tithe,no more than 54 bushels:

              The land producing 100 bushels reduced to 90 will yield a rent of

90–54 or 36 bushels. That producing 90 bushels reduced to 81 will yield a

rent of 81–54 or 27 bushels. That producing 80 bushels reduced to 72 will

yield a rent of 72–54 or 18 bushels. That producing 70 bushels reduced to 63

will yield a rent of 63–54 or 9 bushels.

              and that producing 60 bushels, reduced to 54, will yield, as before,

no rent. So that the rent of the first quality of land has lost four bushels; of the

second, three; of the third, two; and of the fourth, one: that is, each has lost

exactly one-tenth. A tax, therefore, of a fixed proportion of the produce,

lowers, in the same proportion, corn-rent.

              But it is only corn-rent that is lowered, and not rent estimated in

money, or in any other commodity. For, in the same proportion as corn-rent

is reduced in quantity, the corn composing it is raised in value. Under the

tithe, 54 bushels will be worth in the market what 60 were before; and nine-

tenths will in all cases sell for as much as the whole ten-tenths previously

sold for. The landlords will therefore be compensated in value and price for

what they lose in quantity; and will suffer only so far as they consume their

rent in kind, or after receiving it in money, expend it in agricultural produce:

that is, they only suffer as consumers of agricultural produce, and in common

with all the other consumers. Considered as landlords, they have the same

income as before; the tithe, therefore, falls on the consumer, and not on the

landlord.

              The same effect would be produced on rent, if the tax, instead of

being a fixed proportion of the produce, were a fixed sum per quarter or per

bushel. A tax which takes a shilling for every bushel, takes more shillings

from one field than from another, just in proportion as it produces more

bushels; and operates exactly like tithe, expect that tithe is not only the same

proportion on all lands, but is also the same proportion at all times, while a

fixed sum of money per bushel will amount to a greater or a less proportion,

according as corn is cheap or dear.

              There are other modes of taxing agriculture, which would affect rent

differently. A tax proportioned to the rent would fall wholly on the rent, and

would not at all raise the price of corn, which is regulated by the portion of

the produce that pays no rent. A fixed tax of so much per cultivated acre,without distinction of value, would have effects directly the reverse. Taking

no more from the best qualities of land than from the worst, it would leave

the differences the same as before, and consequently the same corn-rents, and

the landlords would profit to the full extent of the rise of price. To put the

thing in another manner; the price must rise sufficiently to enable the worst

land to pay the tax; thus enabling all lands which produce more than the

worst, to pay not only the tax, but also an increased rent to the landlords.

These, however, are not so much taxes on the produce of land, as taxes on the

land itself. Taxes on the produce, properly so called, whether fixed or ad

valorem, do not affect rent, but fall on the consumer: profits, however,

generally bearing either the whole or the greatest part of the portion which is

levied on the consumption of the labouring classes.

              4. The preceding is, I apprehend, a correct statement of the manner

in which taxes on agricultural produce operate when first laid on. When,

however, they are of old standing, their effect may be different, as was first

pointed out, I believe, by Mr Senior. It is, as we have seen, an almost

infallible consequence of any reduction of profits, to retard the rate of

accumulation. Now the effect of accumulation, when attended by its usual

accompaniment, an increase of population, is to increase the value and price

of food, to raise rent, and to lower profits: that is, to do precisely what is done

by a tax on agricultural produce, except that this does not raise rent. The tax,

therefore, merely anticipates the rise of price, and fall of profits, which would

have taken place ultimately through the mere progress of accumulation; while

it at the same time prevents, or at least retards, that progress. If the rate of

profit was such, previous to the imposition of a tithe, that the effect of the

tithe reduces it to the practical minimum, the tithe will put a stop to all further

accumulation, or cause it to take place out of the country; and the only effect

which the tithe will then have had on the consumer, is to make him pay

earlier the price which he would have had to pay somewhat later — part of

which, indeed, in the gradual progress of wealth and population, he would

have almost immediately begun to pay. After a lapse of time which would

have admitted of a rise of one-tenth through the natural progress of wealth,

the consumer will be paying no more that he would have paid if the tithe had

never existed; he will have ceased to pay any portion of it, and the person

who will really pay it is the landlord, whom it deprives of the increase of rent

which would by that time have accrued to him. At every successive point in

this interval of time, less of the burthen will rest on the consumer, and moreof it on the landlord: and in the ultimate result, the minimum of profits will

be reached with a smaller capital and population, and a lower rental, than if

the course of things had not been disturbed by the imposition of the tax. If, on

the other hand, the tithe or other tax on agricultural produce does not reduce

profits to the minimum, but to something above the minimum, accumulation

will not be stopped, but only slackened: and if population also increases, the

two-fold increase will continue to produce its effects — a rise of the price of

corn, and an increase of rent. These consequences, however, will not take

place with the same rapidity as if the higher rate of profit had continued. At

the end of twenty years the country will have a smaller population and

capital, than, but for the tax, it would by that time have had; the landlords

will have a smaller rent; and the price of corn, having increased less rapidly

than it would otherwise have done, will not be so much as a tenth higher than

what, if there had been no tax, it would by that time have become. A part of

the tax, therefore, will already have ceased to fall on the consumer, and

devolved upon the landlord; and the proportion will become greater and

greater by lapse of time.

              Mr Senior illustrates this view of the subject by likening the effects

of tithes, or other taxes on agricultural produce to those of natural sterility of

soil. If the land of a country without access to foreign supplies, were

suddenly smitten with a permanent deterioration of quality, to an extent

which would make a tenth more labour necessary to raise the existing

produce, the price of corn would undoubtedly rise one-tenth. But it cannot

hence be inferred that if the soil of the country had from the beginning been

one-tenth worse than it is, corn would at present have been one-tenth dearer

than we find it. It is far more probable, that the smaller return to labour and

capital, ever since the first settlement of the country, would have caused in

each successive generation a less rapid increase than has taken place: that the

country would now have contained less capital, and maintained a smaller

population, so that notwithstanding the inferiority of the soil, the price of

corn would not have been higher, nor profits lower, than at present; rent alone

would certainly have been lower. We may suppose two islands, which, being

alike in extent, in natural fertility, and industrial advancement, have up to a

certain time been equal in population and capital, and have had equal rentals,

and the same price of corn. Let us imagine a tithe imposed in one of these

islands, but not in the other. There will be immediately a difference in the

price of corn, and therefore probably in profits. While profits are not tendingdownwards in either country, that is, while improvements in the production

of necessaries fully keep pace with the increase of population, this difference

of prices and profits between the islands may continue. But if, in the untithed

island, capital increases, and population along with it, more than enough to

counterbalance any improvements which take place, the price of corn will

gradually rise, profits will fall, and rent will increase; while in the tithed

island capital and population will either not increase (beyond what is

balanced by the improvements), or if they do, will increase in a less degree;

so that rent and the price of corn will either not rise at all, or rise more

slowly. Rent, therefore, will soon be higher in the untithed than in the tithed

island, and profits not so much higher, nor corn so much cheaper, as they

were on the first imposition of the tithe. These effects will be progressive. At

the end of every ten years there will be a greater difference between the

rentals and between the aggregate wealth and population of the two islands,

and a less difference in profits and in the price of corn.

              At what point will these last differences entirely cease, and the

temporary effect of taxes on agricultural produce, in raising the price, have

entirely given place to the ultimate effect, that of limiting the total produce of

the country? Though the untithed island is always verging towards the point

at which the price of food would overtake that in the tithed island, its

progress towards that point naturally slackens as it draws nearer to attaining

it; since — the difference between the two islands in the rapidity of

accumulation depending upon the difference in the rates of profit — in

proportion as these approximate, the movement which draws them closer

together, abates of its force. The one may not actually overtake the other,

until both islands reach the minimum of profits: up to that point, the tithed

island may continue more or less ahead of the untithed island in the price of

corn: considerably ahead if it is far from the minimum, and is therefore

accumulating rapidly. very little ahead if it is near the minimum, and

accumulating slowly.

              But whatever is true of the tithed and untithed islands in our

hypothetical case, is true of any country having a tithe, compared with the

same country if it had never had a tithe.

              In England the great emigration of capital, and the almost periodical

occurrence of commercial crises through the speculations occasioned by the

habitually low rate of profit, are indications that profit has attained thepractical, though not the ultimate minimum, and that all the savings which

take place (beyond what improvements, tending to the cheapening of

necessaries, make room for) are either sent abroad for investment, or

periodically swept away. There can therefore, I think, be little doubt that if

England had never had a tithe, or any tax on agricultural produce, the price of

corn would have been by this time as high, and the rate of profits as low, as at

present. Independently of the more rapid accumulation which would have

taken place if profits had not been prematurely lowered by these imposts; the

mere saving of a part of the capital which has been wasted in unsuccessful

speculations, and the keeping at home a part of that which has been sent

abroad, would have been quite sufficient to produce the effect. I think,

therefore, with Mr Senior, that the tithe, even before its commutation, had

ceased to be a cause of high prices or low profits, and had become a mere

deduction from rent; its other effects being, that it caused the country to have

no greater capital, no larger production, and no more numerous population

than if it had been one-tenth less fertile than it is; or let us rather say

one.twentieth (considering how great a portion of the land of Great Britain

was tithe-free).

              But though tithes and other taxes on agricultural produce, when of

long standing, either do not raise the price of food and lower profits at all, or

if at all, not in proportion to the tax; yet the abrogation of such taxes, when

they exist, does not the less diminish price, and, in general, raise the rate of

profit. The abolition of a tithe takes one-tenth from the cost of production,

and consequently from the price, of all agricultural produce; and unless it

permanently raises the labourer’s requirements, it lowers the cost of labour,

and raises profits. Rent, estimated in money or in commodities, generally

remains as before; estimated in agricultural produce, it is raised. The country

adds as much by the repeal of a tithe, to the margin which intervenes between

it and the stationary state, as is cut off from that margin by a tithe when first

imposed. Accumulation is greatly accelerated; and if population also

increases, the price of corn immediately begins to recover itself, and rent to

rise; thus gradually transferring the benefit of the remission, from the

consumer to the landlord.

              The effects which thus result from abolishing tithe, result equally

from what has been done by the arrangements under the Commutation Act

for converting it into a rent.charge. When the tax, instead of being levied onthe whole produce of the soil, is levied only from the portions which pay rent,

and does not touch any fresh extension of cultivation, the tax no longer forms

any part of the cost of production of the portion of the produce which

regulates the price of all the rest. The land or capital which pays no rent, can

now send its produce to market one-tenth cheaper. The commutation of tithe

ought therefore to have produced a considerable fall in the average price of

corn. If it had not come so gradually into operation, and if the price of corn

had not during the same period been under the influence of several other

causes of change, the effect would probably have been markedly

conspicuous. As it is, there can be no doubt that this circumstance has had its

share in the fall which has taken place in the cost of production and in the

price of home-grown produce; though the effects of the great agricultural

improvements which have been simultaneously advancing, and of the free

admission of agricultural produce from foreign countries, have masked those

of the other cause. This fall of price would not in itself have any tendency

injurious to the landlord, since corn-rents are increased in the same ratio in

which the price of corn is diminished. But neither does it in any way tend to

increase his income. The rent-charge, therefore, which is substituted for tithe,

is a dead loss to him at the expiration of existing leases: and the commutation

of tithe was not a mere alteration in the mode in which the landlord bore an

existing burthen, but the imposition of a new one; relief being afforded to the

consumer at the expense of the landlord, who, however, begins immediately

to receive progressive indemnification at the consumer’s expense, by the

impulse given to accumulation and population.

              5. We have hitherto inquired into the effects of taxes on

commodities, on the assumption that they are levied impartially on every

mode in which the commodity can be produced or brought to market.

Another class of considerations is opened, if we suppose that this impartiality

is not maintained, and that the tax is imposed, not on the commodity, but on

some particular mode of obtaining it.

              Suppose that a commodity is capable of being made by two different

processes; as a manufactured commodity may be produced either by hand or

by steam-power; sugar may be made either from the sugar-cane or from beet-

root, cattle fattened either on hay and green crops, or on oil-cake and the

refuse of breweries. It is the interest of the community, that of the two

methods, producers should adopt that which produces the best article at thelowest price. This being also the interest of the producers, unless protected

against competition, and shielded from the penalties of indolence; the process

most advantageous to the community is that which, if not interfered with by

government, they ultimately find it to their advantage to adopt. Suppose

however that a tax is laid on one of the processes, and no tax at all, or one of

smaller amount, on the other. If the taxed process is the one which the

producers would not have adopted, the measure is simply nugatory. But if the

tax falls, as it is of course intended to do, upon the one which they would

have adopted, it creates an artificial motive for preferring the untaxed

process, though the inferior of the two. If, therefore, it has any effect at all, it

causes the commodity to be produced of worse quality, or at a greater

expense of labour’. it causes so much of the labour of the community to be

wasted, and the capital employed in supporting and remunerating the labour

to be expended as uselessly, as if it were spent in hiring men to dig holes and

fill them up again. This waste of labour and capital constitutes an addition to

the cost of production of the commodity, which raises its value and price in a

corresponding ratio, and thus the owners of the capital are indemnified. The

loss falls on the consumers; though the capital of the country is also

eventually diminished, by the diminution of their means of saving, and in

some degree, of their inducements to save.

              The kind of tax, therefore, which comes under the general

denomination of a discriminating duty, transgresses the rule that taxes should

take as little as possible from the tax-payer beyond what they bring into the

treasury of the state. A discriminating duty makes the consumer pay two

distinct taxes, only one of which is paid to the government, and that

frequently the less onerous of the two. If a tax were laid on sugar produced

from the cane, leaving the sugar from beet-root untaxed, then in so far as

cane sugar continued to be used, the tax on it would be paid to the treasury,

and might be as objectionable as most other taxes; but if cane sugar, having

previously been cheaper than beet-root sugar, was now dearer, and beet-root

sugar was to any considerable amount substituted for it, and fields laid out

and manufactories established in consequence, the government would gain no

revenue from the beet-root sugar, while the consumers of it would pay a real

tax. They would pay for beet-root sugar more than they had previously paid

for cane sugar, and the difference would go to indemnify producers for a

portion of the labour of the country actually thrown away, in producing by

the labour of (say) three hundred men, what could be obtained by the otherprocess with the labour of two hundred.

              One of the commonest cases of discriminating duties, is that of a tax

on the importation of a commodity capable of being produced at home,

unaccompanied by an equivalent tax on the home production. A commodity

is never permanently imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad at a

smaller cost of labour and capital on the whole, than is necessary for

producing it. If, therefore, by a duty on the importation, it is rendered cheaper

to produce the article than to import it, an extra quantity of labour and capital

is expended, without any extra result. The labour is useless, and the capital is

spent in paying people for laboriously doing nothing. All custom duties

which operate as an encouragement to the home production of the taxed

article, are thus an eminently wasteful mode of raising a revenue.

              This character belongs in a peculiar degree to custom duties on the

produce of land, unless countervailed by excise duties on the home

production. Such taxes bring less into the public treasury, compared with

what they take from the consumers, than any other imposts to which civilized

nations are usually subject. If the wheat produced in a country is twenty

millions of quarters, and the consumption twenty-one millions, a million

being annually imported, and if on this million a duty is laid which raises the

price ten shillings per quarter, the price which is raised is not that of the

million only, but of the whole twenty-one millions. Taking the most

favourable, but extremely improbable supposition, that the importation is not

at all checked, nor the home production enlarged, the state gains a revenue of

only half a million, while the consumers are taxed ten millions and a half; the

ten millions being a contribution to the home growers, who are forced by

competition to resign it all to the landlords. The consumer thus pays to the

owners of land an additional tax, equal to twenty times that which he pays to

the state. Let us now suppose that the tax really checks importation. Suppose

importation stopped altogether in ordinary years; it being found that the

million of quarters can be obtained, by a more elaborate cultivation, or by

breaking up inferior land, at a less advance than ten shillings upon the

previous price — say, for instance, five shillings a quarter. The revenue now

obtains nothing, except from the extraordinary imports which may happen to

take place in a season of scarcity. But the consumers pay every year a tax of

five shillings on the whole twenty-one millions of quarters, amounting to 5

1/4 millions sterling. Of this the odd 250,000 l. goes to compensate thegrowers of the last million of quarters for the labour and capital wasted under

the compulsion of the law. The remaining five millions go to enrich the

landlords as before.

              Such is the operation of what are technically termed Corn Laws,

when first laid on; and such continues to be their operation, so long as they

have any effect at all in raising the price of corn. But I am by no means of

opinion that in the long run they keep up either prices or rents in the degree

which these considerations might lead us to suppose. What we have said

respecting the effect of tithes and other taxes on agricultural produce, applies

in a great degree to corn laws: they anticipate artificially a rise of price and of

rent, which would at all events have taken place through the increase of

population and of production. The difference between a country without corn

laws, and a country which has long had corn laws, is not so much that the last

has a higher price or a larger rental, but that it has the same price and the

same rental with a smaller aggregate capital and a smaller population. The

imposition of corn laws raises rents, but retards that progress of accumulation

which would in no long period have raised them fully as much. The repeal of

corn laws tends to lower rents, but it unchains a force which, in a progressive

state of capital and population, restores and even increases the former

amount. There is every reason to expect that under the virtually free

importation of agricultural produce, at last extorted from the ruling powers of

this country, the price of food, if population goes on increasing, will

gradually but steadily rise; though this effect may for a time be postponed by

the strong current which in this country has set in (and the impulse is

extending itself to other countries) towards the improvement of agricultural

science, and its increased application to practice.

              What we have said of duties on importation generally, is equally

applicable to discriminating duties which favour importation from one place

or in one particular manner, in contradistinction to others: such as the

preference given to the produce of a colony, or of a country with which there

is a commercial treaty: or the higher duties formerly imposed by our

navigation laws on goods imported in other than British shipping. Whatever

else may be alleged in favour of such distinctions, whenever they are not

nugatory, they are economically wasteful. They induce a resort to a more

costly mode of obtaining a commodity, in lieu of one less costly, and thus

cause a portion of the labour which the country employs in providing itselfwith foreign commodities, to be sacrificed without return.

              6. There is one more point relating to the operation of taxes on

commodities conveyed from one country to another, which requires notice:

the influence which they exert on international exchanges. Every tax on a

commodity tends to raise its price, and consequently to lessen the demand for

it in the market in which it is sold. All taxes on international trade tend,

therefore, to produce a disturbance and a readjustment of what we have

termed the Equation of International Demand. This consideration leads to

some rather curious consequences, which have been pointed out in the

separate essay on international Commerce, already several times referred to

in this treatise.

              Taxes on foreign trade are of two kinds — taxes on imports, and on

exports. On the first aspect of the matter it would seem that both these taxes

are paid by the consumers of the commodity; that taxes on exports

consequently fall entirely on foreigners, taxes on imports wholly on the home

consumer. The true state of the case, however, is much more complicated.

              ‘By taxing exports, we may, in certain circumstances, produce a

division of the advantage of the trade more favourable to ourselves. In some

cases we may draw into our coffers, at the expense of foreigners, not only the

whole tax, but more than the tax: in other cases, we should gain exactly the

tax; in others, less than the tax. In this last case, a part of the tax is borne by

ourselves: possibly the whole, possibly even, as we shall show, more than the

whole.’ Reverting to the supposititious case employed in the Essay, of a trade

between Germany and England in broadcloth and linen, ‘suppose that

England taxes her export of cloth, the tax not being supposed high enough to

induce Germany to produce cloth for herself. The price at which cloth can be

sold in Germany is augmented by the tax. This will probably diminish the

quantity consumed. It may diminish it so much that, even at the increased

price, there will not be required so great a money value as before. Or it may

not diminish it at all, or so little, that in consequence of the higher price, a

greater money value will be purchased than before. In this last case, England

will gain, at the expense of Germany, not only the whole amount of the duty,

but more; for, the money value of her exports to Germany being increased,

while her imports remain the same, money will flow into England from

Germany. The price of cloth will rise in England, and consequently in

Germany; but the price of linen will fall in Germany, and consequently in