their children, and leave their fortune to strangers. More distant relatives are

in general almost as completely detached from the family and its interests as

if they were in no way connected with it. The only claim they are supposed to

have on their richer relations, is to a preference, caeteris paribus, in good

offices, and some aid in case of actual necessity.

              So great a change in the constitution of society must make a

considerable difference in the grounds on which the disposal of property by

inheritance should rest. The reasons usually assigned by modern writers for

giving the property of a person who dies intestate, to the children, or nearest

relatives, are, first, the supposition that in so disposing of it, the law is more

likely than in any other mode to do what the proprietor would have done, if

he had done anything; and secondly, the hardship, to those who lived with

their parents and partook in their opulence, of being cast down from the

enjoyments of wealth into poverty and privation.

              There is some force in both these arguments. The law ought, no

doubt, to do for the children or dependents of an intestate, whatever it was the

duty of the parent or protector to have done, so far as this can be known by

any one besides himself. Since, however, the law cannot decide on individual

claims, but must proceed by general rules, it is next to be considered what

these rules should be.

              We may first remark, that in regard to collateral relatives, it is not,

unless on grounds personal to the particular individual, the duty of any one to

make a pecuniary provision for them. No one now expects it, unless there

happen to be no direct heirs; nor would it be expected even then, if the

expectation were not created by the provisions of the law in case of intestacy.

I see, therefore, no reason why collateral inheritance should exist at all. Mr

Bentham long ago proposed, and other high authorities have agreed in the

opinion, that if there are no heirs either in the descending or in the ascending

line, the property, in case of intestacy, should escheat to the State. With

respect to the more remote degrees of collateral relationship, the point is not

very likely to be disputed. Few will maintain that there is any good reason

why the accumulations of some childless miser should on his death (as every

now and then happens) go to enrich a distant relative who never saw him,

who perhaps never knew himself to be related to him until there was

something to be gained by it, and who had no moral claim upon him of any

kind, more than the most entire stranger. But the reason of the case appliesalike to all collaterals, even in the nearest degree. Collaterals have no real

claims, but such as may be equally strong in the case of non-relatives; and in

the one case as in the other, where valid claims exist, the proper mode of

paying regard to them is by bequest.

              The claims of children are of a different nature: they are real, and

indefeasible. But even of these, I venture to think that the measure usually

taken is an erroneous one: what is due to children is in some respects

underrated, in others, as it appears to me, exaggerated. One of the most

binding of all obligations, that of not bringing children into the world unless

they can be maintained in comfort during childhood, and brought up with a

likelihood of supporting themselves when of full age, is both disregarded in

practice and made light of in theory in a manner disgraceful to human

intelligence. On the other hand, when the parent possesses property, the

claims of the children upon it seem to me to be the subject of an opposite

error. Whatever fortune a parent may have inherited, or still more, may have

acquired, I cannot admit that he owes to his children, merely because they are

his children, to leave them rich, without the necessity of any exertion. I could

not admit it, even if to be so left were always, and certainly, for the good of

the children themselves. But this is in the highest degree uncertain. It depends

on individual character. Without supposing extreme cases, it may be affirmed

that in a majority of instances the good not only of society but of the

individuals would be better consulted by bequeathing to them a moderate,

than a large provision. This, which is a commonplace of moralists ancient

and modern, is felt to be true by many intelligent parents, and would be acted

upon much more frequently, if they did not allow themselves to consider less

what really is, than what will be thought by others to be, advantageous to the

children.

              The duties of parents to their children are those which are

indissolubly to the fact of causing the existence of a human being. The parent

owes to society to endeavour to make the child a good and valuable member

of it, and owes to the children to provide, so far as depends on him, such

education, and such appliances and means, as will enable them to start with a

fair chance of achieving by their own exertions a successful life. To this

every child has a claim; and I cannot admit, that as a child he has a claim to

more. There is a case in which these obligations present themselves in their

true light, without any extrinsic circumstances to disguise or confuse them: itis that of an illegitimate child. To such a child it is generally felt that there is

due from the parent, the amount of provision for his welfare which will

enable him to make his life on the whole a desirable one.I hold that to no

child, merely as such, anything more is due, than what is admitted to be due

to an illegitimate child: and that no child for whom thus much has been done,

has, unless on the score of previously raised expectations, any grievance, if

the remainder of the parent’s fortune is devoted to public uses, or to the

benefit of individuals on whom in the parent’s opinion it is better bestowed.

              In order to give the children that fair chance of a desirable existence,

to which they are entitled, it is generally necessary that they should not be

brought up from childhood in habits of luxury which they will not have the

means of indulging in after-life. This, again, is a duty often flagrantly

violated by possessors of terminable incomes, who have little property to

leave. When the children of rich parents have lived, as it is natural they

should do, in habits, corresponding to the scale of expenditure in which the

parents indulge, it is generally the duty of the parents to make a greater

provision for them than would suffice for children otherwise brought up. I

say generally, because even here there is another side to the question. It is a

proposition quite capable of being maintained, that to a strong nature which

has to make its way against narrow circumstances, to have known early some

of the feelings and experiences of wealth, is an advantage both in the

formation of character and in the happiness of life. But allowing that children

have a just ground of complaint, who have been brought up to require

luxuries which they are not afterwards likely to obtain, and that their claim,

therefore, is good to a provision baring some relation to the mode of their

bringing up; this, too, is a claim which is particularly liable to be stretched

further than its reasons warrant. The case is exactly that of the younger

children of the nobility and landed gentry, the bulk of whose fortune passes

to the eldest son. The other sons, who are usually numerous, are brought up

in the same habits of luxury as the future heir, and they receive as a younger

brother’s portion, generally what the reason of the case dictates, namely,

enough to support, in the habits of life to which they are accustomed,

themselves, but not a wife or children. It really is no grievance to any man,

that for the means of marrying and of supporting a family, he has to depend

on his own exertions.

              A provision, then, such as is admitted to be reasonable in the case ofillegitimate children, for younger children, wherever in short the justice of the

case, and the real interests of the individuals and of society, are the only

things considered, is, I conceive, all that parents owe to their children, and

all, therefore, which the State owes to the children of those who die intestate.

The surplus, if any, I hold that it may rightfully appropriate to the general

purposes of the community. I would not, however, be supposed to

recommend that parents should never do more for their children than what,

merely as children, they have a moral right to. In some cases it is imperative,

in many laudable, and in all allowable, to do much more. For this, however,

the means are afforded by the liberty of bequest. It is due, not to the children

but to the parents, that they should have the power of showing marks of

affection, of requiting services and sacrifices, and of bestowing their wealth

according to their own preferences, or their own judgment of fitness.

              4. Whether the power of bequest should itself be subject to

limitation, is an ulterior question of great importance. Unlike inheritance ab

intestato,bequest is one of the attributes of property: the ownership of a thing

cannot be looked upon as complete without the power of bestowing it, at

death or during life, at the owner’s pleasure: and all the reasons, which

recommend that private property should exist, recommend pro tanto this

extension of it. But property is only a means to an end, not itself the end. Like

all other proprietary rights, and even in a greater degree than most, the power

of bequest may be so exercised as to conflict with the permanent interests of

the human race. It does so, when, not content with bequeathing an estate to

A, the testator prescribes that on A’s death it shall pass to his eldest son, and

to that son’s son, and so on for ever. No doubt, persons have occasionally

exerted themselves more strenuously to acquire a fortune from the hope of

founding a family in perpetuity; hut the mischiefs to society of such

perpetuities outweigh the value of this incentive to exertion, and the

incentives in the case of those who have the opportunity of making large

fortunes are strong enough without it. A similar abuse of the power of

bequest is committed when a person who does the meritorious act of leaving

property for public uses, attempts to prescribe the details of its application in

perpetuity; when in founding a place of education (for instance) he dictates,

for ever, what doctrines shall be taught. It being impossible that any one

should know what doctrines will be fit to be taught after he has been dead for

centuries, the law ought not to give effect to such dispositions of property,

unless subject to the perpetual revision (after a certain interval has elapsed) ofa fitting authority.

              These are obvious limitations. But even the simplest exercise of the

right of bequest, that of determining the person to whom property shall pass

immediately on the death of the testator, has always been reckoned among

the privileges which might be limited or varied, according to views of

expediency. The limitations, hitherto, have been almost solely in favour of

children. In England the right is in principle unlimited, almost the only

impediment being that arising from a settlement by a former proprietor, in

which case the holder for the time being cannot indeed bequeath his

possessions, but only because there is nothing to bequeath, he having merely

a life interest. By the Roman law, on which the civil legislation of the

Continent of Europe is principally founded, bequest originally was not

permitted at all, and even after it was introduced, a legitima portio was

compulsorily reserved for each child; and such is still the law in some of the

Continental nations. By the French law since the Revolution, the parent can

only dispose by will, of a portion equal to the share of one child, each of the

children taking an equal portion. This entail, as it may be called, of the bulk

of every one’s property upon the children collectively, seems to me as little

defensible in principle as an entail in favour of one child, though it does not

shock so directly the idea of justice. I cannot admit that parents should be

compelled to leave to their children even that provision which, as children, I

have contended that they have a moral claim to. Children may forfeit that

claim by general unworthiness, or particular ill-conduct to the parents: they

may have other resources or prospects: what has been previously done for

them, in the way of education and advancement in life, may fully satisfy their

moral claim; or others may have claims superior to theirs.

              The extreme restriction of the power of bequest in French law, was

adopted as a democratic expedient, to break down the custom of

primogeniture, and counteract the tendency of inherited property to collect in

large masses. I agree in thinking these objects eminently desirable; but the

means used are not, I think, the most judicious. Were I framing a code of

laws according to what seems to me best in itself, without regard to existing

opinions and sentiments, I should prefer to restrict, not what any one might

bequeath, but what any one should be permitted to acquire, by bequest or

inheritance. Each person should have power to dispose by will of his or her

whole property; but not to lavish it in enriching some one individual, beyonda certain maximum, which should be fixed sufficiently high to afford the

means of comfortable independence. The inequalities of property which arise

from unequal industry, frugality, perseverance, talents, and to a certain extent

even opportunities, are inseparable from the principle of private property, and

if we accept the principle, we must bear with these consequences of it: but I

see nothing objectionable in fixing a limit to what any one may acquire by

the mere favour of others, without any exercise of his faculties, and in

requiring that if he desires any further accession of fortune, he shall work for
41
it. I do not conceive that the degree of limitation which this would impose

on the right of bequest, would be felt as a burthensome restraint by any

testator who estimated a large fortune at its true value, that of the pleasures

and advantages that can be purchased with it: on even the most extravagant

estimate of which, it must be apparent to every one, that the difference to the

happiness of the possessor between a moderate independence and five times

as much, is insignificant when weighed against the enjoyment that might be

given, and the permanent benefits diffused, by some other disposal of the

four-fifths. So long indeed as the opinion practically prevails, that the best

thing which can be done for objects of affection is to heap on them to satiety

those intrinsically worthless things on which large fortunes are mostly

expended, there might be little use in enacting such a law, even if it were

possible to get it passed, there would generally be the power of evading it.

The law would be unavailing unless the popular sentiment went energetically

long with it; which (judging from the tenacious adherence of public opinion

in France to the law of compulsory division) it would in some states of

society and government be very likely to do, however much the contrary may

be the fact in England and at the present time. If the restriction could be made

practically effectual, the benefit would be great. Wealth which could no

longer be employed in over-enriching a few, would either be devoted to

objects of public usefulness, or if bestowed on individuals, would be

distributed among a larger number. While those enormous fortunes which no

one needs for any personal purpose but ostentation or improper power, would

become much less numerous, there would be a great multiplication of persons

in easy circumstances, with the advantages of leisure, and all the real

enjoyments which wealth can those of vanity; a class by whom the services

which a nation having leisured classes is entitled to expect from them, either

by their direct exertions or by the tone they give to the feelings and tastes of

the public, would be rendered in a much more beneficial manner than atpresent. A large portion also of the accumulations of successful industry

would probably be devoted to public uses, either by direct bequests to the

State, or by the endowment of institutions; as is already done very largely in

the United States, where the ideas and practice in the matter of inheritance
                                                    42
seem to be unusually rational and beneficial.

              5. The next point to be considered is, whether the reasons on

institution of property rests, are applicable to all things in which a right of

exclusive ownership is at present recognised; and if not, on what other

grounds the recognition is defensible.

              The essential principle of property being to assure to all persons

what they have produced by their labour and accumulated by their

abstinence, this principle cannot apply to what is not the produce of labour,

the raw material of the earth. If the land derived its productive power wholly

from nature, and not at all from industry, or if there were any means of

discriminating what is derived from each source, it not only would not be

necessary, but it would be the height of injustice, to let the gift of nature be

engrossed by individuals. The use of the land in agriculture must indeed, for

the time being, he necessity exclusive; the same person who has ploughed

and sown must be permitted to reap: but the land might be occupied for one

season only, as among the ancient Germans; or might be periodically

redivided as population increased: or the State might he the universal

landlord, and the cultivators tenants under it, either on lease or at will.

              But though land is not the produce of industry, most of its valuable

qualities are so. Labour is not only requisite for using, but almost equally so

for fashioning, the instrument. Considerable labour is often required at the

commencement, to clear the land for cultivation. In many cases, even when

cleared, its productiveness is wholly the effect of labour and art. The Bedford

Level produced little or nothing until artificially drained. The bogs of Ireland,

until the same thing is done to them, can produce little besides fuel. One of

the barrenest soils in the world, composed of the material of the Goodwin

Sands, the Pays de Waes in Flanders, has been so fertilized by industry, as to

have become one of the most productive in Europe. Cultivation also requires

buildings and fences, which are wholly the produce of labour. The fruits of

this industry cannot be reaped in a short period. The labour and outlay are

immediate, the benefit is spread over many years, perhaps over all future

time. A holder will not incur this labour and outlay when strangers and nothimself will he benefited by it. If he undertakes such improvements, he must

have a sufficient period before him in which to profit by them: and he is in no

way so sure of having always a sufficient period as when his tenure is
          43
perpetual.

              6. These are the reasons which form the justification in an

economical point of view, of property in land. It is seen, that they are only

valid, in so far as the proprietor of land is its improver. Whenever, in any

country, the proprietor, generally speaking, ceases to be the improver,

political economy has nothing to say in defence of landed property, as there

established. In no sound theory of private property was it ever contemplated

that the proprietor of land should be merely a sinecurist quartered on it.

              In Great Britain, the landed proprietor is not unfrequently an

improver. But it cannot be said that he is generally so. And in the majority of

cases he grants the liberty of cultivation on such terms, as to prevent

improvements from being made by any one else. In the southern parts of the

island, as there are usually no leases, permanent improvements can scarcely

he made except by the landlord’s capital; accordingly the South, compiled

with the North of England, and with the Lowlands of Scotland, is still

extremely backward in agricultural improvement. The truth is, that any very

general improvement of land by the landlords, is hardly compatible with a

law or custom of primogeniture. When the land goes wholly to the heir, it

generally goes to him severed from the pecuniary resources which would

enable him to improve it, the personal property being absorbed by the

provision for younger children, and the land itself often heavily burthened for

the same purpose. There is therefore but a small proportion of landlords who

have the means of making expensive improvements, unless they do it with

borrowed money, and by adding to the mortgages with which in most cases

the land was already burthened when they received it. But the position of the

owner of a deeply mortgaged estate is so precarious; economy is so

unwelcome to one whose apparent fortune greatly exceeds his real means,

and the vicissitudes of rent and price which only trench upon the margin of

his income, are so formidable to one who can call little more than the margin

his own, that it is no wonder if few landlords find themselves in a condition

to make immediate sacrifices for the sake of future profit. Were they ever so

much inclined, those alone can prudently do it, who have seriously studied

the principles of scientific agriculture: and great landlords have seldomseriously studied anything. They might at least hold out inducements to the

farmers to do what they will not or cannot do themselves; but even in

granting leases, it is in England a general complaint that they tie up their

tenants by covenants grounded on the practices of an obsolete and exploded

agriculture; while most of them, by withholding leases altogether, and giving

the farmer no guarantee of possession beyond a single harvest, keep the land

on a footing little more favourable to improvement than in the time of our

barbarous ancestors,

                      — immetata quibus jugera liberas

                      Fruges et Cererem ferunt,

                      Nec cultura placet longior annuâ.

              Landed property in England is thus very far from completely

fulfilling the conditions which render its existence economically justifiable.

But if insufficiently realized even in England, in Ireland those conditions are

not complied with at all. With individual exceptions (some of them very

honourable ones), the owners of Irish estates do nothing for the land but drain

it of its produce. What has been epigrammatically said in the discussions on

“peculiar burthens” is literally true when applied to them; that the greatest

“burthen on land” is the landlords. Returning nothing to the soil, they

consume its whole produce, minus the potatoes strictly necessary to keep the

inhabitants from dying of famine; and when they have any purpose of

improvement, the preparatory step usually consists in not leaving even this
                                                                            44
pittance, but turning out the people to beggary if not to starvation. When

landed property has placed itself upon this footing it ceases to be defensible,

and the time has come for making some new arrangement of the matter.

              When the “sacredness of property” is talked of, it should always be

remembered, that any such sacredness does not belong in the same degree to

landed property. No man made the land. It is the original inheritance of the

whole species. its appropriation is wholly a question of general expediency.

When private property in land is not expedient, it is unjust. It is no hardship

to any one, to be excluded from what others have produced: they were not

bound to produce it for his use, and he loses nothing by not sharing in what

otherwise would not have existed at all. But it is some hardship to be born

into the world and to find all nature’s gifts previously engrossed, and no

place left for the new-comer. To reconcile people to this, after they have onceadmitted into their minds the idea that any moral rights belong to them as

human beings, it will always be necessary to convince them that the exclusive

appropriation is good for mankind on the whole, themselves included. But

this is what no sane human being could be persuaded of, if the relation

between the landowner and the cultivator were the same everywhere as it has

been in Ireland.

              Landed property is felt, even by those most tenacious of its rights, to

be a different thing from other property; and where the bulk of the

community have been disinherited of their share of it, and it has become the

exclusive attribute of a small minority, men have generally tried to reconcile

it, at least in theory, to their sense of justice, by endeavouring to attach duties

to it, and erecting it into a sort of magistracy, either moral or legal. But if the

state is at liberty to treat the possessors of land as public functionaries, it is

only going one step further to say, that it is at liberty to discard them. The

claim of the landowners to the land is altogether subordinate to the general

policy of the state. The principle of property gives them no right to the land,

but only a right to compensation for whatever portion of their interest in the

land it may be the policy of the state to deprive them of. To that, their claim

is indefeasible. it is due to landowners, and to owners of any property

whatever, recognised as such by the state, that they should not be

dispossessed of it without receiving its pecuniary value, or an annual income

equal to what they derived from it. This is due on the general principles on

which property rests. If the land was bought with the compensation is due to

them on even if otherwise, it is still due on that ground; even if otherwise, it

is still due on the ground of prescription. Nor can it ever be necessary for

accomplished an object by which community should be immolated. When the

property is of a kind to which peculiar affections attach themselves, the

compensation ought to exceed a bare pecuniary equivalent. But, subject to the

proviso, the state is at liberty to deal with landed property as the general

interests of the community may require, even to the extent, if it so happen, of

doing with the whole, what is done with a part whenever a bill is passed for a

railroad or a new street. The community has too much at stake in the proper

cultivation of the land, and in the conditions annexed to the occupancy of it,

to leave these things to the discretion of a class of persons called landlords,

when they have shown themselves unfit for the trust. The legislature, which if

it pleased might convert the whole body of landlords into fundholders or

pensioners, might, à fortiori, commute the average receipts of Irishlandowners into a fixed rent charge, and raise the tenants into proprietors;

supposing always that the full market value of the land was tendered to the

landlords, in case they preferred that to accepting the conditions proposed.

              There will be another place for discussing the various modes of

landed property and tenure, and the advantages and inconveniences of each;

in this chapter our concern is with the right itself, the grounds which justify

it, and (as a corollary from these) the conditions by which it should be

limited. To me it seems almost an axiom that property in land should be

interpreted strictly, and that the balance in all cases of doubt should incline

against the proprietor. The reverse is the case with property in moveables,

and in all things the product of labour: over these, the owner’s power both of

use and of exclusion should be absolute, except where positive evil to others

would result from it: but in the case of land, no exclusive right should be

permitted in any individual, which cannot be shown to be productive of

positive good. To be allowed any exclusive right at all, over a portion of the

common inheritance, while there are others who have no portion, is already a

privilege. No quantity of moveable goods which a person can acquire by his

labour, prevents others from acquiring the like by the same means; but from

the very nature of the case, whoever owns land, keeps mothers out of the

enjoyment of it. The privilege, or monopoly, is only defensible as a necessary

evil; it becomes an injustice when carried to any point to which the

compensating good does not follow it.

              For instance, the exclusive right to the land for purposes of

cultivation does not imply an exclusive right to it for purposes of access; and

no such right ought to be recognised, except to the extent necessary to protect

the produce against damage, and the owner’s privacy against invasion. The

pretension of two Dukes to shut up a part of the Highlands, and exclude the

rest of mankind from many square miles of mountain scenery to prevent

disturbance to wild animals, is an abuse; it exceeds the legitimate bounds of

the right of landed property. When land is not intended to be cultivated, no

good reason can in general be given for its being private property at all; and if

any one is permitted to call it his, he ought to know that he holds it by

sufferance of the community, and on an implied condition that his ownership,

since it cannot possibly do them any good, at least shall not deprive them of

any, which could have derived from the land if it had been unappropriated.

Even in the case of cultivated land, a man whom, though only one amongmillions, the law permits to hold thousands of acres as his single share, is not

entitled to think that all this is given to him to use and abuse, and deal with as

if it concerned nobody but himself. The rents or profits which he can obtain

from it are at his sole disposal; but with regard to the land, in everything

which he does with it, and in everything which he abstains from doing, he is

morally bound, and should whenever the case admits be legally compelled, to

make his interest and pleasure consistent with the public good. The species at

large still retains, of its original claim to the soil of the planet which it

inhabits, as much as is compatible with the purposes for which it has parted

with the remainder.

              7. Besides property in the produce of labour, and property in land,

there are other things which are or have been subjects of property, in which

no proprietary rights ought to exist at all. But as the civilized world has in

general made up its mind on most of these, there is no necessity for dwelling

on them in this place. At the head of them, is property in human beings. It is

almost superfluous to observe, that this institution can have no place in any

society even pretending to be founded on justice, or on fellowship between

human creatures. But, iniquitous as it is, yet when the state has expressly

legalized it, and human beings, for generations, have been bought, sold, and

inherited under sanction of law, it is another wrong, in abolishing the

property, not to make full compensation. This wrong was avoided by the

great measure of justice in 1833, one of the most virtuous acts, as well as the

most practically beneficent, ever done collectively by a nation. Other

examples of property which ought not to have been created, are properties in

public trusts; such as judicial offices under the old French regime, and the

heritable jurisdictions which, in countries not wholly emerged from feudality,

pass with the land. Our own country affords, as cases in point, that of a

commission in the army, and of an advowson, or right of nomination to an

ecclesiastical benefice. A property is also sometimes created in a right of

taxing the public; in a monopoly, for instance, or other exclusive privilege.

These abuses prevail most in semibarbarous countries but are not without

example in the most civilized. In France there are several important trades

and professions, including notaries, attorneys, brokers, appraisers, printers,

and (until lately) bakers and butchers, of which the numbers are limited by

law. The brevet or privilege of one of the permitted number consequently

brings a high price in the market. When such is the case, compensation

probably could not with justice be refused, on the abolition of the privilege.There are other cases in which this would be more doubtful. The question

would turn upon what, in the peculiar circumstances, was sufficient to

constitute prescription; and whether the legal recognition which the abuse

had obtained, was sufficient to constitute it an institution, or amounted only

to an occasional licence. It would be absurd to claim compensation for losses

caused by changes in a tariff, a thing confessedly variable from year to year;

or for monopolies like those granted to individuals by the Tudors, favours of

a despotic authority, which the power that gave was competent at any time to

recal.

              So much on the institution of property, a subject of which, for the

purposes of political economy, it was indispensable to treat, but on which we

could not usefully confine ourselves to economical considerations. We have

now to inquire on what principles and with what results the distribution of the

produce of land and labour is effected, under the relations which this

institution creates among the different members of the community.

        41
               See, for admirable illustrations of this and many kindred points,

Mr Maine’s profound work on Ancient Law and its relation to Modern Ideas.

        42
               In the case of capital employed, in the hands of the owner himself,

in carrying on any of the operations of industry, there are strong grounds for

leaving to him the power of bequeathing to one person the whole of the funds

actually engaged in a single enterprise. It is well that he should be enabled to

leave the enterprise under the control of whichever of his heirs he regards as

best fitted to conduct it virtuously and efficiently: and the necessity (ver

frequent and inconvient under the French law) would be thus obviated, of

breaking up a manufacturing or commercial establishment at the death of its

chief. In like manner, it should be allowed to a proprietor who leaves to one

of his successors the more burthen of keeping up an ancestral who leaves to

one of his successors the moral burthern of keeping up an ancestral mansion

and park or pleasure-ground, to bestow along with them as much other

property as is required for their sufficient maintenance.

        43
               “Munificent bequests and donations for public purposes, whether

charitable or education, form a striking feature in the modern history of the

United States, and expecially of New England. Not only is it common for rich

capitalists to leave by will a portion of their fortune towards the endowment

of national institutions, but individuals during their lifetime makemagnificent grants of money for the same objects. There is here no

compulsory law for the equal partition of property among children, as in

France, and on the other hand, no custom of entail or primogeniture, as in

England, so that the affluent feel themselves at liberty to share their wealth

between their kindred and the public; it being impossible to found a family,

and parents having frequently the happiness of seeing all their children well

provided for and independent long before their death. I have seen a list of

bequests and donations made during the last thirty years for the benefit of

religious, charitable, and literary institutions in the state of Massachusetts

alone, and they amounted to no less a sum than six millions of dollars, or

more than a million sterling.” — Lyell’s Travels in America, vol. i. p. 263.

        44
               “Ce qui donnait a l’homme l’intelligence et la constance dans ses

travaus, qui lui faisait diriger tous ses efforts vers un but utile a sa race,

c’etait le sentiment de la perpetuite. Les terrains les plus fertiles sont toujours

ceux que les eaux ont deposes le long de leur cours, mais ce sont aussi ceux

qu’elles menacent de leurs inodations ou qu’elles corrompent par des

marecages. Avec la garantie de la peretuite, l’homme entreprit de longs et

penibles travaux pour donner aux marecages un ecoulement, pour elever des

digues contre les inondations, pour repartir par des canaux d’arrosement des

eaux fertilisantes sur les memes champs que les memes eaux condamnaient a

la sterilite. Sous la meme garantie, l’homme, ne se contentant plus des fruits

annuels de la terre, a demele parmi la vegetation sauvage les plantes vivaces,

les arbustes, les arbres qui pouvaient lui etre utiles, il les a perfectionnes par

la culture, il a change en quelque sorte leur essence, et il a multiplies. Parmi

les fruits, en effet, on en reconnait que des siecles de culture ont seuls pu

amener a la perfection qu’ils ont atteinte aujourd’hui, tandis que d’autres ont

ete importes des regions les plus lointaines. L’homme en meme temps a

ouvert la terre jusqu’a une grande profondeur, pour renouveler son sol, et le

fertiliser par le melange de ses parties et les impressions de l’air; it a fixe sur

les collines la terre qui s’en echappait, et il a couvert la face entiere de la

campagne d’une vegetation partout abondante, et partout abondante, et

partout utile a la race humanine. Parmi ses travaux, il y en a d’autres dont ses

derniers neveux jouiront encoure dans plusieurs siecles. tous ont concouru a

augmenter la force productive de la nature, a donner a la race humaine un

revenu infiniment plus abondant, un revenu dont une portion considerable est

consommee par ceux qui n’ont point part a la propriete territoriale, et qui

cependant n’auraient point trouve de nourriture sans ce partage du sol quisemple les avoir desherites.” Sismondi, Etude sur l’Economie Politique,

Troisieme Essai, De la Richesse Territoriale.

        45
               I must beg the reader to bear in mind that this paragraph was

written more than twenty years ago. So wonderful are the changes, both

moral and economical, taking place in our age, that, without perpetually re-

writing a work like the present, it is impossible to keep up with them.

   Chapter 3 – Of the Classes Among Whom the Produce is Distributed

 

 

              1. Private property being assumed as a fact, we have next to

enumerate the different classes of persons to whom it gives rise; whose

concurrence, or at least whose permission, is necessary to production, and

who are therefore able to stipulate for a share of the produce. We have to

inquire, according to what laws the produce distributes itself among these

classes, by the spontaneous action of the interests of those concerned: after

which, a further question will be, what effects are or might be produced by

laws, institutions, and measures of government, in superseding or modifying

that spontaneous distribution.

              The three requisites of production, as has been so often repeated, are

labour, capital, and land: understanding by capital, the means and appliances

which are the accumulated results of previous labour, and by land, the

materials and instruments supplied by nature, whether contained in the

interior of the earth, or constituting its surface. Since each of these elements

of production may be separately appropriated, the industrial community may

be considered as divided into landowners, capitalists, and productive

labourers. Each of these classes, as such, obtains a share of the produce: no

other person or class obtains anything, except by concession from them. The

remainder of the community is, in fact, supported at their expense, giving, if

any equivalent, one consisting of unproductive services. These three classes,

therefore, are considered in political economy as making up the whole

community.

              2. But although these three sometimes exist as separate classes,

dividing the produce among them, they do not necessarily or always so exist.

The fact is so much otherwise, that there are only one or two communities in

which the complete separation of these classes is the general rule. England

and Scotland, with parts of Belgium and Holland, are almost the only

countries in the world, where the land, capital, and labour employed in

agriculture, are generally the property of separate owners. The ordinary case

is, that the same person owns either two of these requisites, or all three.

              The case in which the same person owns all three, embraces the twoextremes of existing society, in respect to the independence and dignity of the

labouring class. First, when the labourer himself is the proprietor. This is the

commonest case in the Northern States of the American Union; one of the

commonest in France, Switzerland, the three Scandinavian kingdoms, and
                    45
parts of Germany; and a common case in parts of Italy and in Belgium. In

all these countries there are, no doubt, large landed properties, and a still

greater number which, without being large, require the occasional or constant

aid of hired labourers. Much, however, of the land is owned in portions too

small to require any other labour than that of the peasant and his family, or

fully to occupy even that. The capital employed is not always that of the

peasant proprietor, many of these small properties being mortgaged to obtain

the means of cultivating; but the capital is invested at the peasant’s risk, and

though he pays interest for it, it gives to no one any right of interference,

except, perhaps, eventually to take possession of the land, if the interest

ceases to be paid.

              The other case in which the land, labour, and capital, belong to the

same person, is the case of slave countries, in which the labourers themselves

are owned by the landowner. Our West India colonies before emancipation,

and the sugar colonies of the nations by whom a similar act of justice is still

unperformed, are examples of large establishments for agricultural and

manufacturing labour (the production of sugar and rum is a combination of

both) in which the land, the factories (if they may be so called), the

machinery, and the degraded labourers, are all the property of a capitalist. In

this case, as well as in its extreme opposite, the case of the peasant proprietor,

there is no division of the produce.

              3. When the three requisites are not all owned by the same person, it

often happens that two of them are so. Sometimes the same person owns the

capital and the land, but not the labour. The landlord makes his engagement

directly with the labourer, and supplies the whole or part of the stock

necessary for cultivation. This system is the usual one in those parts of

Continental Europe, in which the labourers are neither serfs on the one hand,

nor proprietors on the other. It was very common in France before the

Revolution, and is still practised in some parts of that country, when the land

is not the property of the cultivator. It prevails generally in the level districts

of Italy, except those principally pastoral, such as the Maremma of Tuscany

and the Campagna of Rome. On this system the division of the produce isbetween two classes, the landowner and the labourer.

              In other cases again the labourer does not own the land, but owns the

little stock employed on it, the landlord not being in the habit of supplying

any. This system generally prevails in Ireland. It is nearly universal in India,

and in most countries of the East; whether the government retains, as it

generally does, the ownership of the soil, or allows portions to become, either

absolutely or in a qualified sense, the property of individuals. In India,

however, things are so far better than in Ireland, that the owner of land is in

the habit of making advances to the cultivators, if they cannot cultivate

without them. For these advances the native landed proprietor usually

demands high interest; but the principal landowner, the government, makes

them gratuitously, recovering the advance after the harvest, together with the

rent. The produce is here divided as before, between the same two classes,

the landowner and the labourer.

              These are the principal variations in the classification of those

among whom the produce of agricultural labour is distributed. In the case of

manufacturing industry there never are more than two classes, the labourers

and the capitalists. The original artisans in all countries were either slaves, or

the women of the family. In the manufacturing establishments of the ancients,

whether on a large or on a small scale, the labourers were usually the

property of the capitalist. In general, if any manual labour was thought

compatible with the dignity of a freeman, it was only agricultural labour. The

converse system, in which the capital was owned by the labourer, was coeval

with free labour, and under it the first great advances of manufacturing

industry were achieved. The artisan owned the loom or the few tools he used,

and worked on his own account; or at least ended by doing so, though he

usually worked for another, first as apprentice and next as journeyman, for a

certain number of years before he could be admitted a master. But the status

of a permanent journeyman, all his life a hired labourer and nothing more,

had no place in the crafts and guilds of the middle ages. In country villages,

where a carpenter or a blacksmith cannot live and support hired labourers on

the returns of his business, he is even now his own workman; and

shopkeepers in similar circumstances are their own shopmen, or shopwomen.

But wherever the extent of the market admits of it, the distinction is now fully

established between the class of capitalists, or employers of labour, and the

class of labourers; the capitalists, in general, contributing no other labour thanthat of direction and superintendence.

        46
               “The Norwegian return” (say the Commissioners of Poor Law

Enquiry, to whom information was furnished from nearly every country in

Europe and America by the ambassadors and consuls there) “states that at the

last census in 1825, out of a population of 1,051,318 persons, there were 59,

464 freeholders. As by 59,464 freeholders must be meant 59,464 heads of

families, or about 300,000 individuals; the freeholders must form more than a

fourth of the whole population. Mr Macgregor states that in Denmark (by

which Zealand and the adjoining islands are probably meant) out of a

population of 926,110, the number of landed proprietors and farmers is

415,110, or nearly one-half. In Sleswick–Holstein, out of a populationof

604,085, it is 196,017, or about one-third. The proportion of proprietors and

farmers to the whole population is not given in Sweden; but the Stockholm

return estimates the average quantity of land annexed to a labourer’s

habitation at from one to five acres; and through the Gottenburg return gives

a lower estimate, it adds, that the peasants possess much of the land. In

Wurtemburg we are told that more than two-thirds of the labouring

population are the proprietors of their own habitations, and that almost all

own at least a garden of from three-quarters of an acre to an acre and a half.”

In some of these statements, proprietors and farmers are not discriminated;

but “all the returns concur in stating the number of day-labourers to be very

small.” — (Preface to Foreign Communications, p. xxxviii) As the general

status of the labouring people, the condition of a workman for hire is almost

peculiar to Great Britain.

 

 

                   Chapter 4 – Of Competition, and Custom

 

 

              1. Under the rule of individual property, the division of the produce

is the result of two determining agencies: Competition, and Custom. It is

important to ascertain the amount of influence which belongs to each of these

causes, and in what manner the operation of one is modified by the other.

              Political economists generally, and English political economists

above others, have been accustomed to lay almost exclusive stress upon the

first of these agencies; to exaggerate the effect of competition, and to take

into little account the other and conflicting principle. They are apt to express

themselves as if they thought that competition actually does, in all cases,

whatever it can be shown to he the tendency of competition to do. This is

partly intelligible, if we consider that only through the principle of

competition has political economy any pretension to the character of a

science.So far as rents, profits, wages, prices, are determined by competition,

laws may be assigned for them. Assume competition to be their exclusive

regulator, and principles of broad generality and scientific precision may be

laid down, according to which they will be regulated. The political economist

justly deems this his proper business: and as an abstract or hypothetical

science, political economy cannot be required to do, and indeed cannot do,

anything more. But it would be a great misconception of the actual course of

human affairs, to suppose that competition exercises in fact this unlimited

sway. I am not speaking of monopolies, either natural or artificial, or of any

interferences of authority with the liberty of production or exchange. Such

disturbing causes have always been allowed for by political economists. I

speak of cases in which there is nothing to restrain competition; no hindrance

to it either in the nature of the case or in artificial obstacles; yet in which the

result is not determined by competition, but by custom or usage; competition

either not taking place at all, or producing its effect in quite a different

manner from that which is ordinarily assumed to be natural to it.

              2. Competition, in fact, has only become in any considerable degree

the governing principle of contracts, at a comparatively modern period. The

farther we look back into history, the more we see all transactions and

engagements under the influence of fixed customs. The reason is evident.Custom is the most powerful protector of the weak the strong; their sole

protector where there are no laws or government adequate to the purpose.

Custom is a barrier which, even in the most oppressed condition of mankind,

tyranny is forced in some degree to respect. To the industrious population, in

a turbulent military community, freedom of competition is a vain phrase; they

are never in a condition to make terms for themselves by it: there is always a

master who throws his sword into the scale, and the terms are such as he

imposes. But though the law of the strongest decides, it is not the interest nor

in general the practice of the strongest to strain that law to the utmost, and

every relaxation of it has a tendency to become a custom, and every custom

to become a right. Rights thus originating, and not competition in any shape,

determine, in a rude state of society, the share of the produce enjoyed by

those who produce it. The relations, more especially, between the landowner

and the cultivator, and the payments made by the latter to the former, are, in

all states of society but the most modern, determined by the usage of the

country. Never until late times have a right to retain his holdings, while he

fulfils the customary requirements; and thus become, in a certain sense, a co-

proprietor of the soil. Even where the holder has not acquired this fixity of

tenure, the terms of occupation have often been fixed and invariable.

              In India, for example, and other Asiatic communities similarly

constituted, the ryots, or peasant-farmers, are not regarded as tenants at will,

nor even as tenants by virtue of a lease. In most villages there are indeed

some ryots on this precarious footing, consisting of those, or the descendants

of those, who have settled in the place at a known and comparatively recent

period; but all who are looked upon as descendants or representatives of the

original inhabitants, and even many mere tenants of ancient date, are thought

entitled to retain their land, as long as they pay the customary rents. What

these customary rents are, or ought to be, has indeed, in most cases, become a

matter of obscurity; usurpation, tyranny, and foreign conquest having to a

great degree obliterated the evidences of them. But when an old and purely

Hindoo principality falls under the dominion of the British Government, or

the management of its officers, and when the details of the revenue system

come to be inquired into, it is usually found that though the demands of the

great landholder, the State, have been swelled by fiscal rapacity until all limit

is practically lost sight of, it has yet been thought necessary to have a distinct

name and a separate pretext for each increase of exaction; so that the demand

has sometimes come to consist of thirty or forty different items, in addition tothe nominal rent. This circuitous mode of increasing the payments assuredly

would not have been resorted to, if there had been an acknowledged right in

the landlord to increase the rent. Its adoption is a proof that there was once an

effective limitation, a real customary rent; and that the understood right of the

ryot to the land, so long as he paid rent according to custom, was at some
                                      46
time or other more than nominal. The British Government of India always

simplifies the tenure by consolidating the various assessments into one, thus

making the rent nominally as well as really an arbitrary thing, or at least a

matter of specific agreement: but it scrupulously respects the right of the ryot

to the land, though until the reforms of the present generation (reforms even

now only partially carried into effect) it seldom left him much more than a

bare subsistence.

              In modern Europe the cultivators have gradually emerged from a

state of personal slavery. The barbarian conquerors of the Western Empire

found that the easiest mode of managing their conquests would be to leave

the occupation of the land in the hands in which they found it, and to save

themselves a labour so uncongenial as the superintendence of troops of

slaves, by allowing the slaves to retain in a certain degree the control of their

own actions, under an obligation to furnish the lord with provisions and

labour. A common expedient was to assign to the serf, for his exclusive use,

as much land as was thought sufficient for his support, and to make him work

on the other lands of his lord whenever required. By degrees these indefinite

obligations were transformed into a definite one, of supplying a fixed

quantity of provisions or a fixed quantity of labour: and as the lords, in time,

became inclined to employ their income in the purchase of luxuries rather

than in the maintenance of retainers, the payments in kind were commuted

for payments in money. Each concession, at first voluntary and revocable at

pleasure, gradually acquired the force of custom, and was at last recognised

and enforced by the tribunals. In this manner the serfs progressively rose into

a free tenantry, who held their land in perpetuity on fixed conditions. The

conditions were sometimes very onerous, and the people very miserable. But

their obligations were determined by the usage or law of the country, and not

by competition.

              Where the cultivators had never been, strictly speaking, in personal

bondage, or after they had ceased to be so, the exigencies of a poor and little

advanced society gave rise to another arrangement, which in some parts ofEurope, even highly improved parts, has been found sufficiently

advantageous to be continued to the present day. I speak of the métayer

system. Under this, the land is divided, in small farms, among single families,

the landlord generally supplying the stock which the agricultural system of

the country is considered to require, and receiving, in lieu of rent and profit, a

fixed proportion of the produce. This proportion, which is generally paid in

kind, is usually, (as is implied in the words métayer, mezzaiuolo, and

medietarius,) one-half. There are places, however, such as the rich volcanic

soil of the province of Naples, where the landlord takes two-thirds, and yet

the cultivator by means of an excellent agriculture contrives to live. But

whether the proportion is two-thirds or one-half, it is a fixed proportion; not

variable from farm to farm, or from tenant to tenant. The custom of the

country is the universal rule; nobody thinks of raising or lowering rents, or of

letting land on other than the customary conditions. Competition, as a

regulator of rent, has no existence.

              3. Prices, whenever there was no monopoly, came earlier under the

influence of competition, and are much more universally subject to it, than

rents: but that influence is by no means, even in the present activity of

mercantile competition, so absolute as is sometimes assumed. There is no

proposition which meets us in the field of political economy oftener than this-

that there cannot be two prices in the same market. Such undoubtedly is the

natural effect of unimpeded competition; yet every one knows that there are,

almost always, two prices in the same market. Not only are there in every

large town, and in almost every trade, cheap shops and dear shops, but the

same shop often sells the same article at different prices to different

customers: and, as a general rule, each retailer adapts his scale of prices to the

class of customers whom he expects. The wholesale trade, in the great articles

of commerce, is really under the dominion of competition. There, the buyers

as well as sellers are traders or manufacturers, and their purchases are not

influenced by indolence or vulgar finery, nor depend on the smaller motives

of personal convenience, but are business transactions. In the wholesale

markets therefore it is true as a general proposition, that there are not two

prices at one time for the same thing: there is at each time and place a market

price, which can be quoted in a price-current. But retail price, the price paid

by the actual consumer, seems to feel very slowly and imperfectly the effect

of competition; and when competition does exist, it often, instead of lowering

prices, merely divides the gains of the high price among a greater number ofdealers. Hence it is that, of the price paid by the consumer, so large a

proportion is absorbed by the gains of retailers; and any one who inquires

into the amount which reaches the hands of those who made the things he

buys, will often be astonished at its smallness. When indeed the market,

being that of a great city, holds out a sufficient inducement to large capitalists

to engage in retail operations, it is generally found a better speculation to

attract a large business by underselling others, than merely to divide the field

of employment with them. This influence of competition is making itself felt

more and more through the principal branches of retail trade in the large

towns; and the rapidity and cheapness of transport, by making consumers less

dependent on the dealers in their immediate neighbourhood, are tending to

assimilate more and more the whole country to a large town: but hitherto it is

only in the great centres of business that retail transactions have been chiefly,

or even much, determined, by competition. Elsewhere it rather acts, when it

acts at all, as an occasional disturbing influence; the habitual regulator is

custom, modified from time to time by notions existing in the minds of

purchasers and sellers, of some kind of equity or justice.

              In many trades the terms on which business is done are a matter of

positive arrangement among the trade, who use the means they always

possess of making the situation of any member of the body who departs from

its fixed customs, inconvenient or disagreeable. It is well known that the

bookselling trade was, until lately, one of these, and that notwithstanding the

active spirit of rivalry in the trade, competition did not produce its natural

effect in breaking down the trade rules. All professional remuneration is

regulated by custom. The fees of physicians, surgeons, and barristers, the

charges of attorneys, are nearly invariable. Not certainly for want of abundant

competition in those professions, but because the competition operates by

diminishing each competitor’s chance of fees, not by lowering the fees

themselves.

              Since custom stands its ground against competition to so

considerable an extent, even where, from the multitude of competitors and

the general energy in the pursuit of gain, the spirit of competition is strongest,

we may be sure that this is much more the case where people are content with

smaller gains, and estimate their pecuniary interest at a lower rate when

balanced against their ease or their pleasure. I believe it will often be found,

in Continental Europe, that prices and charges, of some or of all sorts, aremuch higher in some places than in others not far distant, without its being

possible to assign any other cause than that it has always been so: the

customers are used to it, and acquiesce in it. An enterprising competitor, with

sufficient capital, might force down the charges, and make his fortune during

the process; but there are no enterprising competitors; those who have capital

prefer to leave it where it is, or to make less profit by it in a more quiet way.

              These observations must be received as a general correction to be

applied whenever relevant, whether expressly mentioned or not, to the

conclusions contained in the subsequent portions of this treatise. Our

reasonings must, in general, proceed as if the known and natural effects of

competition were actually produced by it, in all cases in which it is not

restrained by some positive obstacle. Where competition, though free to exist,

does not exist, or where it exists, but has its natural consequences overruled

by any other agency, the conclusions will fail more or less of being

applicable. To escape error, we ought, in applying the conclusions of political

economy to the actual affairs of life, to consider not only what will happen

supposing the maximum of competition, but how far the result will be

affected if competition falls short of the maximum.

              The states of economical relation which stand first in order to be

discussed and appreciated, are those in which competition has no part, the

arbiter of transactions being either brute force or established usage. These

will be the subject of the next four chapters.

        47
               The ancient law books of the Hindoos mention in some cases one-

sixth, in others one-fourth of the produce, as a proper rent; but there is no

evidence that the rules laid down in those books were, at any period of

history, really acted upon.

 

 

                               Chapter 5 – Of Slavery

 

 

              1. Among the forms which society assumes under the influence of

the institution of property, there are, as I have already remarked, two,

otherwise of a widely dissimilar character, but resembling in this, that the

ownership of the land, the labour, and the capital, is in the same hands. One

of these cases is that of slavery, the other is that of peasant proprietors. In the

one, the landowner owns the labour, in the other the labourer owns the land.

We begin with the first.

              In this system all the produce belongs to the landlord. The food and

other necessaries of his labourers are part of his expenses. The labourers

possess nothing but what he thinks fit to give them, and until he thinks fit to

take it back: and they work as hard as he chooses, or is able, to compel them.

Their wretchedness is only limited by his humanity, or his pecuniary interest.

With the first consideration, we have on the present occasion nothing to do.

What the second in so detestable a constitution of society may dictate,

depends on the facilities for importing fresh slaves. If full-grown able-bodied

slaves can be procurred in sufficient numbers, and imported at a moderate

expense, self-interest will recommend working the slaves to death, and

replacing them importation in preference to the slow and expensive process

of breeding them. Nor are the slave-owners generally backward in learning

this lesson. It is notorious that such was the practice in our slave colonies,

while the slave trade was legal; and it is said to be so still in among the Cuba

              When, as among the ancients, the slave-market could only be

supplied by captives either taken in war, or kidnapped from thinly scattered

tribes on the remote confines of the known world, it was generally more

profitable to keep up the number by breeding, which necessitates a far better

treatment of them; and for this reason, joined with several others, the

condition of slaves, notwithstanding occasional enormities, was probably

much less bad in the ancient world, than in the colonies of modern nations.

The Helots are usually cited as the type of the most hideous form of personal

slavery, but with how little truth appears from the fact that they were

regularly armed (though not with the panoply of the hoplite) and formed an

integral part of the military strength of the State. They were doubtless aninferior and degraded caste, but their slavery seems to have been one of the

least onerous varieties of serfdom. Slavery appears in far more frightful

colours among the Romans, during the period in which the Roman

aristocracy was gorging itself with the plunder of a newly-conquered world.

The Romans were a cruel people, and the worthless nobles sported with the

lives of their myriads of slaves with the same reckless prodigality with which

they squandered any other part of their ill-acquired possessions. Yet, slavery

is divested of one of its worst features when it is compatible with hope;

enfranchisement was easy and common: enfranchised slaves obtained at once

the full rights of citizens, and instances were frequent of their acquiring not

only riches, but latterly even honours. By the progress of milder legislation

under the Emperors, much of the protection of law was thrown round the

slave, he became capable of possessing property, and the evil altogether

assumed a considerably gentler aspect. Until, however, slavery assumes the

mitigated form of villenage, in which not only the slaves have property and

legal rights, but their obligations are more or less limited by usage, and they

partly labour for their own benefit; their condition is seldom such as to

produce a rapid growth neither of population or of production.

              2. So long as slave countries are underpeopled in proportion to their

cultivable land, the labour of the slaves, under any tolerable management,

produces much more than is sufficient for their support; especially as the

great amount of superintendence which their labour requires, preventing the

dispersion of the population, insures some of the advantages of combined

labour. Hence, in a good soil and climate, and with reasonable care of his

own interests, the owner of many slaves has the means of being rich. The

influence, however, of such a state of society on production, is perfectly well

understood. It is truism to assert that labour extorted by fear of punishment is

inefficient and unproductive. It is true that in some circumstances, human

beings can be driven by the lash to attempt, and even to accomplish, things

which they would not have undertaken for any payment which it could have

been worth while to an employer to offer them. And it is likely that

productive operations which require much combination of labour, the

production of sugar for example, would not have taken place so soon in the

American colonies, if slavery had not existed to keep masses of labour

together. There are also savage tribes so averse from regular industry, that

industrial life is scarcely able to introduce itself among them until they are

either conquered and made slaves of, or become conquerors and make othersso. But after allowing the full value of these considerations, it remains certain

that slavery is incompatible with any high state of the arts of life, and any

great efficiency of labour. For all products which require much skill, slave

countries are usually dependent on foreigners. Hopeless slavery effectually

brutifies the intellect; and intelligence in the slaves, though often encouraged

in the ancient world and in the East, is in a more advanced state of society a

source of so much danger and an object of so much dread to the masters, that

in some of the States of America it was a highly penal offence to teach a

slave to read. All processes carried on by slave labour are conducted in the

rudest strength of the slave is, on an average, not half exerted. and most

unimproved manner. And even the animal strength of the slave is, on an

average, not half exerted. The unproductiveness and wastefulness of the

industrial system in the Slave States is instructively displayed in the valuable

writings of Mr. Olmsted. The mildest form of slavery is certainly the

condition of the serf, who is attached to the soil, supports himself from his

allotment, and works a certain number of days in the week for his lord. Yet

there is but one opinion on the extreme inefficiency of serf labour. The
                                                  47
following passage is from Professor Jones, whose Essay on the Distribution

of Wealth (or rather on Rent), is a copious repertory of valuable facts on the

landed tenures of different countries.

              “The Russians, or rather those German writers who have observed

the manners and habits of Russia, state some strong facts on this point. Two

Middlesex mowers, they say, will mow in a day as much grass as six Russian

serfs, and in spite of the dearness of provisions in England and their

cheapness in Russia, the mowing a quantity of hay which would cost an

English farmer half a copeck, will cost a Russian proprietor three or four

copecks.* The Prussian counsellor of state, Jacob, is considered to have

proved, that in Russia, where everything is cheap, the labour of a serf is

doubly as expensive as that of a labourer in England. M. Schmalz gives a

startling account of the unproductiveness of serf labour in Prussia, from his

own knowledge and observation.* In Austria, it is distinctly stated, that the

labour of a serf is equal to only one-third of that of a free hired labourer. This

calculation, made in an able work on agriculture (with some extracts from

which I have been favoured), is applied to the practical purpose of deciding

on the number of labourers necessity to cultivate an estate of a given

magnitude. So palpable, indeed, are the ill effects of labour rents on the

industry of the agricultural population, that in Austria itself, where proposalsof changes of any kind do not readily make their way, schemes and plans for

the commutation of labour rents are as popular as in the more stirring German

provinces of the North.”*

              What is wanting in the quality of the labour itself, is not made up by

any excellence in the direction and superintendence. As the same writer

remarks, the landed proprietors “are necessarily, in their character of

cultivators of their own domains, the only guides and directors of the industry

of the agricultural population,” since there can be no intermediate class of

capitalist farmers where the labourers are the property of the lord. Great

landowners are everywhere an idle class, or if they labour at all, addict

themselves only to the more exciting kinds of exertion; that lion’s share

which superiors always reserve for themselves. “It would,” as Mr. Jones

observes, “be hopeless and irrational to expect, that a race of noble

proprietors, fenced round with privileges and dignity, and attracted to

military and political pursuits by the advantages and habits of their station,

should ever become attentive cultivators as a body.” Even in England, if the

cultivation of every estate depended upon its proprietor, any one can judge

what would be the result. There would be a few cases of great science and

energy, and numerous individual instances of moderate success, but the

general state of agriculture would be contemptible.

              3. Whether the proprietors themselves would lose by the

emancipation of their slaves, is a different question from the comparative

effectiveness of free and slave labour to the community. There has been

much discussion of this question as an abstract thesis; as if it could possibly

admit of any universal solution. Whether slavery or free labour is most

profitable to the employer, depends on the wages of the free labourer. These,

again, depend on the numbers of the labouring population, compared with the

capital and the land. Hired labour is generally so much more efficient than

slave labour, that the employer can pay a considerably greater value in wages,

than the maintenance of his slaves cost him before, and yet be a gainer by the

change: but he cannot do this without of serfdom in Europe, and its

destruction in the Western nations, were doubtless hastened by the change

which the growth of population must have made in the pecuniary interests of

the master. As population pressed harder upon the land, with any

improvements in agriculture, the maintenance of the serfs necessarily became

more costly, and their labour less valuable. With the rate of wages such as itis in Ireland, or in England (where, in proportion to its efficiency, labour is

quite as cheap as in Ireland), no one can for a moment imagine that slavery

could be profitable. If the Irish peasantry were slaves, their masters would be

as willing, as their landlords now are, to pay large sums merely to get rid of

them. In the rich and underpeopled soil of the West India islands, there is just

as little doubt that the balance of profits between free and slave labour was

greatly on the side of slavery, and that the compensation canted to the slave-

owners for its abolition was not more, perhaps even less, than an equivalent

for their loss.

              More needs not be said here on a cause so completely judged and

decided as that of slavery. Its demerits are no longer a question requiring

argument; though the temper of mind manifested by the larger part of the

influential classes in Great Britain respecting the struggle in America, shows

how grievously the feelings of the present generation of Englishmen, on this

subject, had fallen behind the positive acts of the generation which preceded

them. That the sons of the deliverers of the West Indian Negroes should

expect with complacency, and encourage by their sympathies, the

establishment of a great and powerful military commonwealth, pledged by its

principles and driven by its strongest interests to be the armed propagator of

slavery through every region of the earth into which its power could

penetrate, discloses a mental state in the leading portion of our higher and

middle classes which it is melancholy to see, and will be a lasting blot in

English history. Fortunately they stopped short of actually aiding, otherwise

than by words, the nefarious enterprise to which they were not ashamed of

wishing success;and at the expense of the best blood of the Free States, but to

their immeasurable elevation in mental and moral worth, the curse of slavery

has been cast out from the great American republic, to find its last temporary

refuge in Brazil and Cuba. No European country, except Spain alone, any

longer participates in the enormity. Even serfage has now ceased to have a

legal existence in Europe. Denmark has the honour of being the first

Continental nation which imitated England in liberating its colonial slaves;

and the abolition of slavery was one of the earliest acts of the heroic and

calumniated Provisional Government of France. The Dutch Government was

not long behind, and its colonies and dependencies are now, I believe without

exception, free from actual slavery, though forced labour for the public

authorities is still a recognised institution in Java, soon, we may hope, to he

exchanged for complete personal freedom.        48
               Essay on the Distribution of Wealth and on the Sources of

Taxation. By the Rev. Richard Jones, page 50.

 

 

                       Chapter 6 – Of Peasant Proprietors

 

 

              1. In the regime of peasant properties, as in that of slavery, the whole

produce belongs to a single owner’ and the distinction of rent, profits, and

wages, does not exist. In all other respects, the two states of society are the

extreme opposites of each other. The one is the state of greatest oppression

and degradation to the labouring class. The other is that in which they are the

most uncontrolled arbiters of their own lot.

              The advantage, however, of small properties in land, is one of the

most disputed questions in the range of political economy. On the Continent,

though there are some dissentients from the prevailing opinion, the benefit of

having a numerous proprietary population exists in the minds of most people

in the form of an axiom. But English authorities are either unaware of the

judgment of Continental agriculturists, or are content to put it aside, on the

plea of their having no experience of large properties in favourable

circumstances: the advantage of large properties being only felt where there

are also large farms; and as this, in arable districts, implies a greater

accumulation of capital than usually exists on the Continent, the great

Continental estates, except in the case of grazing farms, are mostly let out for

cultivation in small portions. There is some truth in this; but the argument

admits of being retorted; for if the Continent knows little, by experience, of

cultivation on a large scale and by large capital, the generality of English

writers are no better acquainted practically with peasant proprietors, and have

almost always the most erroneous ideas of their social condition and mode of

life. Yet the old traditions even of England are on the same side with the

general opinion of the Continent. The “yeomanry” who were vaunted as the

glory of England while they existed, and have been so much mourned over

since they disappeared, were either small proprietors or small farmers, and if

they were mostly the last, the character they bore for sturdy independence is

the more noticeable. There is a part of England, unfortunately a very small

part, where peasant proprietors are still common; for such are the “statesmen”

of Cumberland and Westmoreland, though they pay, I believe, generally if

not universally, certain customary dues, which, being fixed, no more affect

their character of proprietor, than the land-tax does. There is but one voice,among those acquainted with the country, on the admirable effects of this

tenure of land in those counties. No other agricultural population in England
                                                                        48
could have furnished the originals of Wordsworth’s peasantry.

              The general system, however, of English cultivation, affording no

experience to render the nature and operation of peasant properties familiar,

and Englishmen being in general profoundly ignorant of the agricultural

economy of other countries, the very idea of peasant proprietors is strange to

the English mind, and does not easily find access to it. Even the forms of

language stand in the way: the familiar designation for owners of land being

“landlords”, a term to which “tenants” is always understood as a correlative.

When at the time of the famine, the suggestion of peasant properties as a

means of Irish improvement found its way into parliamentary and newspaper

discussions, there were writers of pretension to whom the word “proprietor”

was so far from conveying any distinct idea, that they mistook the small

holdings of Irish cottier tenants for peasant properties. The subject being so

little understood, I think it important, before entering into the theory of it, to

do something towards showing how the case stands as to matter of fact; by

exhibiting, at greater length than would otherwise be admissible, some of the

testimony which exists respecting the state of cultivation, and the comfort

and happiness of the cultivators, in those countries and parts of countries, in

which the greater part of the land other than the labourer who tills the soil.

              2. I lay no stress on the condition of North America, where, as is

well known, the land, except in the former Slave States, is almost universally

owned by the same person who holds the plough. A country combining the

natural fertility of America with the knowledge and arts of modern Europe, is

so peculiarly circumstanced, that scarcely anything, except insecurity of

property or a tyrannical government, could materially impair the prosperity of

the industrious classes. I might, with Sismondi, insist more strongly on the

case of ancient Italy, especially Latium, that Campagna which then swarmed

with inhabitants in the very regions which under a contrary régime have

become uninhabitable from malaria. But I prefer taking the evidence of the

same writer on things known to him by personal observation.

              “C’est surtout la Suisse,” says M. de Sismondi, “qu’il faut parcourir,

qu’il faut étudier, pour juger du bonheur des paysans propriétaires. C’est la

Suisse qu’il faut apprendre à connaître pour se convaincre que l’agriculture

pratiquée par ceux-là même qui en recueillent les fruits suffit pour procurerune grande aisance à une population très nombreuse; une grande

indépendance de caractère, fruit de l’indépendance des situations; un grand

commerce de consommation, conséquence du hien-être de tous les habitans,

même dans un pays dont le climat est rude, dont le sol est médiocrement

fertile, et où les gelées tardives et l’inconstance des saisons détruisent

souvent l’espoir du laboureur. On ne saurait voir sans admiration ces maisons

de bois du moindre paysan, si vastes, si bien closes, si bien construites, si

couvertes de sculpture. Dans l’intérieur, de grands corridors dégagent chaque

chambre de la nombreuse famille; chaque chambre n’a qu’un lit, et il est

abondamment pourvu de rideaux, de couvertures, et du linge le plus blanc;

des meubles soignés l’entourent; les armoires sont remplies de linge, la

laiterie est vaste, aérée, et d’une netteté exquise; sous le même toit on trouve

de grands approvisionnemens de blé, de viande salée, de fromage et de bois;

dans les étables on voit le bétail le mieux soigné et le plus beau de l’Europe;

le jardin est planté de fleurs, les hommes comme les femmes sont

chaudement et proprement habillés, les dernières conservent avec orgueil leur

antique costume; tous portent sur leur visage l’empreinte de la vigueur et de

la santé. Que d’autres nations vantent leur opulence, la Suisse pourra toujours
                                            49
leur opposer avec orgueil ses paysans.”

              The same eminent writer thus expresses his opinion on peasant

proprietorship in general.

              “Partout où l’on retrouve les paysans propriétaires, on retrouve aussi

cette aisance, cette sécurité, cette confiance dans l’avenir, cette indépendance

qui assurent en même temps le bonheur et la vertu. Le paysan qui fait avec

ses enfans tout l’ouvrage de son petit héritage, qui ne paie de fermage à

personne au-dessus de lui, ni de salaire à personne au-dessous, qui règle sa

production sur sa consommation, qui mange son propre blé, boit son propre

vin, se revêt de son chanvre et de ses laines, se soucie peu de connaître les

prix du marché; car il a peu à vendre et peu à acheter, et il n’est jamais ruiné

par les révolutions du commerce. Loin de craindre pour l’avenir, il le voit

s’embellir dans son espérance; car il met à profit pour ses enfans, pour les

siècles qui viendront, chacun des instans que ne requiert pas de lui le travail

de l’année. Il lui a suffi de donner peu de momens de travail pour mettre en

terre le noyau qui dans cent ans sera un grand arbre, pour creuser l’aquéduc

qui séchera à jamais son champ, pour former le conduit qui lui amènera une

source d’eau vive, pour améliorer par des soins souvent répétés mais dérobéssur les instans perdus, toutes les espèces d’animaux et de végétaux dont il

s’entoure. Son petit patrimoine est une vraie caisse d’épargnes, toujours prête

à recevoir tous ses petits profits, à utiliser tous ses momens de loisir. La

puissance toujours agissante de la nature les féconde, et les lui rend au

centuple. Le paysan a vivement le sentiment de ce bonheur attaché à la

condition de propriétaire. Aussi est-il toujours empressé de la terre à tout

prix. Il la paie plus qu’elle ne vaut, plus qu’elle ne lui rendra peut-être; mais

combien n’a-t-il pas raison d’estimer à un haut prix l’avantage de placer

désormais toujours avantageusement son travail, sans être obligé de l’offrir

au rabais; de trouver toujours au besoin son pain, sans être obligé de le payer

à l’enchère.

              “Le paysan propriétaire est de tous les cultivateurs celui qui tire le

plus de parti du sol; parceque c’est celui qui songe le plus à l’avenir, tout

comme celui qui a été le plus éclairé par l’expérience; c’est encore lui qui met

le mieux à profit le travail humain, parceque répartissant ses occupations

entre tous les membres de sa famille, il en réserve pour tous les jours de

l’année, de manière à ce qu’il n’y ait de chômage pour personne: de tous les

cultivateurs il est le plus heureux, et en même temps, sur un espace donné, la

terre ne nourrit bien, sans s’épuiser, et n’occupe jamais tant d’habitans que

lorsqu’ils sont propriétaires; enfin de tous les cultivateurs le paysan

propriétaire est celui qui donne le plus d’encouragement au commerce et à
                                              50
l’industrie, parcequ’il est le plus riche.”

              This picture of unwearied assiduity, and what may be called

affectionate interest in the land, is borne out in regard to the more intelligent

Cantons of Switzerland by English observers. “In walking anywhere in the

neighbourhood of Zurich,” says Mr. Inglis, “in looking to the right or to the

left, one is struck with the extraordinary industry of the inhabitants; and if we

learn that a proprietor here has a return of ten per cent, we are inclined to say,

‘he deserves it.’ I speak at present of country labour, though I believe that in

every kind of trade also, the people of Zurich are remarkable for their

assiduity; but in the industry they show in the cultivation of their land I may

safely say they are unrivalled. When I used to open my casement between

four and five in the morning to look out upon the lake and the distant Alps, I

saw the labourer in the fields; and when I returned from an evening walk,

long after sunset, as late, perhaps, as half-past eight, there was the labourer

mowing his grass, or tying up his vines.... It is impossible to look at a field, agarden, a hedging, scarcely even a tree, a flower, or a vegetable, with

perceiving proofs of the extreme care and industry that are bestowed upon the

cultivation of the soil. If, for example, a path leads through or by the side of a

field of grain, the corn is not, as in England, permitted to hang over the path,

exposed to be pulled or trodden down by every passer by; it is everywhere

bounded by a fence, stakes are placed at intervals of about a yard, and, about

two, or three feet from the ground, boughs of trees are passed longitudinally

along. If you look into a field towards evening, where there are large beds of

cauliflower or cabbage, you will find that every single plant has been

watered. In the gardens, which around Zurich are extremely large, the most

punctilious care is evinced in every production that grows. The vegetables are

planted with seemingly mathematical accuracy; not a single weed is to be

seen, not a single stone. Plants are not earthed up as with us, but are planted

in a small hollow, into each of which a little manure is put, and each plant is

watered daily. Where seeds are sown, the earth directly above is broken into

the finest powder; every shrub, every flower is tied to a stake, and where

there is wall-fruit a trellice is erected against the wall, to which the boughs

are fastened, and there is not a single thing that has not its appropriate resting
      51
place.”

              Of one of the remote valleys of the High Alps the same writer thus
                    52
expresses himself.

              “In the whole of the Engadine the land belongs to the peasantry,

who, like the inhabitants of every other place where this state of things exists,

vary greatly in the extent of their possessions.... Generally speaking, an

Engadine peasant lives entirely upon the produce of his land, with the

exception of the few articles of foreign growth required in his family, such as

coffee, sugar, and wine. Flax is grown, prepared, spun, and woven, without

ever leaving his house. He has also his own wool, which is converted into a

blue coat, without passing through the hands of either the dyer or the tailor.

The country is incapable of greater cultivation than it has received. All has

been done for it that industry and an extreme love of gain can devise. There is

not a foot of waste land in the Engadine, the lowest part of which is not much

lower than the top of Snowdon. Wherever grass will grow, there it is;

wherever a rock will bear a blade, verdure is seen upon it; wherever an ear of

rye will ripen, there it is to be found. Barley and oats have also their

appropriate spots; and wherever it is possible to ripen a little patch of wheat,the cultivation of it is attempted. In no country in Europe will be found so

few poor as in the Engadine. In the village of Suss, which contains about six

hundred inhabitants, there is not a single individual who has not wherewithal

to live comfortably, not a single individual who is indebted to others for one

morsel that he eats.”

              Notwithstanding the general prosperity of the Swiss peasantry, this

total absence of pauperism and (it may almost be said) of poverty, cannot be

predicated of the whole country; the largest and richest canton, that of Berne,

being an example of the contrary; for although, in the parts of it which are

occupied by peasant proprietors, their industry is as remarkable and their ease

and comfort as conspicuous as elsewhere, the canton is burthened with a

numerous pauper population, through the operation of the worst regulated

system of poor-law administration in Europe, except that of England before
                    53
the new Poor Law. Nor is Switzerland in some other respects a favourable

example of all that peasant properties might effect. There exists a series of

statistical accounts of the Swiss Cantons, drawn up mostly with great care

and intelligence, containing detailed date, respecting the condition of the land

and of the people. From these, the subdivision appears to be often so minute,

that it can hardly be supposed not to be excessive: and the indebtedness of the

proprietors in the flourishing canton of Zurich “borders,” as the writer
                                    54
expresses it, “on the incredible;" so that “only the intensest industry,

frugality, temperance, and complete freedom of commerce enable them to

stand their ground.” Yet the general conclusion deducible from these books is

that since the beginning of the century, and concurrently with the subdivision

of many great estates which belonged to nobles or to the cantonal

governments, there has been a striking and rapid improvement in almost

every department of agriculture, as well as in the houses, the habits, and the

food of the people. The writer of the account of Thürgau goes so far as to say,

that since the subdivision of the feudal estates into peasant properties, it is not

uncommon for a third or a fourth part of an estate to produce as much grain,
                                                                              55
and support as many head of cattle, as the whole estate did before.

              3. One of the countries in which peasant proprietors are of oldest

date, and most numerous in proportion to the population, is Norway. Of the

social and economical condition of that country an interesting account has

been given by Mr. Laing. His testimony in favour of small landed properties

both there and elsewhere, is given with great decision. I shall quote a fewpassages.

              “If small proprietors are not good farmers, it is not from the same

cause here which we are told makes them so in Scotland — indolence and

want of exertion. The extent to which irrigation is carried on in these glens

and valleys shows a spirit of exertion and co-operation” (I request particular

attention to this point), “to which the latter can show nothing similar. Hay

being the principal winter support of live stock, and both it and corn, as well

as potatoes, liable, from the shallow soil and powerful reflexion of sunshine

from the rocks, to be burnt and withered up, the greatest exertions are made

to bring water from the head of each glen, along such a level as will give the

command of it to each farmer at the head of his fields. This is done by

leading it in wooden troughs (the half of a tree roughly scooped) from the

highest perennial stream among the hills, through woods, across ravines,

along the rocky, often perpendicular, sides of the glens, and from this main

trough giving a lateral one to each farmer in passing the head of his farm. He

distributes this supply by moveable troughs among the fields; and at this

season waters each rig successively with scoops like those used by bleachers

in watering cloth, laying his trough between every two rigs. One would not

believe, without seeing it, how very large an extent of land is traversed

expeditiously by these artificial showers. The extent of the main troughs is

very great. In one glen I walked ten miles, and found it toughed on both
                                                                                      56
sides: on one, the chain is continued down the main valley for forty miles.

Those may be bad farmers who do such things; but they are not indolent, nor

ignorant of the principle of working in concert, and keeping up

establishments for common benefit. They are undoubtedly, in these respects,

far in advance of any community of cottars in our Highland glens. They feel

as proprietors, who receive the advantage of their own exertions. The

excellent state of the roads and bridges is another proof that the country is

inhabited by people who have a common interest to keep them under repair.
                    57
There are no tolls.”

              On the effects of peasant proprietorship on the Continent generally,
                                                    58
the same writer expresses himself as follows.

              “If we listen to the large farmer, the scientific agriculturist, the”

[English] “political economist, good farming must perish with large farms;

the very idea that good farming can exist, unless on large farms cultivated

with great capital, they hold to be absurd. Draining, manuring, economicalarrangement, cleaning the land, regular rotations, valuable stock and

implements, all belong exclusively to large farms, worked by large capital,

and by hired labour. This reads very well; but if we raise our eyes from their

books to their fields, and coolly compare what we see in the best districts

farmed in large farms, with what we see in the best districts farmed in small

farms, we see, and there is no blinking the fact, better crops on the ground in

Flanders, East Friesland, Holstein, in short, on the whole line of the arable

land of equal quality of the Continent, from the Sound to Calais, than we see

on the line of British coast opposite to this line, and in the same latitudes,

from the Frith of Forth all round to Dover. Minute labour on small portions of

arable ground gives evidently, in equal soils and climate, a superior

productiveness, where these small portions belong in property, as in Flanders,

Holland, Friesland, and Ditmarsch in Holstein, to the farmer. It is not

pretended by our agricultural writers, that our large farmers, even in

Berwickshire, Roxburghshire, or the Lothians, approach to the gardenlike

cultivation, attention to manures, drainage, and clean state of the land, or in

productiveness from a small space of soil not originally rich, which

distinguish the small farmers of Flanders, or their system. In the hest-farmed

parish in Scotland or England, more land is wasted in the corners and borders

of the fields of large farms, in the roads through them, unnecessarily wide

because they are bad, and bad because they are wide, in neglected commons,

waste spots, useless belts and clumps of sorry trees, and such unproductive

areas, than would maintain the poor of the parish, if they were all laid

together and cultivated. But large capital applied to farming is of course only

applied to the very best of the soils of a country. It cannot touch the small

unproductive spots which require more time and labour to fertilize them than

is consistent with a quick return of capital. But although hired time and

labour cannot be applied beneficially to such cultivation, the owner’s own

time and labour may. He is working for no higher terms at first from his land

than a bare living. But in the course of generations fertility and value are

produced; a better living, and even very improved processes of husbandry,

are attained. Furrow draining, stall feeding all summer, liquid manures, are

universal in the husbandry of the small farms of Flanders, Lombardy,

Switzerland. Our most improving districts under large farms are but

beginning to adopt them. Dairy husbandry even, and the manufacture of the
                                                                    59
largest cheeses by the co-operation of many small farmers, the mutual

assurance of property against fire and hail-storms, by the co-operation ofsmall farmers — the most scientific and expensive of all agricultural

operations in modern times, the manufacture of beet-root sugar — the supply

of the European markets with flax and hemp, by the husbandry of small

farmers — the abundance of legumes, fruits, poultry, in the usual diet even of

the lowest classes abroad, and the total want of such variety at the tables even

of oUr middle classes, and this variety and abundance essentially connected

with the husbandry of small farmers — all these are features in the

occupation of a country by small proprietor-farmers, which must make the

inquirer pause before he admits the dogma of our land doctors at home, that

large farms worked by hired labour and great capital can alone bring out the

greatest productiveness of the soil and furnish the greatest supply of the

necessaries and conveniences of life to the inhabitants of a country.”

              4. Among the many flourishing regions of Germany in which

peasant properties prevail, I select the Palatinate, for the advantage of

quoting, from an English source, the results of recent personal observation of

its agriculture and its people. Mr. Howitt, a writer whose habit it is to see all

English objects and English socialities en beau, and who, in treating of the

Rhenish peasantry, certainly does not underrate the rudeness of their

implements, and the inferiority of their ploughing, nevertheless shows that

under the invigorating influence of the feelings of proprietorship, they make

up for the imperfections of their apparatus by the intensity of their

application. “The peasant harrows and clears his land till it is in the nicest
                                                                      60
order, and it is admirable to see the crops which he obtains.” “The
        61
peasants are the great and everpresent objects of country life. They are the

great population of the country, because they themselves are the possessors.

This country is, in fact, for the most part, in the hands of the people. It is

parcelled out among the multitude...... The peasants are not, as with us, for

the most part, totally cut off from property in the soil they cultivate, totally

dependent on the labour afforded by others-they are themselves the

proprietors. It is, perhaps, from this cause that they are probably the most

industrious peasantry in the world. They labour busily, early and late,

because they feel that they are labouring for themselves...... The German

peasants work hard, but they have no actual want. Every man has his house,

his orchard, his roadside trees, commonly so heavy with fruit, that he is

obliged to prop and secure them all ways, or they would be torn to pieces. He

has his corn-plot, his plot for mangel-wurzel, for hemp, and so on. He is his

own master; and he, and every member of his family, have the strongestmotives to labour. You see the effect of this in that unremitting diligence

which is beyond that of the whole world besides, and his economy, which is

still greater. The Germans, indeed, are not so active and lively as the English.

You never see them in a bustle, or as though they meant to knock off a vast

deal in a little time...... They are, on the contrary, slow, but for ever doing.

They plod on from day to day, and year to year — the most patient, untirable,

and persevering of animals. The English peasant is so cut off from the idea of

property, that he comes habitually to look upon it as a thing from which he is

warned by the laws of the large proprietors, and becomes, in consequence,

spiritless, purposeless...... The German bauer, on the contrary, looks on the

country as made for him and his fellow-men. He feels himself a man; he has

a stake in the country, as good as that of the bulk of his neighbours; no man

can threaten him with ejection, or the workhouse, so long as he is active and

economical. He walks, therefore, with a bold step; he looks you in the face

with the air of a free man, but of a respectful one.”

              Of their industry, the same writer thus further speaks: “There is not

an hour of the year in which they do not find unceasing occupation. In the

depth of winter, when the weather permits them by any means to get out of

doors, they are always finding something to do. They carry out their manure

to their lands while the frost is in them. If there is not frost, they are busy

cleaning ditches and felling old fruit trees, or such as do not bear well. Such

of them as are too poor to lay in a sufficient stock of wood, find plenty of

work in ascending into the mountainous woods, and bringing thence fuel. It

would astonish the English common people to see the intense labour with

which the Germans earn their firewood. In the depths of frost and snow, go

into any of their hills and woods, and there you will find them hacking up

stumps, cutting off branches, and gathering, by all means which the official

wood-police will allow, boughs, stakes, and pieces of wood, which they
                                                                  62
convey home with the most incredible toil and patience.” After a description
                                                                      63
of their careful and laborious vineyard culture, he continues, “In England,

with its great quantity of grass lands, and its large farms, so soon as the grain

is in, and the fields are shut up for hay grass, the country seems in a

comparative state of rest and quiet. But here they are everywhere, and for

ever, hoeing and mowing, planting and cutting, weeding and gathering. They

have a succession of crops like a market-gardener. They have their carrots,

poppies, hemp, flax, saintfoin, lucerne, rape, colewort, cabbage, rotabaga,

black turnips, Swedish and white turnips, teazles, Jerusalem artichokes,mangel-wurzel, parsnips, kidney-beans, field beans, and peas, vetches, Indian

corn, buckwheat, madder for the manufacturer, potatoes, their great crop of

tobacco, millet-all, or the greater part, under the family management, in their

own family allotments. They have had these things first to sow, many of them

to transplant, to hoe, to weed, to clear of insects, to top; many of them to

mow and gather in successive crops. They have their water-meadows, of

which kind almost all their meadows are, to flood, to mow, and reflood;

watercourses to reopen and to make anew: their early fruits to gather, to bring

to market with their green crops of vegetables; their cattle, sheep, calves,

foals, most of them prisoners, and poultry to look after; their vines, as they

shoot rampantly in the summer heat, to prune, and thin out the leaves when

they are too thick: and any one may imagine what a scene of incessant labour

it is.”

              This interesting sketch, to the general truth of which any observant

traveller in that highly cultivated and populous region can bear witness,

accords with the more elaborate delineation by a distinguished inhabitant,
                                                                                      64
Professor Rau, in his little treatise “On the Agriculture of the Palatinate.”

Dr. Rau bears testimony not only to the industry, but to the skill and

intelligence of the peasantry; their judicious employment of manures, and

excellent rotation of crops; the progressive improvement of their agriculture

for generations past, and the spirit of further improvement which is still

active. “The indefatigableness of the country people, who may he seen in

activity all the day and all the year, and are never idle, because they make a

good distribution of their labours, and find for every interval of time a

suitable occupation, is as well known as their zeal is praiseworthy in turning

to use every circumstance which presents itself, in seizing upon every useful

novelty which offers, and even in searching out new and advantageous

methods. One easily perceives that the peasant of this district has reflected

much on his occupation: he can give reasons for his modes of proceeding,

even if those reasons are not always tenable; he is as exact an observer of

proportions as it is possible to he from memory, without the aid of figures: he

attends to such general signs of the times as appear to augur him either
                  65
benefit or harm.”

              The experience of all other parts of Germany is similar. “In Saxony,”

says Mr. Kay, “it is a notorious fact, that during the last thirty years, and

since the peasants became the proprietors of the land, there has been a rapidand continual improvement in the condition of the houses, in the manner of

living, in the dress of the peasants, and particularly in the culture of the land.

I have twice walked through that part of Saxony called Saxon Switzerland, in

company with a German guide, and on purpose to see the state of the villages

and of the farming, and I can safely challenge contradiction when I affirm

that there is no farming in all Europe superior to the laboriously careful

cultivation of the valleys of that part of Saxony. There, as in the cantons of

Berne, Vaud, and Zurich, and in the Rhine provinces, the farms are singularly

flourishing. They are kept in beautiful condition, and are always neat and

well managed. The ground is cleared as if it were a garden. No hedges or

brushwood encumber it. Scarcely a rush or thistle or a bit of rank grass is to

be seen. The meadows are well watered every spring with liquid manure,

saved from the drainings of the farm yards. The grass is so free from weeds

that the Saxon meadows reminded me more of English lawns than of

anything else I had seen. The peasants endeavour to outstrip one another in

the quantity and quality of the produce, in the preparation of the ground, and

in the general cultivation of their respective portions. All the little proprietors

are eager to find out how to farm so as to produce the greatest results: they

diligently seek after improvements; they send their children to the agricultural

schools in order to fit them to assist their fathers; and each proprietor soon
                                                                            66
adopts a new improvement introduced by any of his neighbours.” If this he

not overstated, it denotes a state of intelligence very different not only from

that of English labourers hut of English farmers.

              Mr. Kay’s book, published in 1850, contains a mass of evidence

gathered from observation and inquiries in many different parts of Europe,

together with attestations from many distinguished writers, to the beneficial

effects of peasant properties. Among the testimonies which he cites

respecting their effect on agriculture, I select the following.

              “Reichensperger, himself an inhabitant of that part of Prussia where

the land is the most subdivided, has published a long and very elaborate work

to show the admirable consequences of a system of freeholds in land. He

expresses a very decided opinion that not only are the gross products of any

given number of acres held and cultivated by small or peasant proprietors,

greater than the gross products of an equal number of acres held by a few

great proprietors, and cultivated by tenant farmers, but that the net products

of the former, after deducting all the expenses of cultivation, are also greaterthan the net products of the latter.... He mentions one fact which seems to

prove that the fertility of the land in countries where the properties are small,

must be rapidly increasing. He says that the price of the land which is divided

into small properties in the Prussian Rhine provinces, is much higher, and has

been rising much more rapidly, than the price of land on the great estates. He

and Professor Rau both say that this rise in the price of the small estates

would have ruined the more recent purchasers, unless the productiveness of

the small estates had increased in at least an equal proportion; and as the

small proprietors have been gradually becoming more and more prosperous

notwithstanding the increasing prices they have paid for their land, he argues,

with apparent justness, that this would seem to show that not only the gross

profits of the small estates, but the net profits also have been gradually

increasing, and that the net profits per acre, of land, when farmed by small

proprietors, are greater than the net profits per acre of land farmed by a great

proprietor. He says, with seeming truth, that the increasing price of land in

the small estates cannot be the mere effect of competition, or it would have

diminished the profits and the prosperity of the small proprietors, and that

this result has not followed the rise.

              “Albrecht Thaer, another celebrated German writer on the different

systems of agriculture, in one of his later works (Grundsätze der rationellen

Landwirthschaft) expresses his decided conviction, that the net produce of

land is greater when farmed by small proprietors than when farmed by great

proprietors or their tenants.... This opinion of Thaer is all the more

remarkable, as, during the early part of his life, he was very strongly in

favour of the English system of great estates and great farms.”

              Mr. Kay adds from his own observation, “The peasant farming of

Prussia, Saxony, Holland, and Switzerland is the most perfect and

economical farming I have ever witnessed in any country.”

        49
              

              5. But the most decisive example in opposition to the English

prejudice against cultivation by peasant proprietors, is the case of Belgium.

The soil is originally one of the worst in Europe. “The provinces,” says Mr.
            67
M’Culloch, “of West and East Flanders, and Hainault, form a far stretching

plain, of which the luxuriant vegetation indicates the indefatigable care and

labour bestowed upon its cultivation; for the natural soil consists almostwholly of barren sand, and its great fertility is entirely the result of very

skillful management and judicious application of various manures.” There

exists a carefully prepared and comprehensive treatise on Flemish

Husbandry, in the Farmer’s Series of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
                                    68
Knowledge. The writer observes that the Flemish agriculturists “seem to

want nothing but a space to work upon: whatever be the quality or texture of

the soil, in time they will make it produce something. The sands in the

Campine can be compared to nothing but the sand on the sea-shore, which

they probably were originally. It is highly interesting to follow step by step

the progress of improvement. Here you see a cottage and rude cow-shed

erected on a spot of the most unpromising aspect. The loose white sand

blown into regular mounds is only kept together by the roots of the heath: a

small spot only is levelled and surrounded by a ditch: part of this is covered

with young broom, part is planted with potatoes, and perhaps a small patch of

diminutive clover may show itself:” but manures, both solid and liquid, are

collecting, “and this is the nucleus from which, in a few years, a little farm

will spread around.... If there is no manure at hand, the only thing that can be

sown, on pure sand, at first is broom: this grows in the most barren soils; in

three years it is fit to cut, and produces some return in faggots for the bakers

and brickmakers. The leaves which have fallen have somewhat enriched the

soil, and the fibres of the roots have given a slight degree of compactness. It

may now be ploughed and sown with buckwheat, or even with rye without

manure. By the time this is reaped, some manure may have been collected,

and a regular course of cropping may begin. As soon as clover and potatoes

enable the farmer to keep cows and make manure, the improvement goes on

rapidly; in a few years the soil undergoes a complete change: it becomes

mellow and retentive of moisture, and enriched by the vegetable matter

afforded by the decomposition of the roots of clover and other plants.... After

the land has been gradually brought into a good state, and is cultivated in a

regular manner, there appears much less difference between the soils which

have been originally good, and those which have been made so by labour and

industry. At least the crops in both appear more nearly alike at harvest, than

is the case in soils of different qualities in other countries. This is a great

proof of the excellency of the Flemish system; for it shows that the land is in

a constant state of improvement, and that the deficiency of the soil is

compensated by greater attention to tillage and manuring, especially the

latter.”              The people who labour thus intensely on their small properties or

farms, have practised for centuries those principles of rotation of crops and

economy of manures, which in England are counted among modern

discoveries: and even now the superiority of their agriculture, as a whole, to

that of England, is admitted by competent judges. “The cultivation of a poor
                                                                  69
light soil, or a moderate soil,” says the writer last quoted, “is generally

superior in Flanders to that of the most improved farms of the same kind in

Britain. We surpass the Flemish farmer greatly in capital, in varied

implements of tillage, in the choice and breeding of cattle and sheep,”
                                                70
(though, according to the same authority, they are much “before us in the

feeding of their cows,”) “and the British farmer is in general a man of

superior education to the Flemish peasant. But in the minute attention to the

qualities of the soil, in the management and application of manures of

different kinds, in the judicious succession of crops, and especially in the

economy of land, so that every part of it shall be in a constant state of

production, we have still something to learn from the Flemings,” and not

from an instructed and enterprising Fleming here and there, but from the

general practice.

              Much of the most highly cultivated part of the country consists of

peasant properties, managed by the proprietors, always either wholly or
                            71
partly by spade industry. “When the land is cultivated entirely by the spade,

and no horses are kept, a cow is kept for every three acres of land, and

entirely fed on artificial grasses and roots. This mode of cultivation is

principally adopted in the Waes district, where properties are very small. All

the labour is done by the different members of the family;” children soon

beginning “to assist in various minute operations, according to their age and

strength, such as weeding, hoeing, feeding the cows. If they can raise rye and

wheat enough to make their bread, and potatoes, turnips, carrots and clover,

for the cows, they do well; and the produce of the sale of their rape-seed,

their flax, their hemp, and their butter, after deducting the expense of manure

purchased, which is always considerable, gives them a very good profit.

Suppose the whole extent of the land to be six acres, which is not an

uncommon occupation, and which one man can manage;” then (after

describing the cultivation), “if a man with his wife and three young children

are considered as equal to three and a half grown up men, the family will

require thirty-nine bushels of grain, forty-nine bushels of potatoes, a fat hog,

and the butter and milk of one cow.. an acre and a half of land will producethe grain and potatoes, and allow some corn to finish the fattening of the hog,

which has the extra buttermilk: another acre in clover, carrots, and potatoes,

together with the stubble turnips, will more than feed the cow. consequently

two and a half acres of land is sufficient to feed this family, and the produce

of the other three and a half may be sold to pay the rent or the interest of

purchase-money, wear and tear of implements, extra manure, and clothes for

the family. But these acres are the most profitable on the farm, for the hemp,

flax, and colza are included; and by having another acre in clover and roots, a

second cow can be kept, and its produce sold. We have, therefore, a solution

of the problem, how a family can live and thrive on six acres of moderate

land.” After showing by calculation that this extent of land can be cultivated

in the most perfect manner by the family without any aid from hired labour,

the writer continues, “In a farm of ten acres entirely cultivated by the spade,

the addition of a man and a woman to the members of the family will render

all the operations more easy; and with horse and cart to carry out the manure,

and bring home the produce, and occasionally draw the harrows, fifteen acres

may be very well cultivated.... Thus it will be seen,” (this is the result of
                                            72
some pages of details and calculations, ) “that by spade husbandry, an

industrious man with a small capital, occupying only fifteen acres of good

light land, may not only live and bring up a family, paying a good rent, but

may accumulate a considerable sum in the course of his life.” But the

indefatigable industry by which he accomplishes this, and of which so large a

portion is expended not in the mere cultivation, but in the improvement, for a

distant return, of the soil itself — has that industry no connexion with not

paying rent? Could it exist, without presupposing neither a virtually

permanent tenure, or the certain prospect, by labour and economy on hired

land, of becoming one day a landed proprietor?

              As to their mode of living, “the Flemish farmers and labourers live

much more economically than the same class in England: they seldom eat

meat, except on Sundays and in harvest: buttermilk and potatoes with brown

bread is their daily food.” It is on this kind of evidence that English travellers,

as they hurry through Europe, pronounce the peasantry of every Continental

country poor and miserable, its agricultural and social system a failure, and

the English the only régime under which labourers are well off. It is, truly

enough, the only régime under which labourers, whether well off or not,

never attempt to be better. So little are English labourers accustomed to

consider it possible that a labourer should not spend all he earns, that theyhabitually mistake the signs of economy for those of poverty. Observe the

true interpretation of the phenomena.

              “Accordingly they are gradually acquiring capital, and their great

ambition is to have land of their own. They eagerly seize every opportunity

of purchasing a small farm, and the price is so raised by competition, that

land pays little more than two per cent interest for the purchase money. Large

properties gradually disappear, and are divided into small portions, which sell

at a high rate. But the wealth and industry of the population is continually

increasing, being rather diffused through the masses than accumulated in

individuals.”

              With facts like these, known and accessible, it is not a little

surprising to find the case of Flanders referred to not in recommendation of

peasant properties, but as a warning against them; on no better ground than a

presumptive excess of population, inferred from the distress which existed

among the peasantry of Brabant and East Flanders in the disastrous year

1846–47. The evidence which I have cited from a writer conversant with the

subject, and having no economical theory to support, shows that the distress,

whatever may have been its severity, arose from no insufficiency in these

little properties to supply abundantly, in any ordinary circumstances, the

wants of all whom they have to maintain. It arose from the essential condition

to which those are subject who employ land of their own in growing their

own food, namely, that the vicissitudes of the seasons must be borne by

themselves, and cannot, as in the case of large farmers, be shifted from them

to the consumer. When we remember the season of 1846, a partial failure of

all kinds of grain, and an almost total one of the potato, it is no wonder that in

so unusual a calamity the produce of six acres, half of them sown with flax,

hemp, or oil seeds, should fall short of a year’s provision for a family. But we

are not to contrast the distressed Flemish peasant with an English capitalist

who farms several hundred acres of land. If the peasant were an Englishman,

he would not be that capitalist, but a day labourer under a capitalist. And is

there no distress, in times of dearth, among day labourers? Was there none,

that year, in countries where small proprietors and small farmers are

unknown? I am aware of no reason for believing that the distress was greater

in Belgium, than corresponds to the proportional extent of the failure of crops
                                    73
compared with other countries.

              6. The evidence of the beneficial operation of peasant properties inthe Channel Islands is of so decisive a character, that I cannot help adding to

the numerous citations already made, part of a description of the economical

condition of those islands, by a writer who combines personal observation

with an attentive study of the information afforded by other. Mr. William

Thornton, in his “Plea for Peasant Proprietors,” a book which by the

excellence both of its materials and of its execution, deserves to be regarded

as the standard work on that side of the question, speaks of the island of

Guernsey in the following terms: “Not even in England is nearly so large a

quantity of produce sent to market from a tract of such limited extent. This of

itself might prove that the cultivators must be far removed above poverty, for

being absolute owners of all the produce raised by them, they of course sell

only what they do not themselves require. But the satisfactoriness of their

condition is apparent to every observer. ‘The happiest community,’ says Mr.

Hill, ‘which it has ever been my lot to fall in with, is to be found in this little

island of Guernsey.’ ‘No matter,’ says Sir George Head, ‘to what point the

traveller may choose to bend his way, comfort everywhere prevails.’ What

most surprises the English visitor in his first walk or drive beyond the bounds

of St. Peter’s Port is the appearance of the habitations with which the

landscape is thickly studded. Many of them are such as in his own country

would belong to persons of middle rank; but he is puzzled to guess what sort

of people live in the other, which, though in general not large enough for

farmers, are almost invariably much too good in every respect for day

labourers... Literally, in the whole island, with the exception of a few

fishermen’s huts, there is not one so mean as to be likened to the ordinary

habitation of an English farm labourer.... ‘Look,’ says a late Bailiff of

Guernsey, Mr. De L’isle Brock, ‘at the hovels of the English, and compare

them with the cottages of our peasantry.’... Beggars are utterly unknown....

Pauperism, able-bodied pauperism at least, is nearly as rare as mendicancy.

The Savings Banks accounts also bear witness to the general abundance

enjoyed by the labouring classes of Guernsey. in the year 1841, there were in

England, out of a population of nearly fifteen millions, less than 700,000

depositors, or one in every twenty persons, and the average amount of the

deposits was 30l. In Guernsey,in the same year, out of a population of

26,000, the number of depositors was 1920, and the average amount of the
              74
deposits 40l.” The evidence as to Jersey and Alderney is of a similar

character.

              Of the efficiency and productiveness of agriculture on the smallproperties of the Channel islands, Mr. Thornton produces ample evidence, the

result of which he sums up as follows: “Thus it appears that in the two

principal Channel Islands, the agricultural population is, in the one twice, and

in the other, three times, as dense as in Britain, there being in the latter

country, only one cultivator to twenty-two acres of cultivated land, while in

Jersey there is one to eleven, and in Guernsey one to seven acres. Yet the

agriculture of these islands maintains, besides cultivators, nonagricultural

populations, respectively four and five times as dense as that of Britain. This

difference does not arise from any superiority of soil or climate possessed by

the Channel Islands, for the former is naturally rather poor, and the latter is

not better than in the southern counties of England. It is owing entirely to the
                                                                              75
assiduous care of the farmers, and to the abundant use of manure.” “In the
                                          76
year 1837” he says in another place, “the average yield of wheat in the large

farms of England was only twenty-one bushels, and the highest average for

any one county was no more than twenty-six bushels. The highest average

since claimed for the whole of England is thirty bushels. In Jersey, where the

average size of farms is only sixteen acres, the average produce of wheat per

acre was stated by Inglis in 1834 to be thirty-six bushels; but it is proved by

official tables to have been forty bushels in the five years ending with 1833.

In Guernsey, where farms are still smaller, four quarters per acre, according

to Inglis, is considered a good, but still a very common crop.” “Thirty
        77
shillings  an acre would be thought in England a very fair rent for middling

land; but in the Channel Islands, it is only very inferior land that would not

let for at least 4l.”

              7. It is from France, that impressions unfavourable to peasant

properties are generally drawn; it is in France that the system is so often

asserted to have brought forth its fruit in the most wretched possible

agriculture, and to be rapidly reducing, if not to have already reduced the

peasantry, by subdivision of land, to the verge of starvation. it is difficult to

account for the general prevalence of impressions so much the reverse of

truth. The agriculture of France was wretched and the peasantry in great

indigence before the Revolution. At that time they were not, so universally as

at present, landed proprietors. There were, however, considerable districts of

France where the land, even then, was to a great extent the property of the

peasantry, and among these were many of the most conspicuous exceptions

to the general bad agriculture and to the general poverty. An authority, on this

point, not to be disputed, is Arthur Young, the inveterate enemy of smallfarms, the coryphaeus of the modern English school of agriculturists; who

yet, travelling over nearly the whole of France in 1787, 1788, and 1789, when

he finds remarkable excellence of cultivation, never hesitates to ascribe it to
                                                  78
peasant property. “Leaving Sauve,” says he, “I was much struck with a

large tract of land, seemingly nothing but huge rocks; yet most of it enclosed

and planted with the most industrious attention. Every man has an olive, a

mulberry, an almond, or a peach tree, and vines scattered among them; so

that the whole ground is covered with the oddest mixture of these plants and

bulging rocks, that can be conceived. The inhabitants of this village deserve

encouragement for their industry; and if I were a French minister they should

have it. They would soon turn all the deserts around them into gardens. Such

a knot of active husbandmen, who turn their rocks into scenes of fertility,

because I suppose their own, would do the same by the wastes, if animated
                                                79
by the same omnipotent principle.” Again: “Walk to Rossendal,” (near

Dunkirk) “where M. le Brun has an improvement on the Dunes, which he

very obligingly showed me. Between the town and that place is a great

number of neat little houses, built each with its garden, and one or two fields

enclosed, of most wretched blowing dune sand, naturally as white as snow,

but improved by industry. The magic of property turns sand to gold.” And
      80
again: “Going out of Gange, I was surprised to find by far the greatest

exertion in irrigation which I had yet seen in France; and then passed by

some steep mountains, highly cultivated in terraces. Much watering at St.

Lawrence. The scenery very interesting to a farmer. From Gange, to the

mountain of rough ground which I crossed, the ride has been the most

interesting which I have taken in France; the efforts of industry the most

vigorous; the animation the most lively. An activity has been here, that has

swept away all difficulties before it, and has clothed the very rocks with

verdure. It would be a disgrace to common sense to ask the cause; the

enjoyment of property must have done it. Give a man the secure possession

of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a garden; give him a nine years’ lease

of a garden, and he will convert it into a desert.”

              In his description of the country at the foot of the Western Pyrenees,
                                                                        81
he speaks no longer from surmise, but from knowledge. “Take the road to

Moneng, and come presently to a scene which was so new to me in France,

that I could hardly believe my own eyes. A succession of many well-built,

tight, and comfortable farming cottages built of stone and covered with tiles;

each having its little garden, enclosed by clipt thorn-hedges, with plenty ofpeach and other fruit-trees, some fine oaks scattered in the hedges, and young

trees nursed up with so much care, that nothing but the fostering attention of

the owner could effect anything like it. To every house belongs a farm,

perfectly well enclosed, with grass borders mown and neatly kept around the

corn-fields, with gates to pass from one enclosure to another. There are some

parts of England (where small yeomen still remain) that resemble this country

of Béarn; but we have very little that is equal to what I have seen in this ride

of twelve miles from Pau to Moneng. It is all in the hands of little proprietors,

without the farms being so small as to occasion a vicious and miserable

population. An air of neatness, warmth, and comfort breathes over the whole.

It is visible in their new built houses and stables; in their little gardens; in

their hedges; in the courts before their doors; even in the coops for their

poultry, and the sties for their hogs. A peasant does not think of rendering his

pig comfortable, if his own happiness hang by the thread of a nine years’

lease. We are now in Béarn, within a few miles of the cradle of Henry IV. Do

they inherit these blessings from that good prince? The benignant genius of

that good monarch seems to reign still over the country; each peasant has the

fowl in the pot.” He frequently notices the excellence of the agriculture of

French Flanders, where the farms “are all small, and much in the hands of
                    82
little proprietors.” In the Pays de Caux, also a country of small properties,

the agriculture was miserable; of which his explanation was that it “is a

manufacturing country, and farming is but a secondary pursuit to the cotton
                                                  83
fabric, which spreads over the whole of it.” The same district is still a seat

of manufactures, and a country of small proprietors, and is now, whether we

judge from the appearance of the crops or from the official returns, one of the

best cultivated in France. In “Flanders, Alsace, and part of Artois, as well as

on the banks of the Garonne, France possesses a husbandry equal to our
      84
own.”  Those countries, and a considerable part of Quercy, “are cultivated

more like gardens than farms. Perhaps they are too much like gardens, from
                                85
the smallness of properties.” In those districts the admirable rotation of

crops, so long practised in Italy, but at that time generally neglected in

France, was already universal. “The rapid succession of crops, the harvest of

one being but the signal of sowing immediately for a second,” (the same fact

which strikes all observers in the valley of the Rhine) “can scarcely be

carryed to greater perfection: and this is a point, perhaps, of all others the

most essential to good husbandry, when such crops are so justly distributed as

we generally find them in these provinces; cleaning and ameliorating onesbeing made the preparation for such as foul and exhaust.”

              It must not, however, be supposed, that Arthur Young’s testimony

on the subject of peasant properties is uniformly favourable. In Lorraine,

Champagne, and elsewhere, he finds the agriculture bad, and the small

proprietors very miserable, in consequence, as he says, of the extreme
                                                                86
subdivision of the land. His opinion is thus summed up: — “Before I

travelled, I conceived that small farms, in property, were very susceptible of

good cultivation; and that the occupier of such, having no rent to pay, might

be sufficiently at his ease to work improvements, and carry on a vigorous

husbandry; but what I have seen in France, has greatly lessened my good

opinion of them. In Flanders, I saw excellent husbandry on properties of 30 to

100 acres; but we seldom find here such small patches of property as are

common in other provinces. In Alsace, and on the Garonne, that is, on soils

of such exuberant fertility as to demand no exertions, some small properties

also are well cultivated. In Béarn, I passed through a region of little farmers,

whose appearance, neatness, ease, and happiness charmed me; it was what

property alone could, on a small scale, effect; but these were by no means

contemptibly small; they are, as I judged by the distance from house to house,

from 40 to 80 acres. Except these, and a very few other instances, I saw

nothing respectable on small properties, except a most unremitting industry.

Indeed, it is necessary to impress on the reader’s mind, that though the

husbandry I met with, in a great variety of instances on little properties, was

as bad as can be well conceived, yet the industry of the possessors was so

conspicuous, and so meritorious, that no commendations would be too great

for it. It was sufficient to prove that property in land is, of all others, the most

active instigator to severe and incessant labour. And this truth is of such force

and extent, that I know no way so sure of carrying. tillage to a mountain top,

as by permitting the adjoining villagers to acquire it in property; in fact, we

see that in the mountains of Languedoc, &c., they have conveyed earth in

baskets, on their backs, to form a soil where nature had denied it.”

              The experience, therefore, of this celebrated agriculturist, and

apostle of the grande culture, may be said to be, that the effect of small

properties, cultivated by peasant proprietors, is admirable when they are not

too small: so small, namely, as not fully to occupy the time and attention of

the family; for he often complains, with great apparent reason, of the quantity

of idle time which the peasantry had on their hands when the land was in verysmall portions, notwithstanding the ardour with which they toiled to improve

their little patrimony in every way which their knowledge or ingenuity could

suggest. He recommends, accordingly, that a limit of subdivision should be

fixed by law; and this is by no means an indefensible proposition in

countries, if such there are, where the morcellement, having already gone

farther than the state of capital and the nature of the staple articles of

cultivation render advisable, still continues progressive. That each peasant

should have a patch of land, even in full property, if it is not sufficient to

support him in comfort, is a system with all the disadvantages, and scarcely

any of the benefits, of small properties; since he must either live in indigence

on the produce of his land, or depend as habitually as if he had no landed

possessions, on the wages of hired labour: which, besides, if all the holdings

surrounding him are of similar dimensions, he has little prospect of finding.

The benefits of peasant properties are conditional on their not being too much

subdivided; that is, on their not being required to maintain too many persons,

in proportion to the produce that can be raised from them by those persons.

The question resolves itself, like most questions respecting the condition of

the labouring classes, into one of population. Are small properties a stimulus

to undue multiplication, or a check to it?

        50
               In Mr Wordsworth’s little descriptive work on the scenery of the

Lakes, he speaks of the upper part of the dales as having been for centuries “a

perfect republic of shepherds and agriculturalists, proprietors, for the most

part, of the lands which they occupied and cultivated. The plough of each

man was confined to the maintenance of his own family, or to the occasional

accommodation to his neighbour. Two or three cows furnished each family

with milk and cheese. The chapel was the only edifice that presided over

these dwellings, the supreme head of this pure commonwealth; the members

of which existed in the midst of a powerful empire, like an ideal society, or

an organized community, whose constitution had been imposed and regulated

by the mountains which protected it. Neither high-born nobleman, knight, nor

esquire was here; but many of these humble sons of the hills had a

consciousness that the land which they walked over and tilled had for more

than five hundred years been possessed by men of their name and blood...

Corn was grown in these vales sufficient upon each estate to furnish bread for

each family, no more. the storms and moisture of the climate induced them to

sprinkle their upland property with outhouses of native stone, as places of

shelter for their sheep, where, in tempestuous weather, food was distributedto them. Every family spun from its own flock the wool with which it was

clothed; a weaver was here and there found among them, and the rest of their

wants was supplied by the produce of the yarn, which they carded and spun

in their own houses, and carried to market either under their arms, or more

frequently on packhorses, a small train taing their way weekly down the

valley, or over the mountains, to the most commodious town.” — A

Description of the Scenery of the Lakes in the North of England. 3rd edit. pp.

50 to 53 and 63 to 65.

        51
               Etudes sur l’Economie Politique, Essai III.

        52
               And in another work (Nouveaux Principes d’Economie Politique,

ilv, iii, ch. 3 he says: “Quand on traverse la Suisse presqu’entiere, plusieurs

provinces de France, d’Italie, et d’Allemagne, il n’est pas besoin de

demander, en regardant chaque partie de terre, si elle appartient a un

cultivateur proprietaire ou a un fermier. Les soins bien entendus, les

joissances preparees au labourer, la parure que la campagne a recue de ses

mains, indiquent bien vite le premier. Il est vrai qu’un gouvernement

oppressif peut detruire l’aisance et abrutir l’intelligence que devait donner la

propriete que l’impot peut enlever le plus net du produit des champs, que

l’insolence des agens du pouvoir peut troubler la securite des paysans, que

l’impossiblite d’obtenir justice contre un puissant voison peut jeter le

decouragement dans l’ame, et que, dans le beau pays qui a ete rendu a

l’administration du Roi de Sardaigne, un proprietaire porte aussi bien qu’un

journalier l’uniforme de la misere.” He was here speaking of Savoy, where

the peasants are generaly proprietors; and according to authentic (though not

recent) accounts, extremely miserable. But, as M. de Sismondi continues,

“On a beau se conformer a une seule des regles de l’economie politique, elle

ne peut pas operer le bien a elle seule; du moins elle diminue le mal.”

        53
               Switzerland, the South of France, and the Pyrenees, in 1830. vol.

1, ch. 2.

        54
               Ibid. ch. 8 and 10.

        55
               There have been considerable changes in the Poor Law

administration and legislation of the Canton of Berne since the sentence in

the text was written. But I am not sufficiently acquainted with the nature and

operation of these changes to speak more particularly of them here.        56
               ‘Eine an das unglaubliche granzende Schuldenmasse” is the

expression. (Historish-geographisch-statistische Gemalde der Schweiz. Erster

Theil. Der Kanton Zurich. Von Gerold Meyer Von Knonau, 1834, pp. 80–1)

There are villages in Zurich, he adds, in which there is not a single property

unmortgaged. It does not, however, follow that each individual proprietor is

deeply involved because the aggregate mass of encumbrances is large. In the

Canton of Schaffhausen, for instance, it is stated that the landed properties are

almost all mortgaged, but rarely for more than one-half their registered value.

(Zwolfter Theil. Der Kanton Schaffhausen, von Edward Im–Thurn, 1840, p.

52) and the mortgages are often for the improvement and enlargement of the

estate. (Siebenzehnter Theil. Der Kanton Thurgau, von J.A. Pupikofer, 1837,

p. 209.)

        57
               “Denselben Erfolg hat die Vertheilung der ehemaligen grossen

Lehenhote in mehrere kleinere eigenthumliche Bauerguter. Es ist gar nicht

selten, dass ein Drittheil oder Viertheil eines solchen Hofes nun eben so viel

Getreide liefert und eben so viel Stuck Vieh unterhalt als volmals der ganze

Hof.” (Thurgau, p. 72)

        58
               Reichensperger (Die Agrarfrage) quoted by Mr Kay (“Social

Condition and Education of the People in England and Europe,”) observes,

“that the parts of Europe where the most extensive and costly plans for

watering the meadows and lands have been carried out in the greatest

perfection, are those where the lands are very much subdivided, and are in the

hands of small proprietors. He instances the plain round Valencia, several of

the southern departments of France, particularly those of Vaucluse and

Bouches du Rhone, Lombardy, Tuscany, the districts of Sienna, Lucca, and

Bergamo, Piedmont, many parts of Germany etc., in all which parts of

Europe the land is very much subdivided among small proprietors. In all

these parts great and expensive systems and plans of general irrigation have

been carried out, and are now being supported by the small proprietors

themselves; thus showing how they are able to accomplish, by means of

combination, work requiring the expenditure of great quantities of capital.”

Kay, i. 126.

        59
               Laing, Journal of a Residence in Norway, pp. 36, 37.

        60
               Notes of a Traveller, pp. 299 et seqq.

        61
               The manner in which the Swiss peasants combine to carry oncheese-making by their united capital deserves to be noted. “Each parish in

Switzerland hires a man, generally from the district of Gruyere in the canton

of Freyburg, to take care of the herd, and make the cheese. One cheeseman,

one pressman or assistant, and one cowherd are considered necessary for

every forty cows. The owners of the cows get credit each of them, in a book

daily for the quantity of milk given by each cow. The cheesemen and his

assistants milk the cows, put the milk all together, and make cheese of it, and

at the end of the season each owner receives the weight of cheese

proportionable to the quantity of milk his cows have delivered. By this co-

operative plan, instead of the small-sized unmarketable cheeses only, which

each could produce out of his three or four cows’ milk, he has the same

weight in large marketable cheese superior in quality, because made by

people who attend to no other business. The cheeseman and his assistants are

paid so much per head of the cows, in money or in cheese, or sometimes they

hire the cows, and pay the owners in money or cheese.” Notes of a Traveller,

p. 351. A similar system exists in the French Jura. See, for full details

Lavergne, Economie Rurale de la France, 2nd ed. pp. 139 et seqq. One of the

most remarkable points in this interesting case of combination of labour, is

the confidence which it supposes, and which experience must justify, in the

integrity of the persons employed.

        62
               Rural and Domestic Life of Germany, p. 27.

        63
               Ibid. p. 40.

        64
               Rural and Domestic Life of Germany, p. 44.

        65
               Ibid. p. 50.

        66
               Ueber die Landwirthschaft der Rheinpfalz, und insbesondere in

der Heidelberger Gegend. Von D. Karl Heinrich Rau. Heidelber, 1830.

        67
               Rau, pp. 15, 16.

        68
               The Social Condition and Education of the People in England and

Europe; showing the results of the Primary Schools, and of the division of

Landed Property in Foreign Countries. By Joseph Kay, Esq., M.A. Barrister-

at-Law, and the later Travelling Bachelor of the University of Cambridge.

vol. i.

        69
               Kay, i, 116–8.        70
               Geographical Dictionary, art. “Belgium”.

        71
               Pp. 11–14.

        72
               Flemish Husbandry, p. 3.

        73
               Ibid. p. 13.

        74
               Flemish Husbandry, pp. 73 et seq.

        75
               Flemish Husbandry, p. 81.

        76
               As much of the distress lately complained of in Belgium, as

partakes in any degree of a permanent character, appears to be almost

confined tothe portion of the population who carry on manufacturing labour,

either by itself or in conjunction with agricultural; and to be occasioned by a

diminished demand for Belgic manufactures.

              To the preceding testimonies respecting Germany, Switzerland, and

Belgium, may be added the following from Niebuhr, respecting the Roman

Campagna. In a letter from Tivoli, he says, “Wherever you find hereditary

farmers, or small proprietors, there you also find industry and honesty. I

believe that a man who would employ a large fortune in establishing small

freeholds migh put an end to robbery in the mountain districts.” — Life and

Letters of Niebuhr, vol. ii, p. 149.

        77
               A Plea for Peasant Proprietors. By William Thomas Thornton, pp.

99–104.

        78
               Ibid, p. 38.

        79
               Ibid. p. 9.

        80
               Ibid. p. 32.

        81
               Arthur Young’s Travels in France, vol. i, p. 50.

        82
               Ibid. p. 88.

        83
               Ibid. p. 51.

        84
               Ibid. p. 56.

        85
               Young, pp. 322–4.

        86
               Ibid. p. 357.        87
               Ibid. p. 325.

        88
               Ibid. p. 364.

        89
               Young, vol. i, p. 412.

 

 

                 Chapter 7 – Continuation of the Same Subject

 

 

              1. Before examining the influence of peasant properties on the

ultimate economical interests of the labouring class, as determined by the

increase of population, let us note the points respecting the moral and social

influence of that territorial arrangement, which may be looked upon as

established, either by the reason of the case, or by the facts and authorities

cited in the preceding chapter.

              The reader new to the subject must have been struck with the

powerful impression made upon all the witnesses to whom I have referred, by

what a Swiss statistical writer calls the “almost superhuman industry” of
                      87
peasant proprietors. On this point at least, authorities are unanimous. Those

who have seen only one country of peasant properties, always think the

inhabitants of that country the most industrious in the world. There is as little

doubt among observers, with what feature in the condition of the peasantry

this preeminent industry is connected. It is the “magic of property” which, in

the words of Arthur Young, “turns sand into gold.” The idea of property does

not, however, necessarily imply that there should be no rent, any more than

that there should be no taxes. It merely implies that the rent should be a fixed

charge, not liable to be raised against the possessor by his own

improvements, or by the will of a landlord. A tenant at a quit-rent is, to all

intents and purposes, a proprietor; a copyholder is not less so than a

freeholder. What is wanted is permanent possession on fixed terms. “Give a

man the secure possession of a bleak rock, and he will turn it into a garden;

give him a nine years’ lease of a garden, and he will convert it into a desert.”

              The details which have been cited, and those, still more minute, to be

found in the same authorities, concerning the habitually elaborate system of

cultivation, and the thousand devices of the peasant proprietor for making

every superfluous hour and odd moment instrumental to some increase in the

future produce and value of the land, will explain what has been said in a
                  88
previous chapter respecting the far larger gross produce which, with

anything like parity of agricultural knowledge, is obtained from the same

quality of soil on small farms, at least when they are the property of the

cultivator. The treatise on “Flemish Husbandry” is especially instructiverespecting the means by which untiring industry does more than outweigh

inferiority of resources, imperfection of implements, and ignoranCe of

scientific theories. The peasant cultivation of Flanders and italy is affirmed to

produce heavier crops, in equal circumstances of soil, than the best cultivated

districts of Scotland and England. it produces them, no doubt, with an amount

of labour which, if paid for by an employer, would make the cost to him more

than equivalent to the benefit; but to the peasant it is not cost, it is the

devotion of time which he can spare, to a favourite pursuit, if we should not
                              89
rather say a ruling passion.

              We have seen, too, that it is not solely by superior exertion that the

Flemish cultivators succeed in obtaining these brilliant results. The same

motive which gives such intensity to their industry, placed them earlier in

possession of an amount of agricultural knowledge, not attained until much

later in countries where agriculture was carried on solely by hired labour. An
                                                            90
equally high testimony is borne by M. de Lavergne to the agricultural skill

of the small proprietors in those parts of France to which the petite culture is

really suitable. “In the rich plains of Flanders, on the banks of the Rhine, the

Garonne, the Charente, the Rhone, all the practices which fertilize the land

and increase the productiveness of labour are known to the very smallest

cultivators, and practised by them, however considerable may be the

advances which they require. In their hands, abundant manures, collected at

great cost, repair and incessantly increase the fertility of the soil, in spite of

the activity of cultivation. The races of cattle are superior, the crops

magnificent. Tobacco, flax, colza, madder, beetroot, in some places; in

others, the vine, the olive, the plum, the mulberry, only yield their abundant

treasures to a population of industrious labourers. Is it not also to the petite

culture that we are indebted for most of the garden produce obtained by dint

of great outlay in the neighbourhood of Paris?”

              2. Another aspect of peasant properties, in which it is essential that

they should be considered, is that of an instrument of popular education.

Books and schooling are absolutely necessary to education; but not all-

sufficient. The mental faculties will he most developed where they are most

exercised; and what gives more exercise to them than the having a multitude

of interests, none of which can be neglected, and which can be provided for

only by varied efforts of will and intelligence? Some of the disparagers of

small properties lay great stress on the cares and anxieties which beset thepeasant proprietor of the Rhineland or Flanders. It is precisely those cares and

anxieties which tend to make him a superior being to an English day-

labourer. It is, to be sure, rather abusing the privileges of fair argument to

represent the condition of a day-labourer as not an anxious one. I can

conceive no circumstances in which he is free from anxiety, where there is a

possibility of being out of employment; unless he has access to a profuse

dispensation of parish pay, and no shame or reluctance in demanding it. The

day-labourer has, in the existing state of society and population, many of the

anxieties which have not an invigorating effect on the mind, and none of

those which have. The position of the peasant proprietor of Continental

Europe is the reverse. From the anxiety which chills and paralyses-the

uncertainty of having food to eat-few persons are more exempt: it requires as

rare a concurrence of circumstances as the potato failure combined with an

universal bad harvest, to bring him within reach of that danger. His anxieties

are the ordinary vicissitudes of more and less; his cares are that he takes his

fair share of the business of life; that he is a free human being, and not

perpetually a child, which seems to be the approved condition of the

labouring classes according to the prevailing philanthropy. He is no longer a

being of a different order from the middle classes; he has pursuits and objects

like those which occupy them, and give to their intellects the greatest part of

such cultivation as they receive. If there is a first principle in intellectual

education, it is this-that the discipline which does good to the mind is that in

which the mind is active, not that in which it is passive. The secret for

developing the faculties is to give them much to do, and much inducement to

do it. This detracts nothing from the importance, and even necessity, of other

kinds of mental cultivation. The possession of property will not prevent the

peasant from being coarse, selfish, and narrow-minded. These things depend

on other influences, and other kinds of instruction. But this great stimulus to

one kind of mental activity, in no way impedes any other means of

intellectual development. On the contrary, by cultivating the habit of turning

to practical use every fragment of knowledge acquired, it helps to render that

schooling and reading fruitful, which without some such auxiliary influence

are in too many cases like seed thrown on a rock.

              3. It is not on the intelligence alone, that the situation of a peasant

proprietor exercises an improving influence. It is no less propitious to the

moral virtues of prudence, temperance, and self-control. Day-labourers,

where the labouring class mainly consists of them, are usually improvident:they spend carelessly to the full extent of their means, and let the future shift

for itself. This is so notorious, that many persons strongly interested in the

welfare of the labouring classes, hold it as a fixed opinion that an increase of

wages would do them little good, unless accompanied by at least a

corresponding improvement in their tastes and habits. The tendency of

peasant proprietors, and of those who hope to become proprietors, is to the

contrary extreme; to take even too much thought for the morrow. They are

oftener accused of penuriousness than of prodigality. They deny themselves

reasonable indulgences, and live wretchedly in order to economize. In

Switzerland almost everybody saves, who has any means of saving; the case

of the Flemish farmers has been already noticed: among the French, though a

pleasure-loving and reputed to be a self-indulgent people, the spirit of thrift is

diffused through the rural population in a manner most gratifying as a whole,

and which in individual instances errs rather on the side of excess than defect.

Among those who, from the hovels in which they live, and the herbs and

roots which constitute their diet, are mistaken by travellers for proofs and

specimens of general indigence, there are numbers who have hoards in

leathern bags, consisting of sums, in five franc pieces, which they keep by

them perhaps for a whole generation, unless brought out to be expended in

their most cherished gratification the purchase of land. If there is a moral

inconvenience attached to a state of society in which the peasantry have land,

it is the danger of their being too careful of their pecuniary concerns; of its

making them crafty, and “calculating” in the objectionable sense. The French

peasant is no simple countryman, no downright “paysan du Danube;” both in

fact and in fiction he is now “le rusé paysan.” That is the stage which he has

reached in the progressive development which the constitution of things has

imposed on human intelligence and human emancipation. But some excess in

this direction is a small and a passing evil compared with recklessness and

improvidence in the labouring classes, and a cheap price to pay for the

inestimable worth of the virtue of self-dependence, as the general

characteristic of a people: a virtue which is one of the first conditions of

excellence in the human character — the stock on which if the other virtues

are not grafted, they have seldom any firm root; a quality indispensable in the

case of a labouring class, even to any tolerable degree of physical comfort;

and by which the peasantry of France, and of most European countries of

peasant proprietors, are distinguished beyond any other labouring population.

              4. Is it likely that a state of economical relations so conducive tofrugality and prudence in every other respect, should be prejudicial to it in the

cardinal point of increase of population? That it is so, is the opinion

expressed by most of those English political economists who have written

anything about the matter. Mr. M’Culloch’s opinion is well known. Mr. Jones
        91
affirms, that a “peasant population raising their own wages from the soil,

and consuming them in kind, are universally acted upon very feebly by

internal checks, or by motives disposing them to restraint. The consequence

is, that unless some external cause, quite independent of their will, forces

such peasant cultivators to slacken their rate of increase, they will, in a

limited territory, very rapidly approach a state of want and penury, and will

be stopped at last only by the physical impossibility of procuring
                              92
subsistence.” He elsewhere speaks of such a peasantry as “exactly in the

condition in which the animal disposition to increase their numbers is

checked by the fewest of those balancing motives and desires which regulate

the increase of superior ranks or more civilized people.” The “causes of this

peculiarity”, Mr. Jones promised to point out in a subsequent work, which

never made its appearance. I am totally unable to conjecture from what

theory of human nature, and of the motives which influence human conduct,

he would have derived them. Arthur Young assumes the same “peculiarity”

as a fact; but, though not much in the habit of qualifying his opinions, he does

not push his doctrine to so violent an extreme as Mr. Jones; having, as we

have seen, himself testified to various instances in which peasant populations

such as Mr. Jones speaks of, were not tending to “a state of want and

penury”, and were in no danger whatever of coming into contact with

“physical impossibility of procuring subsistence.”

              That there should be discrepancy of experience on this matter, is

easily to be accounted for. Whether the labouring people live by land or by

wages, they have always hitherto multiplied up to the limit set by their

habitual standard of comfort. When that standard was low, not exceeding a

scanty subsistence, the size of properties, as well as the rate of wages, has

been kept down to what would barely support life. Extremely low ideas of

what is necessary for subsistence, are perfectly compatible with peasant

properties; and if a people have always been used to poverty, and habit has

reconciled them to it, there will be over-population, and excessive

subdivision of land. But this is not to the purpose. The true question is,

supposing a peasantry to possess land not insufficient but sufficient for their

comfortable support, are they more, or less, likely to fall from this state ofcomfort through improvident multiplication, than if they were living in an

equally comfortable manner as hired labourers? All à priori considerations

are in favour of their being less likely. The dependence of wages on

population is a matter of speculation and discussion. That wages would fall if

population were much increased is often a matter of real doubt, and always a

thing which requires some exercise of the thinking faculty for its intelligent

recognition. But every peasant can satisfy himself from evidence which he

can fully appreciate, whether his piece of land can be made to support several

families in the same comfort as it supports one. Few people like to leave to

their children a worse lot in life than their own. The parent who has land to

leave, is perfectly able to judge whether the children can live upon it or not:

but people who are supported by wages, see no reason why their sons should

be unable to support themselves in the same way, and trust accordingly to

chance. “In even the most useful and necessary arts and manufactures,” says
          93
Mr. Laing, “the demand for labourers is not a seen, known, steady, and

appreciable demand: but it is so in husbandry” under small properties. “The

labour to be done, the subsistence that labour will produce out of his portion

of land, are seen and known elements in a man’s calculation upon his means

of subsistence. Can his square of land, or can it not, subsist a family? Can he

marry or not? are questions which every man can answer without delay,

doubt, or speculation. It is the depending on chance, where judgment has

nothing clearly set before it, that causes reckless, improvident marriages in

the lower, as in the higher classes, and produces among us the evils of over-

population; and chance necessarily enters into every man’s calculations,

when certainty is removed altogether; as it is, where certain subsistence is, by

our distribution of property, the lot of but a small portion instead of about

two-thirds of the people.”

              There never has been a writer more keenly sensible of the evils

brought upon the labouring classes by excess of population, than Sismondi,

and this is one of the grounds of his earnest advocacy of peasant properties.

He had ample opportunity, in more countries than one, for judging of their

effect on population. Let us see his testimony. “In the countries in which

cultivation by small proprietors still continues, population increases regularly

and rapidly until it has attained its natural limits; that is to say, inheritances

continue to be divided and subdivided among several sons, as long as, by an

increase of labour, each family can extract an equal income from a smaller

portion of land. A father who possessed a vast extent of natural pasture,divides it among his sons, and they turn it into fields and meadows; his sons

divide it among their sons, who abolish fallows: each improvement in

agricultural knowledge admits of another step in the subdivision of property.

But there is no danger lest the proprietor should bring up his children to make

beggars of them. He knows exactly what inheritance he has to leave them; he

knows that the law will divide it equally among them; he sees the limit

beyond which this division would make them descend from the rank which

he has himself filled, and a just family pride, common to the peasant and to

the nobleman, makes him abstain from summoning into life, children for

whom he cannot properly provide. If more are born, at least they do not

marry, or they agree among themselves, which of several brothers shall

perpetuate the family. It is not found that in the Swiss Cantons, the

patrimonies of the peasants are ever so divided as to reduce them below an

honourable competence; though the habit of foreign service, by opening to

the children a career indefinite and uncalculable, sometimes calls forth a
                                94
super-abundant population.”

              There is similar testimony respecting Norway. Though there is no

law or custom of primogeniture, and no manufactures to take off a surplus

population, the subdivision of property is not carried to an injurious extent.
                                                                    95
“The division of the land among children,” says Mr. Laing, “appears not,

during the thousand years it has been in operation, to have had the effect of

reducing the landed properties to the minimum size that will barely support

human existence. I have counted from five-and-twenty to forty cows upon

farms, and that in a country in which the farmer must, for at least seven

months in the year, have winter provender and houses provided for all the

cattle. It is evident that some cause or other, operating on aggregation of

landed property, counteracts the dividing effects of partition among children.

That cause can be no other than what I have long conjectured would be

effective in such a social arrangement; viz. that in a country where land is

held, not in tenancy merely, as in Ireland, but in full ownership, its

aggregation by the deaths of co-heirs, and by the marriages of the female

heirs among the body of landholders, will balance its subdivision by the equal

succession of children. The whole mass of property will, I conceive, be found

in such a state of society to consist of as many estates of the class of 10001.,

as many of 100l., as many of 10l., a year, at one period as another.” That this

should happen, supposes diffused through society a very efficacious

prudential check to population; and it is reasonable to give part of the creditof this prudential restraint to the peculiar adaptation of the peasant-

proprietary system for fostering it.

                                                                96
              “In some parts of Switzerland,” says Mr. Kay, “as in the canton of

Argovie for instance, a peasant never marries before he attains the age of

twenty-five years, and generally much later in life; and in that canton the

women very seldom marry before they have attained the age of thirty.... Nor

do the division of land and the cheapness of the mode of conveying it from

one man to another, encourage the providence of the labourers of the rural

districts only. They act in the same manner, though perhaps. in a less degree,

upon the labourers of the smaller towns. In the smaller provincial towns it is

customary for a labourer to own a small plot of ground outside the town. This

plot he cultivates in the evening as his kitchen garden. He raises in it

vegetables and fruits for the use of his family during the winter. After his

day’s work is over, he and his family repair to the garden for a short time,

which they spend in planting, sowing, weeding, or preparing for sowing or

harvest, according to the season. The desire to become possessed of one of

these gardens operates very strongly in strengthening prudential habits and in

restraining improvident marriages. Some of the manufacturers in the canton

of Argovie told me that a townsman was seldom contented until he had

bought a garden, or a garden and house, and that the town labourers generally

deferred their marriages for some years, in order to save enough to purchase

either one or both of these luxuries.”

                                                                97
              The same writer shows by statistical evidence that in Prussia the

average age of marriage is not only much later than in England, but “is

gradually becoming later than it was formerly,” while at the same time

“fewer illegitimate children are born in Prussia than in any other of the
                                                                      98
European countries.” “Wherever I travelled,” says Mr. Kay, “in North

Germany and Switzerland, I was assured by all that the desire to obtain land,

which was felt by all the peasants, was acting as the strongest possible check
                                          99
upon undue increase of population.”

              In Flanders, according to Mr. Fauche, the British Consul at
        100
Ostend, “farmers’ sons and those who have the means to become farmers

will delay their marriage until they get possession of a farm.” Once a farmer,

the next object is to become a proprietor. “The first thing a Dane does with
                                                                    101
his savings,” says Mr. Browne, the Consul at Copenhagen, “is to purchase

a clock, then a horse and cow, which he hires out, and which pays a goodinterest. Then his ambition is to become a petty proprietor, and this class of

persons is better off than any in Denmark. Indeed, I know of no people in any

country who have more easily within their reach all that is really necessary

for life than this class, which is very large in comparison with that of

labourers.”

              But the experience which most decidedly contradicts the asserted

tendency of peasant proprietorship to produce excess of population, is the

case of France. In that country the experiment is not tried in the most

favourable circumstances, a large proportion of the properties being too

small. The number of landed proprietors in France is not exactly ascertained,

but on no estimate does it fall much short of five millions; which, on the

lowest calculation of the number of persons of a family (and for France it

ought to be a low calculation), shows much more than half the population as

either possessing, or entitled to inherit, landed property. A majority of the

properties are so small as not to afford a subsistence to the proprietors, of

whom, according to some computations, as many as three millions are

obliged to eke out their means of support either by working for hire, or by

taking additional land, generally on metayer tenure. When the property

possessed is not sufficient to relieve the possessor from dependence on

wages, the condition of a proprietor loses much of its characteristic efficacy

as a check to over-population: and if the prediction so often made in England

had been realized, and France had become a “pauper warren,” the experiment

would have proved nothing against the tendencies of the same system of

agricultural economy in other circumstances. But what is the fact? That the

rate of increase of the French population is the slowest in Europe. During the

generation which the Revolution raised from the extreme of hopeless

wretchedness to sudden abundance, a great increase of population took place.

But a generation has grown up, which, having been born in improved

circumstances, has not learnt to be miserable; and upon them the spirit of

thrift operates most conspicuously, in keeping the increase of population

within the increase of national wealth. In a table, drawn up by Professor
    102
Rau, of the rate of annual increase of the populations of various countries,

that of France, from 1817 to 1827, is stated at 63/100 per cent, that of

England during a similar decennial period being 1 6/10 annually, and that of

the United States nearly 3. According to the Official returns as analysed by
            103
M. Legoyt, the increase of the population, which from 1801 to 1806 was at

the rate of 1.28 per cent annually, averaged only 0.47 per cent from 1806 to1831; from 1831 to 1836 it averaged 0.60 per cent; from 1836 to 1841, 0.41
                                                      104
per cent, and from 1841 to l846, 0.68 per cent. At the census of l851 the

rate of annual increase shown was only 1.08 per cent in the five years, or 0.21

annually; and at the census of 1856 only 0.71 per cent in five years, or 0.14

annually. so that, in the words of M. de Lavergne, “la population ne s’accroît
                            105
presque plus en France.” Even this slow increase is wholly the effect of a

diminution of deaths; the number of births not increasing at all, while the
                                                                              106
proportion of the births to the population is constantly diminishing. This

slow growth of the numbers of the people, while capital increases much more

rapidly, has caused a noticeable improvement in the condition of the

labouring class. The circumstances of that portion of the class who are landed

proprietors are not easily ascertained with precision, being of course

extremely variable; but the mere labourers, who derived no direct benefit

from the changes in landed property which took place at the Revolution, have
                                                                        107
unquestionably much improved in condition since that period. Dr. Rau

testifies to a similar fact in the case of another country in which the
                                                                      108
subdivision of the land is probably excessive, the Palatinate.

              I am not aware of a single authentic instance which supports the

assertion that rapid multiplication is promoted by peasant properties.

Instances may undoubtedly be cited of its not being prevented by them, and

one of the principal of these is Belgium; the prospects of which, in respect to

population, are at present a matter of considerable uncertainty. Belgium has

the most rapidly increasing population on the Continent; and when the

circumstances of the country require, as they must soon do, that this rapidity

should be checked, there will be a considerable strength of existing habit to

be broken through. One of the unfavourable circumstances is the great power

possessed over the minds of the people by the Catholic priesthood, whose

influence is everywhere strongly exerted against restraining population. As

yet, however, it must be remembered that the indefatigable industry and great

agricultural skill of the people have rendered the existing rapidity of increase

practically innocuous; the great number of large estates still undivided

affording by their gradual dismemberment, a resource for the necessary

augmentation of the gross produce; and there are, besides, many large

manufacturing towns, and mining and coal districts, which attract and employ

a considerable portion of the annual increase of population.

              5. But even where peasant properties are accompanied by an excessof numbers, this evil is not necessarily attended with the additional

economical disadvantage of too great a subdivision of the land. It does not

follow because landed property is minutely divided, that farms will be so. As

large properties are perfectly compatible with small farms, so are small

properties with farms of an adequate size; and a subdivision of occupancy is

not an inevitable consequence of even undue multiplication among peasant

proprietors. As might be expected from their admirable intelligence in things

relating to their occupation, the Flemish peasantry have long learnt this
                                                                      109
lesson. “The habit of not dividing properties,” says Dr. Rau, “and the

opinion that this is advantageous, have been so completely preserved in

Flanders, that even now, when a peasant dies leaving several children, they

do not think of dividing his patrimony, though it be neither entailed nor

settled in trust; they prefer selling it entire, and sharing the proceeds,

considering it as a jewel which loses its value when it is divided.” That the

same feeling must prevail widely even in France, is shown by the great

frequency of sales of land, amounting in ten years to a fourth part of the

whole soil of the country.. and M. Passy, in his tract “On the Changes in the
                                                                                        110
Agricultural Condition of the Department of the Eure since the year 1800,”

states other facts tending to the same conclusion. “The example,” says he, “of

this department attests that there does not exist, as some writers have

imagined, between the distribution of property and that of cultivation, a

connexion which tends invincibly to assimilate them. In no portion of it have

changes of ownership had a perceptible influence on the size of holdings.

While, in districts of small farming, lands belonging to the same owner are

ordinarily distributed among many tenants, so neither is it uncommon, in

places where the grande culture prevails, for the same farmer to rent the lands

of several proprietors. In the plains of Vexin, in particular, many active and

rich cultivators do not content themselves with a single farm; others add to

the lands of their principal holding, all those in the neighbourhood which they

are able to hire, and in this manner make up a total extent which in some

cases reaches or exceeds two hundred hectares” (five hundred English acres).

“The more the estates are dismembered, the more frequent do this sort of

arrangements become: and as they conduce to the interest of all concerned, it

is probable that time will confirm them.”

                                                        111
              “In some places,” says M. de Lavergne, “in the neighbourhood of

Paris, for example, where the advantages of the grande culture become

evident, the size of farms tends to increase, several farms are thrown togetherinto one, and farmers enlarge their holdings by renting parcelles from a

number of different proprietors. Elsewhere farms as well as properties of too

great extent, tend to division. Cultivation spontaneously finds out the

organization which suits it best.” It is a striking fact, stated by the same
                112
eminent writer, that the departments which have the greatest number of

small côtes foncières, are the Nord, the Somme, the Pas de Calais, the Seine

Inférieure, the Aisne, and the Oise; all of them among the richest and best

cultivated, and the first-mentioned of them the very richest and best

cultivated, in France.

              Undue subdivision, and excessive smallness of holdings, are

undoubtedly a prevalent evil in some countries of peasant proprietors, and

particularly in parts of Germany and France. The governments of Bavaria and

Nassau have thought it necessary to impose a legal limit to subdivision, and

the Prussian Government unsuccessfully proposed the same measures to the

Estates of its Rhenish Provinces. But I do not think it will anywhere be found

that the petite culture is the system of the peasants, and the grande culture

that of the great landlords: on the contrary, wherever the small properties are

divided among too many proprietors, I believe it to be true that the large

properties also are parcelled out among too many farmers, and that the cause

is the same in both cases, a backward state of capital, skill, and agricultural

enterprise. There is reason to believe that the subdivision in France is not

more excessive than is accounted for by this cause; that it is diminishing, not

increasing; and that the terror expressed in some quarters, at the progress of

the morcellement, is one of the most groundless of real or pretended
      113
panics.

              If peasant properties have any effect in promoting subdivision

beyond the degree which corresponds to the agricultural practices of the

country, and which is customary on its large estates, the cause must lie in one

of the salutary influences of the system; the eminent degree in which it

promotes providence on the part of those who, not being yet peasant

proprietors, hope to become so. In England, where the agricultural labourer

has no investment for his savings but the savings bank, and no position to

which he can rise by any exercise of economy, except perhaps that of a petty

shopkeeper, with its chances of bankruptcy, there is nothing at all resembling

the intense spirit of thrift which takes possession of one who, from being a

day labourer, can raise himself by saving to the condition of a landedproprietor. According to almost all authorities, the real cause of the

morcellement is the higher price which can be obtained for land by selling it

to the peasantry, as an investment for their small accumulations, than by

disposing of it entire to some rich purchaser who has no object but to live on

its income, without improving it. The hope of obtaining such an investment is

the most powerful inducements, to those who are without land, to practise the

industry, frugality, and self-restraint, on which their success in this object of

ambition is dependent.

              As the result of this enquiry into the direct operation and indirect

influences of peasant properties, I conceive it to be established, that there is

no necessary connexion between this form of landed property and an

imperfect state of the arts of production; that it is favourable in quite as many

respects as it is unfavourable, to the most effective use of the powers of the

soil; that no other existing state of agricultural economy has so beneficial an

effect on the industry, the intelligence, the frugality, and prudence of the

population, nor tends on the whole so much to discourage an improvident

increase of their numbers; and that no existing state, therefore, is on the

whole so favourable both to their moral and their physical welfare. Compared

with the English system of cultivation by hired labour, it must be regarded as
                                                  114
eminently beneficial to the labouring class. We are not on the present

occasion called upon to compare it with the joint ownership of the land by

associations of labourers.

        90
               “Fast ubermenschliche Fleiss”. Der Canton Schaffhausen (ut

supra), p. 53.

        91
               Supra, Book i, ch. ix, sec. 4.

        92
               Read the graphic description by the historian Michelet, of the

feelings of a peasant proprietor towards his land.

              “Si nous voulons connaitre la pensee intime, la passion, du paysan

de France, cela est fort aise. Promenons-nous le dimanche dans la campagne,

suivons-le. Le voila qui s’en va la-bas devant nous. Il est deux heures; sa

femme est a vepres; il est endimanche; je reponds qu’il va voir sa maitresse.

              “Quelle maitresse? sa terre.

              “Je ne dis pas qu’il y aille tout droit. Non, il est libre ce jour-la, il est

maitre d’y aller ou de n’y pas aller. N’y va-t-il pas assez tous les jours de lasemaine? Aussi, il se detourne, il va ailleurs, il a affaire ailleurs. Et pourtant,

il y va.

              “Il est vrai qu’il passait bien pres; c’etait un occasion. Il la regarde,

mais apparemment il n’y entera pas; qu’y ferait-il? — Et pourtant il y entre.

              “Du moins, il est probable qu’il n’y travaillera pas; il est

endimanche; il a blouse et chemise blanches. — Rien n’empeche cependant

d’oter quelque mauvaise herbe, de rejeter cette pierre. Il y a bien encore cette

souche qui gene, mais il n’a pas sa pioche, ce sera pour demain.

              “Alors, il croise ses bras et s’arrete, regarde, serieux, soucieux. Il

regarde longtemps, tres-longtemps, et semble s’oublier. A la fin, s’il se croit

observe, s’il appercoit un passant, il s’eloigne a pas lents. A trente pas encore,

il s’arrete, se retourne, et jette sur sa terre un dernier regard, regard profond et

sombre; mais pour qui sait bien voir, il est tout passionne, ce regard, tout de

coeur, plein de devotion.” — Le Peuple, par J. Michelet, 1re partie, ch. 1.

        93
               Essai sur l’Economie Rurale de l’Angleterre, de l’Ecosse, et de

l’Irlande, 3me ed. p. 127.

        94
               Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, p. 146.

        95
               Ibid. p. 68.

        96
               Notes of a Traveller, p. 46.

        97
               Nouveaux Principes, Book iii. ch. 3.

        98
               Residence in Norway, p. 18.

        99
               Vol. i. pp. 67–9.

        100
               Ibid. pp. 75–9.

        101
               Ibid. p. 90.

        102
               The Prussian minister of statistics, in a work (Der

Volkswohlstand im Preussischen Staate) which I am obliged to quote at

second hand from Mr Kay, after proving by figures the great and progressive

increase of the consumption of food and clothing per head of the population,

from which he justly infers a corresponding increase of the productiveness of

agriculture, continues: “The division of estates has, since 1831, proceeded

more and more throughout the country. There are now many more smallindependent proprietors than formerly. Yet, however many complaints of

pauperism are heard among the dependent labourers, we never hear it

complained that pauperism is increasing among the peasant proprietors.” —

Kay, i. 262–6.

        103
               In a communication to the Commissioners of Poor Law Enquiry,

p. 640 of their Foreign Communication, Appendix F to their First Report.

        104
               Ibid. 268.

        105
               The following is the table (see p. 168 of the Belgian translation of

Mr Rau’s large work:

                                      per cent

United States 1820–30 2.92 Hungary (according to Rohrer) 2.40 England

1811–21 1.78 England 1821–31 1.60 Austria (Rohrer) 1.30 Prussia 1816–27

1.54 Prussia 1820–30 1.37 Prussia 1821–31 1.27 Netherlands 1821–28 1.28

Scotland 1821–31 1.30 Saxony 1815–30 1.15 Baden 1820–30 (Heunisch)

1.13 Bavaria 1814–28 1.08 Naples 1814–24 0.83 France 1817–27 (Mathieu)

0.63  and more recently Moreau de Jonnes 0.55

              But the number given by Moreau de Jonnes, he adds, is not entitled

to implicit confidence.

              The following table given by M. Quetelet (Sur l’Homme et le

Developpment de se Facultes, vol. i, ch. 7, also on the authority of Rau,

contains additional matter, and differs in some items from the preceding,

probably from the author’s having taken, in those cases, an average of

different years:

                              per cent

Ireland 2.45 Hungary 2.40 Spain 1.66 England 1.65 Rhenish Prussia 1.33

Austria 1.30 Bavaria 1.08 Netherlands 0.94 Naples 0.83 France 0.63 Sweden

0.58 Lombardy 0.45

              A very carefully prepared statement, by M. Legoyt, in the Journal of

Economistes for May 1847, which brings up the results for France to the

census of the preceding year 1846, is summed up in the following table:

              According to the Census According to the excess

of

                                                             

births over deaths

                  percent percent

              Sweden 0.83 1.14 Norway 1.36 1.30 Denmark — 0.95 Russia —

0.65 Austria 0.85 0.90 Prussia 1.84 1.18 Saxony 1.45 0.90 Hanover — 0.85

Bavaria — 0.71 Wurtemburg 0.01 1.00 Holland 0.90 1.03 Belgium — 0.76

Sardinia 1.08 — Great Britain (exclusive of Ireland)

                  1.95 1.00

France 0.68 0.50 United States

                  3.27 —

              17. Journal des Economistes for March and May 1847.

              18. M. Legoyt is of opinion that the population was understated in

1841, and the increase between that time and 1846 consequently overstated,

and that the real increase during the whole period was something

intermediate between the last two averages, or not much more than one in

two hundred.

              19. Journal des Economistes for February 1847. In the Journal for

January 1865, M. Legoyt gives some of the numbers slightly altered, and I

presume corrected. The series of percentages is 1.28, 0.31, 0.69, 0.60, 0.41,

0.68, 0.22, and 0.20. The last census in the table that of 1861, shows a slight

reaction, the percentage, independently of the newly acquired departments,

being 0.32.

              20. The following are the numbers given by M. Legoyt:

              From 1824 to 1828 annual number of births 981,914, being 1 in

32.30 of the population.

              From 1829 to 1833 annual number of births 965,444, being 1 in

34.00

              From 1834 to 1838 annual number of births 972,993, being 1 in

34.39

              From 1839 to 1843 annual number of births 970,617, being 1 in

35.27              From 1844 to 1845 annual numbrr of births 983,573, being 1 in

35.58

              In the last two years the births, according to M. Legoyt, were

swelled by the effects of considerable immigration. “Cette diminution des

naissances.” he observes, “en presence d’un accroissement constant, quoique

peu rapide, de la population generale et des mariages, ne peut etre attribue

qu’aux progres de l’esprit d’ordre et de prevision dans les familes. C’est

d’ailleurs la consequence prevue de nos institutions civiles et sociales, qui, en

amenant chaque jour une plus grande subdivision de la fortune territoriale et

mobiliere de la France, developpent au sein des populations les instincts de

conservation et de bien-etre.”

              In four departments, among which are two of the most thriving in

Normandy, the deaths even then exceeded the births. The census of 1856

exhibits the remarkable fact of a positive diminution in the population of 54

out of the 86 departments. A significant comment on the pauper-warren

theory. See M. de Lavergne’s analysis of the returns.

              21. “Les classes de notre population qui n’ont que leur salaire, celles

qui, par cette raison, sont les plus exposees a l’indigence, sont aujourd’hui

beaucoup mieux pourvues des objets necessaires a la nourriture, au logement

et au vetement, qu’elles ne l’etaient au commencement du siecle.... On peut

appuyer [ce fait] du temoignage de toutes les personnes qui ont souvenir de la

premiere des epoques comparees.... S’il restait des doutes a cet egard, on

pourrait facilement les dissiper en consultant les anciens cultivateurs et les

anciens ouvriers, ainsi que nous l’avons fait nous-memes dans diverses

localites, sans rencontrer un seul temoignage contradictoire; on peut invoquer

aussi les renseignemens recueillis a ce sujet par un observateur exact, M.

Villerme (Tableay de l’Etat Physique et Moral des Oyvriers, liv. ii. ch. i)”

From an intelligent work published in 1846, Recherches sur les Cayses de

l’Indigence, par A. Clement, pp. 84–5. The same writer speaks (p. 118) of “la

hausse considerable qui s’est manifeste depuis 1789 dans le taux du salaire de

nos cultivateurs journaliers;” and adds the following evidence of a higher

standard of habitual requirements, even in that portion of the town

population, the state of which is usually represented as most deplorable.

“Depuis quinze a vingt ans, un changement considerable s’est manifeste dans

les habitudes des ouvriers de nos villes manufacturieres: ils depensent

aujourd’hui beaucoup plus que par le passe pour le vetement et la parure...Les ouvriers de certaines classes, tels que les anciens canuts de Lyon,”

(according to all representations, like their counterpart, our handloom

weavers, the very worst paid class of artizans,) “ne se montrent plus comme

autrefois couverts de sales haillons.” (page 164.)

              The preceding statements were given in former editions of this work,

being the best to which I had at the time access; but evidence, both of a more

recent, and of a more minute and precise character, will now be found in the

important work of M. Leonce de Lavergne, Economie Rurale de la France

depuis 1789. According to that pains-taking, well-informed, and most

impartial enquirer, the average daily wages of a French labourer have risen,

since the commencement of the Revolution, in the ratio of 19 to 30, while,

owing to the more constant employment, the total earnings have increased in

a still neater ratio, not short of double. The following are the words of M. de

Lavergne (2nd ed. p. 57):

              “Arthur Young evalue a dix-neuf sols le prix moyen de la journee du

travail, qui doit etre aujourd’hui d’un franc cinquante centimes, et cette

augmentation ne represente encore qu’une partie du gain realise. Bien que la

nation rurale soit restee a peu pres la meme, l’excedant de population survenu

depuis 1789 s’etant concentre dans les villes, le nombre effectif des journees

de travail a grossi, d’abord parce que la vie moyenne s’etant allongee, le

nombre des hommes valides s’est eleve, et ensuite parce que le travail est

mieux organise, soit par la suppression de plusieurs fetes chomees, soit par le

seul effet d’une demande plus active. En tenant compte de l’accroissement du

nombre des journees, le gain annuel de l’ouvrier rural doit avoir double....

Cette augmentation dans le salaire se traduit pour l’ouvrier en une

augmentation au moins correspondante de bien-etre, puisque le prix des

principaux objets necessaires a la vie a peu change, et que celui des objets

fabriques, des tissus, par exemple, a sensiblement baisse. L’habitation est

egalement devenue meilleure, sinon partout, du moins dans la plupart de nos

provinces.”

              M. de Lavergne’s estimate of the average amount of a day’s wages is

grounded on a careful comparison, in this and all other economical points of

view, of all the different provinces of France.

              22. In his little book on the Agriculture of the Palatinate, already

cited. He says that the daily wages of labour, which during the last years ofthe war were unusually high, and so continued until 1817, afterwards sank to

a lower money-rate, but that the prices of many commodities having fallen in

a still greater proportion, the condition of the people was unequivocally

improved. The food given to farm labourers by their employers has also

neatly improved in quantity and quality. “Sie heutigen Tages bedeutend

besser ist, als vor ungefahr 40 Jahren, wo das Gesinde weniger Fleisch und

Mehlspeisen, keinen Kase zum Brote u. dgl. erhielt.” (p. 20) “Such an

increase of wages” (adds the Professor) “which must be estimated not in

money, but in the quantity of necessaries and conveniences which the

labourer is enabled to procure, is, by universal admission, a proof that the

mass of capital must have increased.” It proves not only this, but also that the

labouring population has not increased in an equal degree; and that in this

instance as well as in that of France, the division of the land, even when

excessive, has been compatible with a strengthening of the prudential checks

to population.

              23. He cites as an authority, Schwerz, Landwirthschaftliche

Mittheilungen, i. 185.

              24. One of the many important papers which have appeared in the

Journal of Economistes,the organ of the principal political economists of

France, and doing great and increasing honour to their knowledge and ability.

M. Passy’s essay has been reprinted separately as a pamphlet.

              25. Economie Rurale de la France, p. 455.

              26. See, for facts of a similar tendency, pp. 141, 250, and other

passages of the same important treatise: which, on the other hand, equally

abounds with evidence of the mischievous effect of subdivision when too

minute, or when the nature of the soil and of its products is not suitable to it.

              27. Mr. Laing, in his latest publication, “Observations on the Social

and Political State of the European People in 1848 and 1849”, a book devoted

to the glorification of England, and the disparagement of everything

elsewhere which others, or even he himself in former works, had thought

worthy of praise, argues that “although the land itself is not divided and

subdivided” on the death of the proprietor, “the value of the land is, and with

effects almost as prejudicial to social progress. The value of each share

becomes a debt or burden upon the land.” Consequently the condition of the

agricultural population is retrograde; “each generation is worse off than thepreceding one, although the land is neither less nor more divided, nor worse

cultivated.” And this he gives as the explanation of the great indebtedness of

the small landed proprietors in France (pp. 97–9). If these statements were

correct, they would invalidate all which Mr. Laing affirmed so positively in

other writings, and repeats in this, respecting the peculiar efficacy of the

possession of land in preventing over-population. But he is entirely mistaken

as to the matter of fact. In the only country of which he speaks from actual

residence, Norway, he does not pretend that the condition of the peasant

proprietors is deteriorating. The facts already cited prove that in respect to

Belgium, Germany, and Switzerland, the assertion is equally wide of the

mark; and what has been shown respecting the slow increase of population in

France, demonstrates that if the condition of the French peasantry was

deteriorating, it could not be from the cause supposed by Mr. Laing. The

truth I believe to be that in every country without exception, in which peasant

properties prevail, the condition of the people is improving, the produce of

the land and even its fertility increasing, and from the larger surplus which

remains after feeding the agricultural classes, the towns are augmenting both

in population and in the well-being of their inhabitants. On this question, as

well as on that of the morcellement, so far as regards France, additional facts

and observations, brought up to a later date, will [52, 57 observations will] be

found in the Appendix.

              28. French history strikingly confirms these conclusions. Three

times during the course of ages the peasantry have been purchasers of land;

and these times immediately preceded the three principal eras of French

agricultural prosperity.

              “Aux temps les plus mauvais,” says the historian Michelet, (Le

Peyple, lre partie, ch. 1) “aux moments de pauvrete universelle, ou le riche

meme est pauvre et vend par force, alors le pauvre se trouve en etat d’acheter;

nul acquereur ne se presentant, le paysan en guenilles arrive avec sa piece

d’or, et il acquiert un bout de terre. Ces moments de desastre ou le paysan a

pu acquerir la terre a bon marche, ont toujours ete suivis d’un elan subit de

fecondite qu’on ne s’expliquait pas. Vers 1500, par example, quand la France

epuisee par Louis XI semble achever sa ruine en Italie, la noblesse qui part

est obligee de vendre; la terre, passant a de nouvelles mains, refleurit tout-a-

coup; on travaille, on batit. Ce beau moment (dans le style de l’histoire

monarchique) s’est appele le bon Louis XII.              “Il dure peu, malheureusement. La terre est a peine remise en bon

etat, le fisc fond dessus; les guerres de religion arrivent, qui semblent raser

tout jusqu’au sol, miseres horribles, famines atroces ou les meres mangeaient

leurs enfants. Qui croirait que le pays se releve de la? Eh bien, la guerre finit

a peine, de ce champ ravage, de cette chaumiere encore noire et brulee, sort

l’Epargne du paysan. Il achete; en dix ans, la France a change de face; en

vingt ou trente, tous les biens ont double, triple de valeur. Ce moment encore

baptise d’un nom royal, s’appelle le bon Henri IV et le grand Richelieu.”

              Of the third era it is needless again to speak: it was that of the

Revolution.

              Whoever would study the reverse of the picture, may compare these

historic periods, characterized by the dismemberment of large and the

construction of small properties, with the wide-spread national suffering

which accompanied, and the permanent deterioration of the condition of the

labouring classes which followed, the “clearing” away of small yeomen to

make room for large grazing farms, which was the grand economical event of

English history during the sixteenth century.

 

 

                               Chapter 8 – Of Metayers

 

 

              1. From the case in which the produce of land and labour belongs

undividedly to the labourer, we proceed to the cases in which it is divided,

but between two classes only, the labourers and the landowners: the character

of capitalists merging in the one or the other, as the case may be. It is

possible indeed to conceive that there might be only two classes of persons to

share the produce, and that a class of capitalists might be one of them; the

character of labourer and that of landowner being united to form the other.

This might occur in two ways. The labourers, though owning the land, might

let it to a tenant, and work under him as hired servants. But this arrangement,

even in the very rare cases which could give rise to it, would not require any

particular discussion, since it would not differ in any material respect from

the threefold system of labourers, capitalists, and landlords. The other case is

the not uncommon one, in which a peasant proprietor owns and cultivates the

land, but rises the little capital required, by a mortgage upon it. Neither does

this case present any important peculiarity. There is but one person, the

peasant himself, who has any right or power of interference in the

management. He pays a fixed annuity as interest to a capitalist, as he pays

another fixed sum in taxes to the government. Without dwelling further on

these cases, we pass to those which present marked features of peculiarity.

              When the two parties sharing in the produce are the labourer or

labourers and the landowner, it is not a very material circumstance in the

case, which of the two furnishes the stock, or whether, as sometimes happens,

they furnish it, in a determinate proportion, between them. The essential

difference does not lie in this, but in another circumstance, namely, whether

the division of the produce between the two is regulated by custom or by

competition. We will begin with the former case; of which the metayer

culture is the principal, and in Europe almost the sole, example.

              The principle of the metayer system, is that the labourer, or peasant,

makes his engagement directly with the landowner, and pays, not a fixed rent,

either in money or in kind, but a certain proportion of the produce, or rather

of what remains of the produce after deducting what is considered necessary

to keep up the stock. The proportion is usually, as the name imports, one-half; but in several districts in Italy it is two-thirds. Respecting the supply of

stock, the custom varies from place to place; in some places the landlord

furnishes the whole, in others half, in others some particular part, as for
                                                                              115
instance the cattle and seed, the labourer providing the implements. “This
                                                                  116
connexion,” says Sismondi, speaking chiefly of Tuscany, “is often the

subject of a contract, to define certain services and certain occasional

payments to which the metayer binds himself; nevertheless the differences in

the obligations of one such contract and another are inconsiderable; usage

governs alike all these engagements, and supplies the stipulations which have

not been expressed; and the landlord who attempted to depart from usage,

who exacted more than his neighbour, who took for the basis of the

agreement anything but the equal division of the crops, would render himself

so odious, he would be so sure of not obtaining a metayer who was an honest

man, that the contract of all the metayers may be considered as identical, at

least in each province, and never gives rise to any competition among

peasants in search of employment, or any offer to cultivate the soil on
                                                                              117
cheaper terms than one another.” To the same effect Châteauvieux,

speaking of the metayers of Piedmont. “They consider it,” (the farm) “as a

patrimony, and never think of renewing the lease, but go on from generation
                                                                            118
to generation, on the same terms, without writings or registries.”

              2. When the partition of the produce is a matter of fixed usage, not

of varying convention, political economy has no laws of distribution to

investigate. It has only to consider, as in the case of peasant proprietors, the

effects of the system first on the condition of the peasantry, morally and

physically, and secondly, on the efficiency of the labour. In both these

particulars the metayer system has the characteristic advantages of peasant

properties, but has them in a less degree. The metayer has less motive to

exertion than the peasant proprietor, since only half the fruits of his industry,

instead of the whole, are his own. But he has a much stronger motive than a

day labourer, who has no other interest in the result than not to be dismissed.

If the metayer cannot be turned out except for some violation of his contract,

he has a stronger motive to exertion than any tenant-farmer who has not a

lease. The metayer is at least his landlord’s partner, and a half-sharer in their

joint gains. Where, too, the permanence of his tenure is guaranteed by

custom, he acquires local attachments, and much of the feelings of a

proprietor. I am supposing that this half produce is sufficient to yield him a

comfortable support. Whether it is so, depends (in any given state ofaciculture) on the deCee of subdivision of the land; which depends on the

operation of the population principle. A multiplication of people, beyond the

number that can be properly supported on the land or taken off by

manufactures, is incident even to a peasant proprietary, and of course not less

but rather more incident to a metayer population. The tendency, however,

which we noticed in the proprietary system, to promote prudence on this

point, is in no small degree common to it with the metayer system. There,

also, it is a matter of easy and exact calculation whether a family can he

supported or not. If it is easy to see whether the owner of the whole produce

can increase the production so as to maintain a greater number of persons

equally well, it is a not less simple problem whether the owner of half the
                    119
produce can do so. There is one check which this system seems to offer,

over and above those held out even by the proprietary system; there is a

landlord, who may exert a controlling power, by refusing his consent to a

subdivision. I do not, however, attach great importance to this check, because

the farm may be loaded with superfluous hands without being subdivided;

and because, so long as the increase of hands increases the gross produce,

which is almost always the case, the landlord, who receives half the produce,

is an immediate gainer, the inconvenience falling only on the labourers. The

landlord is no doubt liable in the end to suffer from their poverty, by being

forced to make advances to them, especially in bad seasons; and a foresight

of this ultimate inconvenience may operate beneficially on such landlords as

prefer future security to present profit.

              The characteristic disadvantage of the metayer system is very fairly

stated by Adam Smith. After pointing out that metayers “have a plain interest

that the whole produce should be as great as possible, in order that their own
                                          120
proportion may be so,” he continues, “it could never, however, be the

interest of this species of cultivators to lay out, in the further improvement of

the land, any part of the little stock which they might save from their own

share of the produce, because the lord who laid out nothing, was to get one-

half of whatever it produced. The tithe, which is but a tenth of the produce, is

found to be a very great hindrance to improvement. A tax, therefore, which

amounted to one-half, must have been an effectual bar to it. It might be the

interest of a metayer to make the land produce as much as could be brought

out of it by means of the stock, but it could never be his interest to mix any

furnished by the proprietor; part of his own with it. In France, where five

parts out of six of the whole kingdom are said to be still occupied by thisspecies of cultivators, the proprietors complain that their metayers take every

opportunity of employing the master’s cattle rather in carriage than in

cultivation; because in the one case they get the whole profits to themselves,

in the other they share them with their landlord.”

              It is indeed implied in the very nature of the tenure, that all

improvements which require expenditure of capital must be made with the

capital of the landlord. This, however, is essentially the case even in England,

whenever the farmers are tenants-at-will: or (if Arthur Young is right) even

on a “nine years’ lease.” If the landlord is willing to provide capital for

improvements, the metayer has the strongest interest in promoting them,

since half the benefit of them will accrue to himself. As however the

perpetuity of tenure which, in the case we are discussing, he enjoys by

custom, renders his consent a necessary condition; the spirit of routine, and

dislike of innovation, characteristic of an agricultural people when not

corrected by education, are no doubt, as the advocates of the system seem to

admit, a serious hindrance to improvement.

              3. The metayer system has met with no mercy from English

authorities. “There is not one word to be said in favour of the practice,” says
                121
Arthur Young, and a “thousand arguments that might be used against it.

The hard plea of necessity can alone be urged in its favour; the poverty of the

farmers being so ceat, that the landlord must stock the farm, or it could not be

stocked at all: this is a most cruel burden to a proprietor, who is thus obliged

to run much of the hazard of farming in the most dangerous of all methods,

that of trusting his property absolutely in the hands of people who are

generally ignorant, many careless, and some undoubtedly wicked.... In this

most miserable of all the modes of letting land, the defrauded landlord

redeives a contemptible rent; the farmer is in the lowest state of poverty; the

land is miserably cultivated; and the nation suffers as severely as the parties
                          122
themselves.... Wherever this system prevails, it may be taken for granted

that a useless and miserable population is found.... Wherever the country (that

I saw) is poor and unwatered, in the Milanese, it is in the hands of metayers:”

they are almost always in debt to their landlord for seed or food, and “their
                                                                          123
condition is more wretched than that of a day labourer.... There  are but few

districts” (in Italy) “where lands are let to the occupying tenant at a money-

rent; but wherever it is found, their crops are greater; a clear proof of the

imbecility of the metaying system.” “Wherever it” (the metayer system) “has                                          124
been adopted,” says Mr. M’Culloch,  “it has put a stop to all improvement,
                                                                                125
and has reduced the cultivators to the most abject poverty” Mr. Jones

shares the common opinion, and quotes Turgot and Destutt–Tracy in support

of it. The impression, however, of all these writers (notwithstanding Arthur

Young’s occasional references to Italy) seems to be chiefly derived from
                                                126
France, and France before the Revolution. Now the situation of French

metayers under the old régime by no means represents the typical form of the

contract. It is essential to that form, that the proprietor pays all the taxes. But

in France the exemption of the noblesse from direct taxation had led the

Government to throw the whole hurthen of their ever-increasing fiscal

exactions upon the occupiers: and it is to these exactions that Turgot ascribed

the extreme wretchedness of the metayers: a wretchedness in some cases so

excessive, that in Limousin and Angounmois (the provinces which he

administered) they had seldom more, according to him, after deducting all

burthens, than from twenty-five to thirty livres (20 to 24 shillings) per head

for their whole annual consumption: “je ne dis pas en argent, mais en
                                                                                    127
comptant tout ce qu’ils consomment en nature sur ce qu’ils ont récolté.”

When we add that they had not the virtual fixity of tenure of the metayers of
                                                128
Italy, (“in Limousin,” says Arthur Young, “the metayers are considered as

little better than menial servants, removable at pleasure, and obliged to

conform in all things to the will of the landlords,”) it is evident that their case

affords no argument against the metayer system in its better form. A

population who could call nothing their own, who, like the Irish cottiers,

could not in any contingency be worse off, had nothing to restrain them from

multiplying, and subdividing the land, until stopped by actual starvation.

              We shall find a very different picture, by the most accurate

authorities, of the metayer cultivation of Italy. In the first place, as to
                                                                129
subdivision. In Lombardy, according to Châteauvieux, there are few farms

which exceed fifty acres, and few which have less than ten. These farms are
                                                                                      130
all occupied by metayers at half profit. They invariably display “an extent

and a richness in buildings rarely known in any other country in Europe.”

Their plan “affords the greatest room with the least extent of building; is best

adapted to arrange and secure the crop; and is, at the same time, the most

economical, and the least exposed to accidents hy fire.” The court-yard

“exhibits a whole so regular and commodious, and a system of such care and

good order, and that our dirty and ill-arranged farms can convey no adequate

idea of.” The same description applies to Piedmont. The rotation of crops is                            131
excellent. “I should think no country can bring so large a portion of its

produce to market as Piedmont.” Though the soil is not naturally very fertile,

“the number of cities is prodigiously great.” The agriculture must, therefore,

be eminently favourable to the net as well as to the gross produce of tlhe

land. “Each plough works thirty-two acres in the season.... Nothng can be

more perfect or neater than the hoeing and moulding up the maize, when in

full growth, by a single plough, with a pair of oxen, without injury to a single

plant, while all the weeds are effectually destroyed.” So much for agricultural

skill. “Nothing can be so excellent as the crop which precedes and that which

follows it.” The wheat “is thrashed by a cylinder, drawn hy a horse, and

guided by a boy, while the labourers turn over the straw with forks. This

process lasts nearly a fortnight; it is quick and economical, and completely

gets out the grain..... In no part of the world are the economy and the

management of the land better understood than in Piedmont, and this explains

the phenomenon of its great population, and immense export of provisions.”

All this under metayer cultivation.

              Of the valley of the Arno, in its whole extent, both above and below
                                            132
Florence, the same writer thus speaks: — “Forests of olive-trees covered

the lower parts of the mountains, and by their foliage concealed an infinite

number of small farms, which peopled these parts of the mountains; chestnut-

trees raised their heads on the higher slopes, their healthy verdure contrasting

with the pale tint of the olive-trees, and spreading a brightness over this

amphitheatre. The road was bordered on each side with villagehouses, not

more than a hundred paces from each other..... They are placed at a little

distance from the road, and separated from it by a wall, and a terrace of some

feet in extent. On the wall are commonly placed many vases of antique

forms, in which flowers, aloes, and young orange-trees are growing. The

house itself is completely covered with vines...... Before these houses we saw

groups of peasant females dressed in white linen, silk corsets, and straw-hats,

ornamented with flowers..... These houses being so near each other, it is

evident that the land annexed to them must be small, and that property, in

these valleys, must be very much divided; the extent of these domains being

from three to ten acres. The land lies round the houses, and is divided into

fields by small canals, or rows of trees, some of which are mulberry-trees, but

the greatest number poplars, the leaves of which are eaten by the cattle. Each

tree supports a vine..... These divisions, arrayed in oblong squares, are large

enough to be cultivated by a plough without wheels, and a pair of oxen.There is a pair of oxen between ten or twelve of the farmers; they employ

them successively in the cultivation of all the farms..... Almost every farm

maintains a well-looking horse, which goes in a small two-wheeled cart,

neatly made, and painted red; they serve for all the purposes of draught for

the farm, and also to convey the farmer’s daughters to mass and to balls.

Thus, on holidays, hundreds of these little carts are seen flying in all

directions, Carrying the young women, decorated with flowers and ribbons.”

              This is not a picture of poverty; and so far as agriculture is

concerned, it effectually redeems metayer cultivation, as existing in these

countries, from the reproaches of English writers; but with respect to the

condition of the cultivators, Châteauvieux’s testimony is, in some points, not
                      133
so favourable. “It is neither the natural fertility of the soil, nor the

abundance which strikes the eye of the traveller, which constitute the well-

being of its inhabitants. It is the number of individuals among whom the total

produce is divided, which fixes the portion that each is enabled to enjoy. Here

it is very small. I have thus far, indeed, exhibited a delightful country, well

watered, fertile, and covered with a perpetual vegetation; I have shown it

divided into countless enclosures, which, like so many beds in a garden,

display a thousand varying productions; I have shown, that to all these

enclosures are attached well-built houses, clothed with vines, and decorated

with flowers; but, on entering them, we find a total want of all the

conveniences of life, a table more than frugal, and a general appearance of

privation.” Is not Châteauvieux here unconsciously contrasting the condition

of the metayers with that of the farmers of other countries, when the proper

standard with which to compare it is that of the acicultural day-labourers?

                                134
              Arthur Young says, “I was assured that these metayers are

(especially near florence) much at their ease; that on holidays they are

dressed remarkably well, and not without objects of luxury, as silver, gold,

and silk; and live well, on plenty of bread, wine, and legumes. In some

instances this may possibly be the case, but the general fact is contrary. It is

absurd to think that metayers, upon such a farm as is cultivated by a pair of

oxen, can live at their ease; and a clear proof of their poverty is this, that the

landlord, who provides half the live stock, is often obliged to lend the peasant

money to procure his half..... The metayers, not in the vicinity of the city, are

so poor, that landlords even lend them corn to eat: their food is black bread,

made of a mixture with vetches; and their drink is very little wine, mixedwith water, and called aquarolle; meat on Sundays only; their dress very

ordinary.” Mr. Jones admits the superior comfort of the metayers near

Florence, and attributes it partly to straw-platting, by which the women of the
                                                      135
peasantry can earn, according to Châteauvieux, from fifteen to twenty

pence a day. But even this fact tells in favour of the metayer system: for in

those parts of England in which either straw-platting or lace-making is

carried on by the women and children of the labouring class, as in

Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire, the condition of the class is not better,

but rather worse than elsewhere, the wages of agricultural labour being

depressed by a full equivalent.

              In spite of Châteauvieux’s statement respecting the poverty of the

metayers, his opinion, in respect to Italy at least, is given in favour of the
                      136
system. “It occupies and constantly interests the proprietors, which is never

the case with great proprietors who lease their estates at fixed rents. It

establishes a community of interests, and relations of kindness between the

proprietors and the metayers; a kindness which I have often witnessed, and

from which result great advantages in the moral condition of society. The

proprietor, under this system, always interested in the success of the crop

never refuses to make an advance upon it, which the land promises to repay

with interest. It is by these advances and by the hope thus inspired, that the

rich proprietors of land have cadually perfected the whole rural economy of

Italy. It is to them that it owes the numerous systems of irrigation which

water its soil, as also the establishment of the terrace culture on the hills:

gradual but permanent improvements, which common peasants, for want of

means, could never have affected, and which could never have been

accomplished by the farmers, nor by the ceat proprietors who let their estates

at fixed rents, because they are not sufficiently interested. Thus the interested

system forms of itself that alliance between the rich proprietor, whose means

provide for the improvement of the culture, and the metayer whose care and

labour are directed, by a common interest, to make the most of these

advances.”

              But the testimony most favourable to the system is that of Sismondi,

which has the advantage of being specific, and from accurate knowledge; his

information being not that of a traveller, but of a resident proprietor,

intimately acquainted with rural life. His statements apply to Tuscany

generally, and more particularly to the Val di Nievole, in which his ownproperty lay, and which is not within the supposed privileged circle

immediately round Florence. It is one of the districts in which the size of

farms appears to be the smallest. The following is his description of the
                                                                    137
dwellings and mode of life of the metayers of that district.

              “Cette maison, bâtie en bonnes murailles à chaux et à ciment, a

toujours au moins un étage, quelquefois deux, au-dessus du rez-dechaussée.

Le plus souvent on trouve à ce rez-dechaussée la cuisine, une étable pour

deux bêtes à corne, et le magasin, qui prend son nom, tinaia, des grandes

cuves (tini) où l’on fait fermenter le vin, sans le soumettre au pressoir: c’est

là encore que le métayer enferme sous clé ses tonneaux, son huile, et son blé.

Presque toujours il possède encore un hangar appuyé contre la maison, pour

qu’il puisse y travailler à couvert à raccommoder ses outils, ou à hacher le

fourrage pour son bétail. Au premier et au second étage sont deux, trois, et

souvent quatre chambres à lit.... La plus spacieuse et la mieux aérée de ces

chambres est en général destinée par le métayer, pendant les mois de Mai et

de Juin, à l’éducation des vers à soie: de grands coffres pour enfermer les

habits et le linge, et quelques chaises de bois, sont les principaux meubles de

ces chambres; mais une nouvelle épouse y apporte toujours sa commode de

bois de noyer. Les lits sont sans rideaux, sans tour de lit; mais sur chacun,

outre un bon garde-paille rempli de la paille élastique du blé de Turquie, On

voit un ou deux matelas en laine, ou, chez les plus pauvres, en étoupe, une

bonne couverture piquée, des draps de forte toile de chanvre, et sur le

meilleur lit de la famille, un tapis de bourre de soie qu’on étale les jours de

fête. Il n’y a de cheminée qu’à la cuisine; dans la même pièce on trouve

toujours la grande table de bois où dîne la famille, avec ses bancs; le grand

coffre, qui sert en même temps d’armoire pour conserver le pain et les

provisions, et de pétrin; un assortiment assez complet et fort peu coûteux de

pots, de plats et d’assiettes en terre cuite; une ou deux lampes de laiton, un

poids à la romaine, et au moins deux cruches en cuivre rouge pour puiser et

pour conserver l’eau. Tout le linge et tous les habits de travail de la famille

ont été filés par les femmes de la maison. Ces habits, tant pour les hommes

que pour les femmes, sont de l’étoffe qu’ils nomment mezza lana si elle est

épaisse, mola si elle est légere. La trame est un gros fil ou de chanvre ou

d’étoupe, le remplissage est de laine ou de coton; elle est teinte par les mêmes

paysannes qui l’ont filée. On se figurerait difficilement combien, par un

travail assidu, les paysannes savent accumuler et de toile et de mezza lana;

combien de draps se trouvent au dépôt commun: comhien chaque membre dela famille a de chemises, de vestes, de pantalons, de jupons, et de robes. Pour

le faire comprendre, nous joignons en note une partie de l’inventaire de la

famille de paysans que nous connaissons le mieux; elle n’est ni parmi les plus

pauvres ni parmi les plus riches, et elle vit heureuse par son travail sur la
                                                            138
moitié des récoltes de moins de dix arpens de terre.  Cette épouse avait eu

50 écus de dot, dont 20 payés comptant, et le reste à terme, à 2 écus par

année. L’écu de Toscane vaut 6 francs. La dot la plus commune pour les

paysannes, dans le reste de la Toscane où les métairies sont plus grandes, est

de 100 écus, 600 francs.”

              Is this poverty, or consistent with poverty? When a common, M. de

Sismondi even says the common, marriage portion of a metayer’s daughter is

24l. English money, equivalent to at least 50l. in Italy and in that rank of life;

when one whose dowry is only half that amount, has the wardrobe described,

which is represented by Sismondi as a fair average; the class must be fully

comparable, in general condition, to a large proportion even of capitalist

farmers in other countries; and incomparably above the daylabourers of any

country, except a new colony, or the United States. Very little can be

inferred, against such evidence, from a traveller’s impression of the poor

quality of their food. Its unexpensive character may be rather the effect of

economy than of necessity. Costly feeding is not the favourite luxury of a

southern people; their diet in all classes is principally vegetable, and no

peasantry on the Continent has the superstition of the English labourer

respecting white bread. But the nourishment of the Tuscan peasant, according

to Sismondi, “is wholesome and various: its basis is an excellent wheaten

bread, brown, but pure from bran and from all mixture.” “Dans la mauvaise

saison, il ne fait que deux repas par. jour. à dix heures du matin il mange sa

pollenta, à l’entrée de la nuit il mange la soupe, puis du pain avec quelque

assaisonnement (companatico). En été il fait trois repas, à huit heures, à une

heure, et au soir, mais il n’allume de feu qu’une seule fois par jour, pour son

diner, qui se compose de soupe, puis d’un plat ou de viande salée ou de

poisson sec, ou de haricots, ou d’herbages, qu’il mange avec du pain. La

viande salée n’entre que pour une quantité bien minime dans cet ordinaire,

car il estime que quarante livres de porc salé par individu suffisent

amplement à sa provision de l’année; il en met deux fois par semaine un petit

morceau dans son potage. Le dimanche il a toujours sur sa table un plat de

viande fraiche, mais un morceau qui ne pèse qu’une livre ou une livre et

demie suffit à toute la famille, quelque nombreuse qu’elle soit. Il ne fautpoint oublier que le paysan Toscan récolte en général de l’huile d’olive pour

son usage: il s’en sert, non seulement pour s’éclairer, mais pour assaisonner

tous les végétaux qu’il apprête pour sa table, et qui deviennent ainsi bien plus

savoureux et plus nutritifs. A déjeuner il mange du pain, et quelquefois du

fromage et des fruits; à souper, du pain et de la salade. Sa boisson se compose

du vin inférieur du pays, et de la vinelle ou piquette fait d’eau fermentée sur

le marc du raisin. Il réserve cependant toujours quelque peu de son meilleur

vin pour le jour où il battra son grain, et pour quelques fêtes qui se célébrent

en famille. Il estime à dix barils de vinelle par année (environ cinquante

bouteilles) et à cinq sacs de froment (environ mille livres de pain) la portion

requise pour un homme fait.”

              The remarks of Sismondi on the moral influences of this state of

society are not less worthy of attention. The rights and obligations of the

metayer being fixed by usage, and all taxes and rates heing paid by the

proprietor, “le métayer a les avantages de la propriété sans l’inconvénient de

la défendre. C’est au propriétaire qu’avec la terre appartient la guerre: pour

lui il vit en paix avec tous ses voisins; il n’a à leur égard aucun motif de

rivalité ou de défiance; il conserve la bonne harmonie avec eux, comme avec

son maitre, avec le fisc et avec l’église: il vend peu, il achète peu, il touche

peu d’argent, mais personne ne lui en demande. On a souvent parlé du

caractère doux et bienveillant des Toscans, mais on n’a point assez remarqué

la cause qui a le plus contribué à préserver cette douceur; c’est celle qui a

soustrait tous les agriculteurs, formant plus des trois quarts de la population, à

presque toute occasion de querelle.” The fixity of tenure which the metayer,

so long as he fulfils his known obligations, possesses by usage, though not by

law, gives him the local attachments, and almost the strong sense of personal

interest, characteristic of a proprietor. “Le métayer vit sur sa métairie comme

sur son héritage, l’aimant d’affection, travaillant à la bonifier sans cesse, se

confiant dans l’avenir, et comptant bien que ses champs seront travaillés

après lui par ses enfans et les enfans de ses enfans. En effet, le plus grand

nomhre des métayers vivent de génération en génération sur la même terre;

ils la connaissent en détail avec une précision que le sentiment seul de la

propriété peut donner... Les champs élevés en terrasses les uns au-dessus des

autres n’ont souvent pas plus de quatre pieds de largeur, mais il n’y en a pas

un dont le métayer n’ait étudié en quelque sorte le caractère. Celui-ci est sec,

celui-là froid et humide; ici la terre est profonde, là ce n’est qu’une croûte qui

couvre à peine le roc; le froment prospère mieux sur l’un, le seigle sur i’autre;ici ce serait peine perdue de semer du blé de Turquie, ailleurs la terre se

refuse aux fèves et aux lupins, plus loin le lin viendra à merveille, et le bord

de ce ruisseau sera propre au chanvre: ainsi l’on apprend du métayer, avec

étonnement, que dans une espace de dix arpens, le sol, les aspects, et

l’inclinaison du terrain, présentent plus de variété qu’un riche fermier n’en

sait en général distinguer dans une ferme de cinq cents acres d’étendue. C’est

que le dernier sent qu’il n’est là que de passage, que de plus il doit se

conduire par des règles générales, et negliger les détails. Mais le métayer,

avec l’expérience du passé, a senti son intelligence éveillée par l’intérêt et

l’affection pour devenir le meilleur des observateurs, et avec tout l’avenir

devant lui, il ne songe pas à lui seulement, mais à ses enfans et à ses petits

enfans. Aussi lorsqu’il plante l’olivier, arbre séculaire, et qu’il ménage au

fond du creux qu’il fait pour lui un écoulement aux eaux qui pourraient lui
                                                                                      139
nuire, il étudie toutes les couches de terrain qu’il est appelé à défoncer.” 

              4. I do not offer these quotations as evidence of the intrinsic

excellence of the metayer system; but they surely suffice to prove that neither

“land miserably cultivated” nor a people in “the most abject poverty” have

any necessary connexion with it, and that the unmeasured vituperation

lavished upon the system by English writers, is grounded on an extremely

narrow view of the subject. I look upon the rural economy of italy as simply

so much additional evidence in favour of small occupations with permanent

tenure. it is an example of what can he accomplished by those two elements,

even under the disadvantage of the peculiar nature of the metayer contract, in

which the motives to exertion on the part of the tenant are only half as strong

as if he farmed the land on the same footing of perpetuity at a money-rent,

either fixed, or varying according to some rule which would leave to the

tenant the whole benefit of his own exertions. The metayer tenure is not one

which we should he anxious to introduce where the exigencies of society had

not naturally given birth to it; but neither ought we to be eager to abolish it on

a mere à priori view of its disadvantages. If the system in Tuscany works as

well in practice as it is represented to do, with every appearance of minute

knowledge, by so competent an authority as Sismondi; if the mode of living

of the people, and the size of farms, have for ages maintained and still
                      140
maintain themselves such as they are said to be by him, it were to be

recetted that a state of rural well-being so much beyond what is realized in

most European countries, should be put to hazard by an attempt to introduce,

under the guise of agricultural improvement, a system of money-rents andcapitalist farmers. Even where the metayers are poor, and the subdivision

great, it is not to be assumed as of course, that the change would be for the

better. The enlargement of farms, and the introduction of what are called

improvements, usually diminish the number of labourers employed on the

land; and unless the growth of capital in trade and manufactures affords an

opening for the displaced population, or unless there are reclaimable wastes

on which they can be located, competition will so reduce wages, that they

will probably be worse off as day-labourers than they were as metayers.

              Mr. Jones very properly objects against the French Economists of

the last century, that in pursuing their favourite object of introducing

moneyrents, they turned their minds solely to putting farmers in the place of

metayers, instead of transforming the existing metayers into farmers; which,

as he justly renmarks, can scarcely be effected, unless, to enable the metayers

to save and become owners of stock, the proprietors submit for a considerable

time to a diminution of income, instead of expecting an increase of it, which

has generally been their immediate motive for making the attempt. if this

transformation were effected, and no other change made in the metayer’s

condition; if, preserving all the other rights which usage insures to him, he

merely got rid of the landlord’s claim to half the produce, paying in lieu of it

a moderate fixed rent; he would be so far in a better position than at present,

as the whole, instead of only half the fruits of any improvement he made,

would now belong to himself; but even so, the benefit would not be without

alloy. for a metayer, though not himself a capitalist, has a capitalist for his

partner, and has the use, in Italy at least, of a considerable capital, as is

proved by the excellence of the farm buildings: and it is not probable that the

landowners would any longer consent to peril their moveable property on the

hazards of aagrcultural enterprise, when assured of a fixed money income

without it. Thus would the question stand, even if the change left undisturbed

the metayer’s virtual fixity of tenure, and converted him, in fact, into a

peasant proprietor at a quitrent. But if we suppose him converted into a mere

tenant, displaceable at the landlord’s will, and liable to have his rent raised by

competition to any amount which any unfortunate being in search of

subsistence can be found to offer or promise for it; he would lose all the

features in his condition which preserve it from being deteriorated; he would

be cast down from his present position of a kind of half proprietor of the land,

and would sink into a cottier tenant.        106
               In France before the Revolution, according to Arthur Young (i.

403) there was great local diversity in this respect. In Champagne “the

landlord commonly finds half the cattle and half the seed, and the metayer,

labour, implements, and taxes; but in some districts the landlord bears a share

of these. In Roussillon, the landlord pays half the taxes; and in Guienne, from

Auch to Fleuran, many landlords pay all. Near Aguillon, on the Garonne, the

metayers furnish half the cattle. At Nangis, in the Isle of France, I met with

an agreement for the landlord to furnish live stock, implements, harness, and

taxes; the metayer found labour and his own capitation tax: the landlord

repaired the house and gates; the metayer the windows: the landlord provided

seed the first year, the metayer the last; in the intervening years they supply

half and half. In the Bourbonnois the landlord finds all sorts of live stock, yet

the metayer sells, changes, and buys at his will; the steward keeping an

account of these mutations, for the landlord has half the product of sales, and

pays half the purchases.” In Piedmont, he says, “the landlord commonly pays

the taxes and repairs the buildings, and the tenant provides cattle,

implements, and seed.” (II. 151)

        107
               Etydes sur l’Economie Politiqtue, 6me essai: De la Condition des

Cultivateurs en Toscane.

        108
               Letters from Italy. I quote from Dr. Rigby’s translation (p. 22).

        109
               This virtual fixity of tenure is not however universal even in Italy;

and it is absence that Sismondi attributes the inferior condition of the

metayers in to its some provinces of Naples, in Lucca, and in the Riviera of

Genoa; where the landlords obtain a larger (though still a fixed) share of the

produce. In those countries the cultivation is splendid, but the people

wretchedly poor. “The same misfortune would probably have befallen the

people of Tuscany if public opinion did not protect the cultivator; but a

proprietor would not dare to impose condiditions unusual in the country, and

even in changing one metayer for another he alters nothing in the terms of the

engagement.” Nouveaux Principes, liv. iii. ch. 5.

        110
               M. Bastiat affirms that even in France, incontestably the least

favourable example of the metayer system, its effect in repressing population

is conspicuous.

              Un fait bien constate, c’est que la tendance a une multiplication

desordonnee se manifeste principalement au sein de cette classe d’hommesqui vit de salaires. Cette prevoyance qui retarde les mariages a sur elle peu

d’empire, parce que les maux qui resultent de l’exces de concurrence ne lui

apparaissent que tres-confusement, et dans un lointain en apparence peu

redoutable. C’est donc la circonstance la plus favorable pour un pays d’etre

organise de maniere a exclure le salariat. Dans les pays de metairies, les

mariages sont determines principalement par les besoins de la culture; ils se

multiplient quand, par quelque circonstance, les metairies offrent des vides

nuisibles aux travaux; ils se ralentissent quand les places sont remplies. Ici,

un etat de choses facile a constater, savoir, le rapport entre l’etendue du

domaine et le nombre des bras, opere comme la prevoyance et plus surement

qu’elle. Aussi voyons-nous que si aucune circonstance n’intervient pour

ouvrir des debouches a une population surnumeraire, elle demeure

stationnaire. Nos departements meridionaux en sont la preuve.” —

Considerations sur le Metayage, Journal des Economistes for February 1846.

        111
               Wealth of Nations, book iii. ch. 2.

        112
               Travels, vol. i. pp. 404–5.

        113
               Ibid. ii. 151–3.

        114
               Ibid. 217.

        115
               Principles of Political Economy, 3rd ed. p. 471.

        116
               Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, pp. 102–4.

        117
               M. de Tracy is partially an exception, inasmuch as his experience

reaches lower dowvn than the revolutionary period; but he admits (as Mr.

Jones has himself stated in another place) that he is acquainted only with a

limited district, of great subdivision and unfertile soil.

              M. Passy is of opinion, that a French peasantry must be in indigence

and the country badly cultivated on a metayer system, because the proportion

of the produce claimable by the landlord is too high; it being only in more

favourable climates that any land, not of the most exuberant fertility, can pay

half its gross produce in rent, and leave enough to peasant farmers to enable

them to grow successfully the more expensive and valuable products of

agriculture. (Systemes de Culture, p. 35) This is an objection only to a

particular numerical proportion, which is indeed the common one, but is not

essential to the system.        118
               See the “Memoire sur la Surcharge des Impositions qu’eprouvait

la Generalite de Limoges, adresse au Conseil d’Etat en 1766,” pp. 260–304 of

the fourth volume of Turgot’s Works. The occasional engagements of

landlords (as mentioned by Arthur Young) to pay a part of the taxes, were

according to Turgot, of recent origin, under the compulsion of actual

necessity. “Le proprietaire ne s’y prete qu’autant qu’il ne peut trouver de

metayer autrement; ainsi, meme dans ce cas-la, le metayer est toujours reduit

a ce qu’il faut precisement pour ne pas mourir de faim.” (p. 275)

        119
               Vol. i. p. 404.

        120
               letters from Italy, translated by Rigby, p. 16

        121
               Ibid. pp. 19, 20.

        122
               Ibid. pp. 24–31.

        123
               Pp. 78–9.

        124
               Pp. 73–6.

        125
               Travels, vol ii. p. 156.

        126
               Letters from Italy, p. 75.

        127
               Ibid, pp. 295–6.

        128
               From his Sixth Essay, formerly refered to.

        129
               “Inventaire du trousseau de Jeanne, fille de Valene Papini, a son

mariage avec Giovacchino Landi, le 29 Avril 1835, a Porta Vecchia, pre

Pescia:

              “28 chemises, 3 robes de bourre de soie en couleur, 4 robes de

fleuret de soie en couleur, 7 robes d’indienne ou toile de coton, 2 robes de

travail d’hiver (mezza lana), 3 robes et jupons de travail d’ete (mola), 3jupes

blanches, 5 tabliers de toile peinte, 1 tablier de soie noir, 1 tablier de merinos

noir, 9 tabliers de travail (mola) en couleur, 4 mouchoirs blancs, 8 mouchoirs

en couleur, 3 mouchoirs de soie, 2 voiles brodes et 1 voile de tulle, 3 essuie-

mains, 14 paires de bas, 2 chapeaux, l’un de feutre, l’autre de paille fine: 2

camees d’or, 2 boucles d’oreilles en or, 1 chapelet avec deux piastres

romaines, 1 collier de corail avec sa croix d’or... Toutes les epouses plus

riches ont de plus la veste di seta, la grande robe de toilette, de soie, qu’elles

ne portent que quatre ou cinq fois dans leur vie.              “Les hommes n’ont point de trousseaux; l’epoux en se mariant

n’avait que 14 chemises, et la reste en proportion. Il n’a encoure a present

que 13 paires de draps, tandis que dans la famille de sa femme il y en a 30

paires.”

        130
               Of the intelligence of this interesting people, M. de Sismondi

speaks in the most favourable terms. Few of them can read; but there is often

one member of the family destined for the priesthood, who reads to them on

winter evening. Their language differs little from the purest Italian. The taste

for improvisaion in verse is general. “Les paysans du val de Nievole

frequentant le spectacle les jours de fete, en ete, de neuf a onze heures du

soir: leur admission ne leur coute guere que cinq sols de France. Alfieri est

leur auteur de prediliction; toute l’histoire des Atrides est familiere a ces

hommes que ne savent pas lire, et qui vont demander a ce poete austere un

delassement de leurs rudes traveaux.” Unlike most rustics, they find pleasure

in the beauty of the country. “Dans les collines du val de Nievole on trouve

devant chaque maison, l’aire pour battre le ble, qui a rarement plus de vingt-

cinq a trente toises carrees, c’est le plus souvent le seul espace de niveau

qu’on recontre dans toute le metarie. En meme temps c’est une terrasse qui

domine les plaines et al vallee, et d’ou la vue s’etend sur un pays ravissant.

Presque jamais je ne m’y suis arrete pour l’admirer, sans que le metayer soit

venu jouir de mon admiration, et m’indiquer du doigt les beautes qu’il croyait

pouvoir m’avoir echappe.”

        131
               “On ne voit jamais,” says Sismondi, “une famille de metayers

proposer a son maitre de partager sa metairie, a moins que le travail ne soit

reellement superieur a ses forces, et qu’elle ne sente la certitude de conserver

les memes jouissances sur un moindre espace de terrain. On ne voit jamais

dans une famille plusieurs fils se marier en meme temps,et former autant de

menages nouveaux; un seul prend une femme et se charge des soins du

menage; aucun de ses freres ne se marie, a moins que lui-meme n’ait pas

d’enfans, ou que l’on n’offre a cet autre frere une nouvelle metaire.” —

Nouveaux Principes, liv, iii. chap. 5.

 

 

                               Chapter 9 – Of Cottiers

 

 

              1. By the general appellation of cottier tenure I shall designate all

cases without exception in which the labourer makes his contract for land

without the intervention of a capitalist farmer, and in which the conditions of

the contract, especially the amount of rent, are determined not by custom but

by competition. The principal European example of this tenure is Ireland, and

it is from that country that the term cottier is derived.* By far the greater part

of the agricultural population of Ireland might until very lately have been said

to be cottier-tenants; except so far as the Ulster tenant-right constituted an

exception. There was, indeed, a numerous class of labourers who (we may

presume through the refusal either of proprietors or of tenants in possession

to permit any further subdivision) had been unable to obtain even the smallest

patch of land as permanent tenants. But, from the deficiency of capital, the

custom of paying wages in land was so universal, that even those who

worked as casual labourers for the cottiers or for such larger farmers as were

found in the country, were usually paid not in money, but by permission to

cultivate for the season a piece of ground, which was generally delivered to

them by the farmer ready manured, and was known by the name of conacre.

For this they agreed to pay a money rent, often of several pounds an acre, but

no money actually passed, the debt being worked out in labour, at a money

valuation.

              The produce, on the cottier system, being divided into two portions,

rent, and the remuneration of the labourer; the one is evidently determined by

the other. The labourer has whatever the landlord does not take: the condition

of the labourer depends on the amount of rent. But rent, being regulated by

competition, depends upon the relation between the demand for land, and the

supply of it. The demand for land depends on the number of competitors, and

the competitors are the whole rural population. The effect, therefore, of this

tenure, is to bring the principle of population to act directly on the land, and

not, as in England, on capital. Rent, in this state of things, depends on the

proportion between population and land. As the land is a fixed quantity,

while population has an unlimited power of increase; unless something

checks that increase, the competition for land soon forces up rent to thehighest point consistent with keeping the population alive. The effects,

therefore, of cottier tenure depend on the extent to which the capacity of

population to increase is controlled, either by custom, by individual prudence,

or by starvation and disease.

              It would be an exaggeration to affirm, that cottier tenancy is

absolutely incompatible with a prosperous condition of the labouring class. If

we could suppose it to exist among a people to whom a high standard of

comfort was habitual; whose requirements were such, that they would not

offer a higher rent for land than would leave them an ample subsistence, and

whose moderate increase of numbers left no unemployed population to force

up rents by competition, save when the increasing produce of the land from

increase of skill would enable a higher rent to be paid without inconvenience;

the cultivating class might be as well remunerated, might have as large a

share of the necessaries and comforts of life, on this system of tenure as on

any other. They would not, however, while their rents were arbitrary, enjoy

any of the peculiar advantages which metayers on the Tuscan system derive

from their connexion with the land. They would neither have the use of a

capital belonging to their landlords, nor would the want of this be made up by

the intense motives to bodily and mental exertion which act upon the peasant

who has a permanent tenure. On the contrary, any increased value given to

the land by the exertions of the tenant, would have no effect but to raise the

rent against himself, either the next year, or at farthest when his lease expired.

The landlords might have justice or good sense enough not to avail of the

advantage which competition would give them; and different landlords would

do so in different degrees. But it is never safe to expect that a class or body of

men will act in opposition to their immediate pecuniary interest; and even a

doubt on the subject would be almost as fatal as a certainty, for when a

person is considering whether or not to undergo a present exertion or

sacrifice for a comparatively remote future, the scale is turned by a very small

probability that the fruits of the exertion or of the sacrifice will he taken away

from him. The only safeguard against these uncertainties would be the

growth of a custom, insuring a permanence of tenure in the same occupant,

without liability to any other increase of rent than might happen to be

sanctioned by the general sentiments of the community. The Ulster tenant-

right is such a custom. The very considerable sums which outgoing tenants
                                                                      141
obtain from their successors, for the goodwill of their farms, in the first

place actually limit the competition for land to persons who have such sumsto offer: while the same fact also proves that full advantage is not taken by

the landlord of even that more limited competition, since the landlord’s rent

does not amount to the whole of what the incoming tenant not only offers but

actually pays. He does so in the full confidence that the rent will not be

raised; and for this he has the guarantee of a custom, not recognised by law,

but deriving its binding force from another sanction, perfectly well
                        142
understood in Ireland. Without one or other of these supports, a custom

limiting the rent of land is not likely to grow up in any progressive

community. If wealth and population were stationary, rent also would

generally be stationary, and after remaining a long time unaltered, would

probably come to be considered unalterable. But all progress in wealth and

population tends to a rise of rents. Under a metayer system there is an

established mode in which the owner of land is sure of participating in the

increased produce drawn from it. But on the cottier system he can only do so

by a readjustment of the contract, while that readjustment, in a progressive

community, would almost always be to his advantage. His interest, therefore,

is decidedly opposed to the growth of any custom commuting rent into a

fixed demand.

              2. Where the amount of rent is not limited, either by law or custom, a

cottier system has the disadvantages of the worst metayer system, with

scarcely any of the advantages by which, in the best forms of that tenure, they

are compensated. It is scarcely possible that cottier agriculture should be

other than miserable. There is not the same necessity that the condition of the

cultivators should be so. Since by a sufficient restraint on population

competition for land could be kept down, and extreme poverty prevented;

habits of prudence and a high standard of comfort, once established, would

have a fair chance of maintaining themselves: though even in these

favourable circumstances the motives to prudence would be considerably

weaker than in the case of metayers, protected by custom (like those of

Tuscany) from being deprived of their farms: since a metayer family, thus

protected, could not be impoverished by any other improvident multiplication

than their own, but a cottier family, however prudent and self-restraining,

may have the rent raised against it by the consequences of the multiplication

of other families. Any protection to the cottiers against this evil could only be

derived from a salutary sentiment of duty or dignity, pervading the class. this

source, however, they might derive considerable protection. If the habitual

standard of requirement among the class were high, a young man might notchoose to offer a rent which would leave him in a worse condition than the

preceding tenant; or it might be the general custom, as it actually is in some

countries, not to marry until a farm is vacant.

              But it is not where a high standard of comfort has rooted itself in the

habits of the labouring class, that we are ever called upon to consider the

effects of a cottier system. That system is found only where the habitual

requirements of the rural labourers are the lowest possible; where as long as

they are not actually staring, they will multiply: and population is only

checked by the diseases, and the shortness of life, consequent on

insufficiency of merely physical necessaries. This was the state of the largest

portion of the Irish peasantry. When a people have sunk into this state, and

still more when they have been in it from time immemorial, the cottier system

is an almost insuperable obstacle to their emerging from it. When the habits

of the people are such that their increase is never checked hut by the

impossibility of obtaining a bare support, and when this support can only be

obtained from land, all stipulations and agreements respecting amount of rent

are merely nominal; the competition for land makes the tenants undertake to

pay more than it is possible they should pay, and when they have paid all

they can, more almost always remains due.

              “As it may fairly be said of the Irish peasantry,” said Mr. Revans,
                                                                    143
the Secretary to the Irish Poor Law Enquiry Commission, “that every

family which has not sufficient land to yield its food has one or more of its

members supported by begging, it will easily be conceived that every

endeavour is made by the peasantry to obtain small holdings, and that they

are not influenced in their biddings by the fertility of the land, or by their

ability to pay the rent, but solely by the offer which is most likely to gain

them possession. The rents which they promise, they are almost invariably

incapable of paying; and consequently they become indebted to those under

whom they hold, almost as soon as they take possession. They give up, in the

shape of rent, the whole produce of the land with the exception of a

sufficiency of potatoes for a subsistence; but as this is rarely equal to the

promised rent, they constantly have against them an increasing balance. In

some cases, the largest quantity of produce which their holdings ever yielded,

or which, under their system of tillage, they could in the most favourable

seasons be made to yield, would not be equal to the rent bid; consequently, if

the peasant fulfilled his engagement with his landlord, which he is rarely ableto accomplish, he would till the ground for nothing, and give his landlord a

premium for being allowed to till it. On the seacoast, fishermen, and in the

northern counties those who have looms, frequently pay more in rent than the

market value of the whole produce of the land they hold. It might be

supposed that they would be better without land under such circumstances.

But fishing might fail during a week or two, and so might the demand for the

produce of the loom, when, did they not possess the land upon which their

food is grown, they might starve. The full amount of the rent bid, however, is

rarely paid. The peasant remains constantly in debt to his landlord; his

miserable possessions-the wretched clothing of himself and of his family, the

two or three stools, and the few pieces of crockery, which his wretched hovel

contains, would not, if sold, liquidate the standing and generally

accumulating debt. The peasantry are mostly a year in arrear, and their excuse

for not paying more is destitution. Should the produce of the holding, in any

year, be more than usually abundant, or should the peasant by any accident

become possessed of any property, his comforts cannot be increased; he

cannot indulge in better food, nor in a greater quantity of it. His furniture

cannot be increased, neither can his wife or children be better clothed. The

acquisition must go to the person under whom he holds. The accidental

addition will enable him to reduce his arrear of rent, and thus to defer

ejectment. But this must be the bound of his expectation.”

              As an extreme instance of the intensity of competition for land, and

of the monstrous height to which it occasionally forced up the nominal rent;
                                                                                144
we may cite from the evidence taken by Lord Devon’s Commission, a fact

attested by Mr Hurly, Clerk of the Crown for Kerry. “I have known a tenant

bid for a farm that I was perfectly well acquainted with, worth 50l. a year: I

saw the competition get up to such an extent, that he was declared the tenant

at 450l.”

              3. In such a condition, what can a tenant gain by any amount of

industry or prudence, and what lose by any recklessness? If the landlord at

any time exerted his full legal rights, the cottier would not be able even to

live. If by extra exertion he doubled the produce of his bit of land, or if he

prudently abstained from producing mouths to eat it up, his only gain would

be to have more left to pay to his landlord; while, if he had twenty children,

they would still be fed first, and the landlord could only take what was left.

Almost alone amongst mankind the cottier is in this condition, that he canscarcely be either better or worse off by any act of his own. If he were

industrious or prudent, nobody but his landlord would gain; if he is lazy or

intemperate, it is at his landlord’s expense. A situation more devoid of

motives to either labour or self-command, imagination itself cannot conceive.

The inducements of free human beings are taken away, and those of a slave

not substituted. He has nothing to hope, and nothing to fear, except being

dispossessed of his holding, and against this he protects himself by the ultima

ratio of a defensive civil war. Rockism and Whiteboyism were the

determination of a people who had nothing that could be called theirs but a

daily meal of the lowest description of food, not to submit to being deprived

of that for other people’s convenience.

              Is it not, then, a bitter satire on the mode in which opinions are

formed on the most important problems of human nature and life, to find

public instructors of the greatest pretension, imputing the backwardness of

Irish industry, and the want of energy of the Irish people in improving their

condition, to a peculiar indolence and insouciance in the Celtic race? Of all

vulgar modes of escaping from the consideration of the effect of social and

moral influences on the human mind, the most vulgar is that of attributing the

diversities of conduct and character to inherent natural differences. What race

would not be indolent and insouciant when things are so arranged, that they

derive no advantage from forethought or exertion? If such are the

arrangements in the midst of which they live and work, what wonder if the

listlessness and indifference so engendered are not shaken off the first

moment an opportunity offers when exertion would really be of use? It is

very natural that a pleasure-loving and sensitively organized people like the

Irish, should be less addicted to steady routine labour than the English,

because life has more excitements for them independent of it; but they are not

less fitted for it than their Celtic brethren the French, nor less so than the

Tuscans, or the ancient Greeks. An excitable organization is precisely that in

which, by adequate inducements, it is easiest to kindle a spirit of animated

exertion. It speaks nothing against the capacities of industry in human beings,

that they will not exert themselves without motive. No labourers work harder,

in England or America, than the Irish; but not under a cottier system.

              4. The multitudes who till the soil of India, are in a condition

sufficiently analogous to the cottier system, and at the same time sufficiently

different from it, to render the comparison of the two a source of someinstruction. In most parts of India there are, and perhaps have always been,

only two contracting parties, the landlord and the peasant: the landlord being

generally the sovereign, except where he has, by a special instrument,

conceded his rights to an individual, who becomes his representative. The

payments, however, of the peasants, or ryots as they are termed, have seldom

if ever been regulated, as in Ireland, by competition. Though the customs

locally obtaining were infinitely various, and though practically no custom

could be maintained against the sovereign’s will, there was always a rule of

some sort common to a neighbourhood; the collector did not make his

separate bargain with the peasant, but assessed each according to the rule

adopted for the rest. The idea was thus kept up of a right of property in the

tenant, or at all events, of a right to permanent possession; and the anomaly

arose of a fixity of tenure in the peasant-farmer, co-existing with an arbitrary

power of increasing the rent.

              When the Mogul government substituted itself throughout the

greater part of India for the Hindoo rulers, it proceeded on a different

principle. A minute survey was made of the land, and upon that survey an

assessment was founded, fixing the specific payment due to the government

from each field. if this assessment had never been exceeded, the ryots would

have been in the comparatively advantageous position of peasant-proprietors,

subject to a heavy, but a fixed quit-rent. The absence, however, of any real

protection against illegal extortions, rendered this improvement in their

condition rather nominal than real; and, except during the occasional accident

of a humane and vigorous local administrator, the exactions had no practical

limit but the inability of the ryot to pay more.

              It was to this state of things that the English rulers of India

succeeded; and they were, at an early period, struck with the importance of

putting an end to this arbitrary character of the land-revenue, and imposing a

fixed limit to the government demand. They did not attempt to go back to the

Mogul valuation. it has been in general the very rational practice of the

English Government in India, to pay little regard to what was laid down as

the theory of the native institutions, but to inquire into the rights which

existed and were respected in practice, and to protect and enlarge those. For a

long time, however, it blundered grievously about matters of fact, and grossly

misunderstood the usages and rights which it found existing. Its mistakes

arose from the inability of ordinary minds to imagine a state of socialrelations fundamentally different from those with which they are practically

familiar. England being accustomed to great estates and great landlords, the

English rulers took it for granted that india must possess the like; and looking

round for some set of people who might be taken for the objects of their

search, they pitched upon a sort of tax-gatherers called zemindars. “The
                                                            145
zemindar,” says the philosophical historian of India, “had some of the

attributes which belong to a landowner; he collected the rents of a particular

district, he governed the cultivators of that district, lived in comparative

splendour, and his son succeeded him when he died. The zemindars,

therefore, it was inferred without delay, were the proprietors of the soil, the

landed nobility and gentry of India. It was not considered that the zemindars,

though they collected the rents, did not keep them; but paid them all away

with a small deduction to the government. It was not considered that if they

governed the ryots, and in many respects exercised over them despotic

power, they did not govern them as tenants of theirs, holding their lands

either at will or by contract under them. The possession of the ryot was an

hereditary possession; from which it was unlawful for the zemindar to

displace him; for every farthing which the zemindar drew from the ryot, he

was bound to account; and it was only by fraud, if, out of all that he collected,

he retained an ana more than the small proportion which, as pay for

collection, he was permitted to receive.”

              “There was an opportunity in India,” continues the historian, “to

which the history of the world presents not a parallel. Next after the

sovereign, the immediate cultivators had, by far, the greatest portion of

interest in the soil. For the rights (such as they were) of the zemindars, a

complete compensation might have easily been made. The generous

resolution was adopted, of sacrificing to the improvement of the country, the

proprietary rights of the sovereign. The motives to improvement which

property gives, and of which the power was so justly appreciated, might have

been bestowed upon those upon whom they would have operated with a force

incomparably greater than that with which they could operate upon any other

class of men: they might have been bestowed upon those from whom alone,

in every country, the principal improvements in agriculture must be derived,

the immediate cultivators of the soil. And a measure worthy to be ranked

among the noblest that ever were taken for the improvement of any country,

might have helped to compensate the people of India for the miseries of that

misgovernment which they had so long endured. But the legislators wereEnglish aristocrats; and aristocratical prejudices prevailed.”

              The measure proved a total failure, as to the main effects which its

wellmeaning promoters expected from it. Unaccustomed to estimate the

mode in which the operation of any given institution is modified even by

such variety of circumstances as exists within a single kingdom, they battered

themselves that they had created, throughout the Bengal provinces, English

landlords, and it proved that they had only created irish ones. The new landed

aristocracy disappointed every expectation built upon them. They did nothing

for the improvement of their estates, but everything for their own ruin. The

same pains not being taken, as had been taken in Ireland, to enable landlords

to defy the consequences of their improvidence, nearly the whole land of

Bengal had to be sequestrated and sold, for debts or arrears of revenue, and in

one generation most of the ancient zemindars had ceased to exist. Other

families, mostly the descendants of Calcutta money dealers, or of native

officials who had enriched themselves under the British government, now

occupy their place; and live as useless drones on the soil which has been

given up to them. Whatever the government has sacrificed of its pecuniary

claims, for the creation of such a class, has at the best been wasted.

              In the parts of India into which the British rule has been more

recently introduced, the blunder has been avoided of endowing a useless

body of great landlords with gifts from the public revenue. In most parts of

the Madras and in part of the Bombay Presidency, the rent is paid directly to

the government by the immediate cultivator. In the North–Western Provinces,

the government makes its engagement with the village community

collectively, determining the share to be paid by each individual, but holding

them jointly responsible for each other’s default. But in the greater part of

India, the immediate cultivators have not obtained a perpetuity of tenure at a

fixed rent. The government manages the land on the principle on which a

good Irish landlord manages his estate: not putting it up to competition, not

asking the cultivators what they will promise to pay, but determining for

itself what they can afford to pay, and defining its demand accordingly. In

many districts a portion of the cultivators are considered as tenants of the

rest, the government making its demand from those only (often a numerous

body) who are looked upon as the successors of the original settlers or

conquerors of the village. Sometimes the rent is fixed only for one year,

sometimes for three or five; but the uniform tendency of present policy istowards long leases, extending, in the northern provinces of India, to a term

of thirty years. This arrangement has not existed for a sufficient time to have

shown by experience, how far the motives to improvement which the long

lease creates in the minds of the cultivators, fall short of the influence of a
                      146
perpetual settlement. But the two plans, of annual settlements and of short

leases, are irrevocably condemned. They can only be said to have succeeded,

in comparison with the unlimited oppression which existed before. They are

approved by nobody, and were never looked upon in any other light than as

temporary arrangements, to be abandoned when a more complete knowledge

of the capabilities of the count should afford data for something more

permanent.

        132
               “It is not uncommon for a tenant without a lease to sell the bare

privilege of occupancy or possession of his farm, without any visible sign of

improvement having been made by him, at from ten to sixteen, up to twenty

and even forty years’ purchase of the rent.” — (Digest of Evidence taken by

Lord Devon’s Commission, Introductory Chapter. the compiler adds, “the

comparative tranquillity of that district” (Ulster) “may perhaps be mainly

attributable to this fact.”

        133
               “It is in the great majority of cases not a reimbursement for outlay

incurred, or improvements effected on the land, but a mere life insurance or

purchase of immunity from outrage.” — (Digest, ut supra) “The present

tenant-right of Ulster” (the writer judiciously remarks) “is an embryo

copyhold.” “Even there, if the tenant-right be disregarded, and a tenant be

ejected without having received the price of his goodwill, outrages are

generally the consequence.” — (Ch. viii.) “The disorganized state of

Tipperary, and the agrarian combination thoughtout Ireland, are but a

methodized war to obtain the Ulster tenant-right.”

        134
               Evils of the State of Ireland, their Causes and their Remedy. Page

10. A pamphlet containing, among other things, an excellent digest and

selection of evidence from the mass collected by the Commission presided

over by Archbishop Whately.

        135
               Evidence, p. 851.

        136
               Mill’s History of British India, book vi, ch. 8.

        137
               Since this was written, the resolution has been adopted by theIndian government of converting the long leases of the northern provinces

into perpetual tenures at fixed rents.

 

 

             Chapter 10 – Means of Abolishing Cottier Tenancy

 

 

              1. When the first edition of this work was written and published, the

question, what is to be done with a cottier population, was to the English

Government the most urgent of practical questions. The majority of a

population of eight millions, having long grovelled in helpless inertness and

abject poverty under the cottier system, reduced by its operation to mere food

of the cheapest description, and to an incapacity of either doing or willing

anything for the improvement of their lot, had at last, by the failure of that

lowest quality of food, been plunged into a state in which the alternative

seemed to be either death, or to be permanently supported by other people, or

a radical change in the economical arrangements under which it had hitherto

been their misfortune to live. Such an emergency had compelled attention to

the subject from the legislature and from the nation, but it could hardly be

said with much result; for, the evil having originated in a system of land

tenancy which withdrew from the people every motive to industry or thrift

except the fear of starvation, the remedy provided by Parliament was to take

away even that, by conferring on them a legal claim to eleemosynary support:

while, towards correcting the cause of the mischief, nothing was done,

beyond vain complaints, though at the price to the national treasury of ten

millions sterling for the delay.

              “It is needless,” (I observed) “to expend any argument in proving

that the very foundation of the economical evils of Ireland is the cottier

system; that while peasant rents fixed by competition are the practice of the

country, to expect industry, useful activity, any restraint on population but

death, or any the smallest diminution of poverty, is to look for figs on thistles

and grapes on thorns. If our practical statesmen are not ripe for the

recognition of this fact; or if while they acknowledge it in theory, they have

not a sufficient feeling of its reality, to be capable of founding upon it any

course of conduct; there is still another, and a purely physical consideration,

from which they will find it impossible to escape. If the one crop on which

the people have hitherto supported themselves continues to be precarious,

either some new and great impulse must be given to agricultural skill and

industry, or the soil of Ireland can no longer feed anything like its presentpopulation. The whole produce of the western half of the island, leaving

nothing for rent, will not now keep permanently in existence the whole of its

people: and they will necessarily remain an annual charge on the taxation of

the empire, until they are reduced either by emigration or by starvation to a

number corresponding with the low state of their industry, or unless the

means are found of making that industry much more productive.”

              Since these words were written, events unforeseen by any one have

saved the English rulers of Ireland from the embarrassments which would

have been the just penalty of their indifference and want of foresight. Ireland,

under cottier agriculture, could no longer supply food to its population:

Parliament, by way of remedy, applied a stimulus to population, but none at

all to production; the help, however, which had not been provided for the

people of Ireland by political wisdom, came from an unexpected source. Self-

supporting emigration — the Wakefield system, brought into effect on the

voluntary principle and on a gigantic scale (the expenses of those who

followed being paid from the earnings of those who went before) has, for the

present, reduced the population down to the number for which the existing

agricultural system can find employment and support. The census of 1851,

compared with that of 1841, showed in round numbers a diminution of

population of a million and a half. The subsequent census (of 1861) shows a

further diminution of about half a million. The Irish having thus found the

way to that flourishing continent which for generations will be capable of

supporting in undiminished comfort the increase of the population of the

whole world; the peasantry of Ireland having learnt to fix their eyes on a

terrestrial paradise beyond the ocean, as a sure refuge both from the

oppression of the Saxon and from the tyranny of nature; there can be little

doubt that however much the employment for agricultural labour may

hereafter be diminished by the general introduction throughout Ireland of

English farming-or even if, like the county of Sutherland, all Ireland should

be turned into a grazing farm — the superseded people would migrate to

America with the same rapidity, and as free of cost to the nation, as the

million of Irish who went thither during the three years previous to 1851.

Those who think that the land of a country exists for the sake of a few

thousand landowners, and that as long as rents are paid, society and

government have fulfilled their function, may see in this consummation a

happy end to Irish difficulties.              But this is not a time, nor is the human mind now in a condition, in

which such insolent pretensions can be maintained. The land of Ireland, the

land of every country, belongs to the people of that country. The individuals

called landowners have no right, in morality and justice, to anything but the

rent, or compensation for its saleable value. With regard to the land itself, the

paramount consideration is, by what mode of appropriation and of cultivation

it can be made most useful to the collective body of its inhabitants. To the

owners of the rent it may be very convenient that the bulk of the inhabitants,

despairing of justice in the country where they and their ancestors have lived

and suffered, should seek on another continent that property in land which is

denied to them at home. But the legislature of the empire ought to regard with

other eyes the forced expatriation of millions of people. When the inhabitants

of a country quit the country en masse because its Government will not make

it a place fit for them to live in, the Government is judged and condemned.

There is no necessity for depriving the landlords of one farthing of the

pecuniary value of their legal rights; but justice requires that the actual

cultivators should be enabled to become in Ireland what they will become in

America-proprietors of the soil which they cultivate.

              Good policy requires it no less. Those who, knowing neither Ireland

nor any foreign country, take as their sole standard of social and economical

excellence English practice, propose as the single remedy for Irish

wretchedness, the transformation of the cottiers into hired labourers. But this

is rather a scheme for the improvement of Irish agriculture, than of the

condition of the Irish people. The status of a day-labourer has no charm for

infusing forethought, frugality, or self-restraint, into a people devoid of them.

If the Irish peasant could be universally changed into receivers of wages, the

old habits and mental characteristics of the people remaining, we should

merely see four or five millions of people living as day-labourers in the same

wretched manner in which as cottiers they lived before; equally passive in the

absence of every comfort, equally reckless in multiplication, and even,

perhaps, equally listless at their work; since they could not be dismissed in a

body, and if they could, dismissal would now be simply remanding them to

the poor-rate. Far other would be the effect of making them peasant

proprietors. A people who in industry and providence have everything to

learn — who are confessedly among the most backward of European

populations in the industrial virtues — require for their regeneration the most

powerful incitements by which those virtues can be stimulated: and there isno stimulus as yet comparable to property in land. A permanent interest in the

soil to those who till it, is almost a guarantee for the most unwearied

laboriousness: against over-population, thought not infallible, it is the best

preservative yet known, and where it failed, any other plan would probably

fail much more egregiously; the evil would be beyond the reach of merely

economic remedies.

              The case of Ireland is similar in its requirements to that of India. In

India, though great errors have from time to time been committed, no one

ever proposed, under the name of agricultural improvement, to eject the ryots

or peasant farmers from their possession; the improvement that has been

looked for, has been through making their tenure more secure to them, and

the sole difference of opinion is between those who contend for perpetuity,

and those who think that long leases will suffice. The same question exists as

to Ireland: and it would be idle to deny that long leases, under such landlords

as are sometimes to be found do effect wonders, even in Ireland. But then

they must be leases at a low rent. Long leases are in no way to be relied on

for getting rid of cottierism. During the existence of cottier tenancy, leases

have always been long; twenty-one years and three lives concurrent, was a

usual term. But the rent being fixed by competition, at a higher amount than

could be paid, so that the tenant neither had, nor could by any exertion

acquire, a beneficial interest in the land, the advantage of a lease was nearly

nominal. In India, the government, where it has not imprudently made over

its proprietary rights to the zemindars, is able to prevent this evil, because,

being itself the landlord, it can fix the rent according to its own judgment; but

under individual landlords, while rents are fixed by competition, and the

competitors are a peasantry struggling for subsistence, nominal rents are

inevitable, unless the population is so thin, that the competition itself is only

nominal. The majority of landlords will grasp at immediate money and

immediate power; and so long as they find cottiers eager to offer them

everything, it is useless to rely on them for tempering the vicious practice by

a considerate self-denial.

              A perpetuity is a stronger stimulus to improvement than a long lease:

not only because the longest lease, before coming to an end, passes through

all the varieties of short leases down to no lease at all; but for more

fundamental reasons. It is very shallow, even in pure economics, to take no

account of the influence of imagination: there is a virtue in “for ever” beyondthe longest term of years; even if the term is long enough to include children,

and all whom a person individually cares for, yet until he has reached that

high degree of mental cultivation at which the public good (which also

includes perpetuity) acquires a paramount ascendancy over his feelings and

desires, he will not exert himself with the same ardour to increase the value

of an estate, his interest in which diminishes in value every year. Besides,

while perpetual tenure is the general rule of landed property, as it is in all the

counties of Europe, a tenure for a limited period, however long, is sure to be

regarded as a something of inferior consideration and dignity, and inspires

less of ardour to obtain it, and of attachment to it when obtained. But where a

country is under cottier tenure, the question of perpetuity is quite secondary

to the more important point, a limitation of the rent. Rent paid by a capitalist

who farms for profit, and not for bread, may safely be abandoned to

competition; rent paid by labourers cannot, unless the labourers were in a

state of civilization and improvement which labourers have nowhere yet

reached, and cannot easily reach under such a tenure. Peasant rents ought

never to be arbitrary, never at the discretion of the landlord: either by custom

or law, it is imperatively necessary that they should be fixed; and where no

mutually advantageous custom, such as the metayer system of Tuscany, has

established itself, reason and experience recommend that they should be fixed

by authority: thus changing the rent into a quit-rent, and the farmer into a

peasant proprietor.

              For carrying this change into effect on a sufficiently large scale to

accomplish the complete abolition of cottier tenancy, the mode which most

obviously suggests itself is the direct one of doing the thing outright by Act

of Parliament; making the whole land of Ireland the property of the tenants,

subject to the rents now really paid (not the nominal rent), as a fixed rent

charge. This, under the name of “fixity of tenure,” was one of the demands of

the Repeal Association during the most successful period of their agitation;

and was better expressed by Mr. Conner, its earliest, most enthusiastic, and
                              147
most indefatigable apostle, by the words, “a valuation and a perpetuity.” In

such a measure there would not have been any injustice, provided the

landlords were compensated for the present value of the chances of increase

which they were prospectively required to forego. The rupture of existing

social relations would hardly have been more violent than that effected by the

ministers Stein and Hardenberg when, by a series of edicts, in the early part

of the present century, they revolutionized the state of landed property in thePrussian monarchy, and left their names to posterity among the greatest

benefactors of their country. To enlightened foreigners writing on Ireland,

Von Raumer and Gustave de Beaumont, a remedy of this sort seemed so

exactly and obviously what the disease required, that they had some difficulty

in comprehending how it was that the thing was not yet done.

              This, however, would have been, in the first place, a complete

expropriation of the higher classes of Ireland: which, if there is any truth in

the principles we have laid down, would be perfectly warrantable, but only if

it were the sole means of effecting a great public good. In the second place,

that there should be none but peasant proprietors, is in itself far from

desirable. Large farms, cultivated by large capital, and owned by persons of

the best education which the country can give, persons qualified by

instruction to appreciate scientific discoveries, and able to bear the delay and

risk of costly experiments, are an important part of a good agricultural

system. Many such landlords there are even in Ireland; and it would be a

public misfortune to drive them from their posts. A lar ge proportion also of

the present holdings are probably still too small to try the proprietary system

under the greatest advantages; nor are the tenants always the persons one

would desire to select as the first occupants of peasant-properties. There are

numbers of them on whom it would have a more beneficial effect to give

them the hope of acquiring a landed property by industry and frugality, than

the property itself in immediate possession.

              There are, however, much milder measures, not open to similar

objections, and which, if pushed to the utmost extent of which they are

susceptible, would realize in no inconsiderable degree the object sought. One

of them would be, to enact that whoever reclaims waste land becomes the

owner of it, at a fixed quit-rent equal to a moderate interest on its mere value

as waste. It would of course be a necessary part of this measure, to make

compulsory on landlords the surrender of waste lands (not of an ornamental

character) whenever required for reclamation. Another expedient, and one in

which individuals could co-operate, would be to buy as much as possible of

the land offered for sale, and sell it again in small portions as peasant-

properties. A Society for this purpose was at one time projected (though the

attempt to establish it proved unsuccessful) on the principles, so far as

applicable, of the Freehold Land Societies which have been so successfully

established in England, not primarily for agricultural, but for electoralpurposes.

              This is a mode in which private capital may be employed in

renovating the social and agricultural economy of ireland, not only without

sacrifice but with considerable profit to its owners. The remarkable success of

the Waste Land improvement Society, which proceeded on a plan far less

advantageous to the tenant, is an instance of what an Irish peasantry can be

stimulated to do, by a sufficient assurance that what they do will be for their

own advantage. it is not even indispensable to adopt perpetuity as the rule;

long leases at moderate rents, like those of the Waste Land Society, would

suffice, if a prospect were held out to the farmers of being allowed to

purchase their farms with the capital which they might acquire, as the

Society’s tenants were so rapidly acquiring under the influence of its
                    148
beneficent system. When the lands were sold, the funds of the association

would be liberated, and it might recommence operations in some other

quarter.

              2. Thus far I had written in 1856. Since that time the great crisis of

Irish industry has made further progress, and it is necessary to consider how

its present state affects the opinions, on prospects or on practical measures,

expressed in the previous part of this chapter.

              The principal change in the situation consists in the great diminution,

holding out a hope of the entire extinction, of cottier tenure. The enormous

decrease in the number of small holdings, and increase in those of a medium

size, attested by the statistical returns, sufficiently proves the general fact, and
                                                              149
all testimonies show that the tendency still continues. It is probable that the

repeal of the corn laws, necessitating a change in the exports of Ireland from

the products of tillage to those of pasturage, would of itself have sufficed to

bring about this revolution in tenure. A grazing farm can only be managed by

a capitalist farmer, or by the landlord. But a change involving so great a

displacement of the population, has been immensely facilitated and made

more rapid by the vast emigration, as well as by that greatest boon ever

conferred on Ireland by any Government, the Encumbered Estates Act; the

best provisions of which have since, through the Landed Estates Court, been

permanently incorporated into the social system of the country. The greatest

part of the soil of Ireland, there is reason to believe, is now farmed either by

the landlords, or by small capitalist farmers. That these farmers are improving

in circumstances, and accumulating capital, there is considerable evidence, inparticular the great increase of deposits in the banks of which they are the

principal customers. So far as that class is concerned, the chief thing still

wanted is security of tenure, or assurance of compensation for improvements.

The means of supplying these wants are now engaging the attention of the

most competent minds; Judge Longfield’s address, in the autumn of 1864,

and the sensation created by it, are an era in the subject, and a point has now

been reached when we may confidently expect that within a very few years

something effectual will be done.

              But what, meanwhile, is the condition of the displaced cottiers, so

far as they have not emigrated; and of the whole class who subsist by

agricultural labour, without the occupation of any land? As yet, their state is

one of great poverty, with but slight prospect of improvement. Many wages,

indeed, have risen much above the wretched level of a generation ago: but the

cost of subsistence has also risen so much above the old potato standard, that

the real improvement is not equal to the nominal; and according to the best

information to which I have access, there is little appearance of an improved

standard of living among the class. The population, in fact, reduced though it

be, is still far beyond what the country can support as a mere grazing district

of England. It may not, perhaps, be strictly true that, if the present number of

inhabitants are to be maintained at home, it can only be either on the old

vicious system of cottierism, or as small proprietors growing their own food.

The lands which will remain under tillage would, no doubt, if sufficient

security for outlay were given, admit of a more extensive employment of

labourers by the small capitalist farmers; and this, in the opinion of some

competent judges, might enable the country to support the present number of

its population in actual existence. But no one will pretend that this resource is

sufficient to maintain them in any condition in which it is fit that the great

body of the peasantry of a country should exist. Accordingly the emigration,

which for a time had fallen off, has, under the additional stimulus of bad

seasons, revived in all its strength. It is calculated that within the year 1864

not less than 100,000 emigrants left the Irish shores. As far as regards the

emigrants themselves and their posterity, or the general interests of the

human race, it would be folly to regret this result. The children of the

immigrant Irish receive the education of Americans, and enter, more rapidly

and completely than would have been possible in the country of their descent,

into the benefits of a higher state of civilization. In twenty or thirty years they

are not mentally distinguishable from other Americans. The loss, and thedisgrace, are England’s: and it is the English people and government whom it

chiefly concerns to ask themselves, how far it will be to their honour and

advantage to retain the mere soil of Ireland, but to lose its inhabitants. With

the present feelings of the Irish people, and the direction which their hope of

improving their condition seems to be permanently taking, England, it is

probable, has only the choice between the depopulation of Ireland, and the

conversion of a part of the labouring population into peasant proprietors. The

truly insular ignorance of her public men respecting a form of agricultural

economy which predominates in nearly every other civilized country, makes

it only too probable that she will choose the worse side of the alternative. Yet

there are germs of a tendency to the formation of peasant proprietors on Irish

soil, which require only the aid of a friendly legislator to foster them; as is

shown in the following extract from a private communication by my eminent

and valued friend, Professor Cairnes:

              “On the sale, some eight or ten years ago, of the Thomond,

Portarlington, and Kingston estates, in the Encumbered Estates Court, it was

observed that a considerable number of occupying tenants purchased the fee

of their farms. I have not been able to obtain any information as to what

followed that proceeding-whether the purchasers continued to farm their

small properties, or under the mania of landlordism tried to escape from their

former mode of life. But there are other facts which have a hearing on this

question. In those parts of the country where tenant-right prevails, the prices

given for the goodwill of a farm are enormous. The following figures, taken

from the schedule of an estate in the neighbourhood of Newry, now passing

through the Landed Estates Court, will give an idea, but a very inadequate

one, of the prices which this mere customary right generally fetches.

              “Statement showing the prices at which the tenant-right of certain

farms near Newry was sold: —

  Lot Acres Rent Purchase-money of tenant-right 1 23 £74 £ 33 2 24 77 240 3

13 39 110 4 14 34 85 5 10 33 172 6 5 13 75 7 8 26 130 8 11 33 130 9 2 5 5

__ ___ ____ 110 £334 £980                “The prices here represent on the whole

about three years’ purchase of the rental: but this, as I have said, gives but an

inadequate idea of that which is frequently, indeed of that which is ordinarily,

paid. The right, being purely customary, will vary in value with the

confidence generally reposed in the good faith of the landlord. In the present

instance, circumstances have come to light in the course of the proceedingsconnected with the sale of the estate, which give reason to believe that the

confidence in this case was not high; consequently, the rates above given may

be taken as considerably under those which ordinarily prevail. Cases, as I am

informed on the highest authority, have in other parts of the country come to

light, also in the Landed Estates Court, in which the price given for the

tenant-right was equal to that of the whole fee of the land. It is a remarkable

fact that people should be found to give, say twenty or twenty-five years’

purchase, for land which is still subject to a good round rent. Why, it will be

asked, do they not purchase land out and out for the same, or a slightly larger,

sum? The answer to this question, I believe is to he found in the state of our

land laws. The cost of transferring land in small portions is, relatively to the

purchase money, very considerable, even in the Landed Estates Court; while

the goodwill of a farm may be transferred without any cost at all. The

cheapest conveyance that could be drawn in that Court, where the utmost

economy, consistent with the present mode of remunerating legal services, is

strictly enforced, would, irrespective of stamp duties, cost 10l. — a very

sensible addition to the purchase of a small peasant estate: a conveyance to

transfer a thousand acres might not cost more, and would probably not cost

much more. But in truth, the mere cost of conveyance represents but the least

part of the obstacles which exist to obtaining land in small portions. A far

more serious impediment is the complicated state of the ownership of land,

which renders it frequently impracticable to subdivide a property into such

portions as would bring the land within the reach of small bidders. The

remedy for this state of things, however, lies in measures of a more radical

sort than I fear it is at all probable that any House of Commons we are soon

likely to see would even with patience consider. A registry of titles may

succeed in reducing this complex condition of ownership to its simplest

expression; but where real complication exists, the difficulty is not to be got

rid of by mere simplicity of form; and a registry of titles-while the powers of

disposition at present enjoyed by landowners remain undiminished, while

every settlor and testator has an almost unbounded licence to multiply

interests in land, as pride, the passion for dictation, or mere whim may

suggest — will, in my opinion, fail to reach the root of the evil. The effect of

these circumstances is to place an immense premium upon large dealings in

land-indeed in most cases practically to preclude all other than large dealing;

and while this is the state of the law, the experiment of peasant

proprietorship, it is plain, cannot be fairly tried. The facts, however, which Ihave state, show, I think, conclusively, that there is no obstacle in the

disposition of the people to the introduction of this system.”

              I have concluded a discussion, which has occupied a space almost

disproportioned to the dimensions of this work; and I here close the

examination of those simpler forms of social economy in which the produce

of the land either belongs undividedly to one class, or is shared only between

two classes. We now proceed to the hypothesis of a threefold division of the

produce, among labourers, landlords, and capitalists; and in order to connect

the coming discussions as closely as possible with those which have now for

some time occupied us, I shall commence with the subject of Wages.

        138
               Author of numerous pamphlets, entitled “True Political Economy

of Ireland”, “Letter to the Earl of Devon”, “Two Letters on the Rackrent

Oppression of Ireland”, and others. Mr Connor has been an agitator on the

subject since 1832.

        139
               Though this society, during the years succeeding the famine, was

forced to wind up its affairs, the memory of what it accomplished ought to be

preserved. The following is an extract in the Proceedings of Lord Devon’s

Commission from the report made to the society in 1845, by their intelligent

manager, Colonel Robinson: —

              “Two hundred and forty-five tenants, many of whom were a few

years since in a state bordering on pauperism, the occupiers of small holdings

of from ten to twenty plantation acres each, have, by their own free labour,

with the society’s aid, improved their farms to the value of 4396 l.; 605 l.

having been added during the last year, being at the rate of 17 l. 18s. per

tenant for the whole term, and 2 l. 9s. for the past year; the benefit of which

improvements each tenant will enjoy during the unexpired term of a thirty-

one years’ lease.

              “These 245 tenants and their families have, by spade industry,

reclaimed and brought into cultivation 1032 plantation acres of land,

previously unproductive mountain waste, upon which they grew, last year,

crops valued by competent practical persons at 3896 l., being in the

proportion of 15 l. 18s. each tenant; and their live stock, consisting of cattle,

horses, sheep, and pigs, now actually upon the estates, is valued, according to

the present prices of the neighbouring markets, at 4162 l., of which 1304 l.

has been added since February 1844, being at the rate of 16 l. 19s. for thwwhole period and 5 l. 6s. for the last year; during which time their stock has

thus increased in value a sum equal to their present annual rent; and by the

statistical tables and returns referred to in previous reports, it is proved that

the tenants, in general improve their little farms, and increase their cultivation

and crops, in nearly direct proportion to the number of available working

persons of both sexes, of which their families consist.”

              There cannot be a stronger testimony to the superior amount of

gross, and even of net produce, raised by small farming under any tolerable

system of landed tenure; and it is worthy of attention that the industry and

zeal were greatest among the smaller holders; Colonel Robinson noticing, as

exceptions to the remarkable and rapid progress of improvement, some

tenants who were “occupants of larger farms than twenty acres, a class too

often deficient in the enduring industry indispensable for the successful

prosecution of mountain improvements.”

        140
               There is, however, a partial counter-current, of which I have not

seen any public notice. “A class of men,not very numerous, but sufficiently

so to do much mischief, have, through the Landed Estates Court, got into

possession of land in Ireland, who, of all classes, are least likely to recognise

the duties of a landlord’s position. These are small traders in towns, who by

dint of sheer parsimony, frequently combined with money-lending at

usurious rates, have succeeded, in the course of a long life, in scraping

together as much money as will enable them to buy fifty or a hundred acres

of land. These people never think of turning farmers, but, proud of their

position as landlords, proceed to turn it to the utmost account. An instance of

this kind came under my notice lately. The tenants on the property were, at

the time of the purchase, some twelve years ago, in a tolerably comfortable

state. Within that period their rent has been raised three several times; and it

is now, as I am informed by the priest of the district, nearly double its amount

at the commencement of the present proprietor’s reign. The result is that the

people, who were formerly in tolerable comfort, are now reduced to poverty:

two of them have left the property and squatted near an adjacent turf bog,

where they exist trusting for support to occasional jobs. If this man is not

shot, he will injure himself through the deterioration of his property, but

meantime he has been getting eight or ten percent on his purchase money.

This is by no means a rare case. The scandal which such occurrences cause,

casts its reflection on transactions of a wholly different and perfectlylegitimate cause, casts its reflection on transactions of a wholly different and

perfectly legitimate kind, where the removal of the tenants is simply an act of

mercy for all parties.

              “The anxiety of landlords to get rid of cottiers is also to some extent

neutralized by the anxiety of middlemen to get them. About one-fourth of the

whole land of Ireland is held under long leases; the rent received, when the

lease is of long standing, being generally greatly under the real value of the

land. It rarely happens that the land thus held is cultivated by the owner of the

lease: instead of this, he sublets it at a rack rent to small men, and lives on the

excess of the rent which he receives over that which he pays. Some of these

leases are always running out; and as they draw towards their close, the

middleman has no other interest in the land than, at any cost of permanent

deteriorations, to get the utmost out of it during the unexpired period of the

term. For this purpose the small cottier tenants precisely answer his turn.

Middlemen in this position are as anxious to obtain cottiers as tenants, as the

landlordsare to be rid of them; and the result is a transfer of this sort of tenant

from one class of estates to the other. The movement is of limited

dimensions, but it does exist, and so far as it exists, neutralizes the general

tendency. Perhaps it may be thought that this system will reproduce itself;

that the same motives which led to the existence of middlemen will

perpetuate the class; but there is no danger of this. Landowners are now

perfectly alive to the ruinous consequences of this system, however conveniet

for a time; and a clause against sub-letting is now becoming a matter of

course in every lease.” — (Private Communication from Professor Cairnes.)

 

 

                               Chapter 11 – Of Wages

 

 

              1. Under the head of Wages are to be considered, first, the causes

which determine or influence the wages of labour generally, and secondly,

the differences that exist between the wages of different employments. It is

convenient to keep these two classes of considerations separate; and in

discussing the law of wages, to proceed in the first instance as if there were

no other kind of labour than common unskilled labour, of the average degree

of hardness and disagreeableness.

              Wages, like other things, may be regulated either by competition or

by custom. In this country there are few kinds of labour of which the

remuneration would not be lower than it is, if the employer took the full

advantage of competition. Competition, however, must be regarded, in the

present state of society, as the principal regulator of wages, and custom or

individual character only as a modifying circumstance, and that in a

comparatively slight degree.

              Wages, then, depend mainly upon the demand and supply of labour;

or as it is often expressed, on the proportion between population and capital.

By population is here meant the number only of the labouring class, or rather

of those who work for hire; and by capital only circulating capital, and not

even the whole of that, but the part which is expended in the direct purchase

of labour. To this, however, must be added all funds which, without forming

a part of capital, are paid in exchange for labour, such as the wages of

soldiers, domestic servants, and all other unproductive labourers. There is

unfortunately no mode of expressing by one familiar term, the aggregate of

what has been called the wages-fund of a country: and as the wages of

productive labour form nearly the whole of that fund, it is usual to overlook

the smaller and less important part, and to say that wages depend on

population and capital. It will be convenient to employ this expression,

remembering, however, to consider it as elliptical, and not as a literal

statement of the entire truth.

              With these limitations of the terms, wages not only depend upon the

relative amount of capital and population, but cannot, under the rule ofcompetition, be affected by anything else. Wages (meaning, of course, the

general rate) cannot rise, but by an increase of the aggregate funds employed

in hiring labourers, or a diminution in the number of the competitors for hire;

nor fall, except either by a diminution of the funds devoted to paying labour,

or by an increase in the number of labourers to be paid.

              2. There are, however, some facts in apparent contradiction to this

doctrine, which it is incumbent on us to consider and explain.

              For instance, it is a common saying that wages are high when trade

is good. The demand for labour in any particular employment is more

pressing, and higher wages are paid, when there is a brisk demand for the

commodity produced; and the contrary when there is what is called a

stagnation: then workpeople are dismissed, and those who are retained must

submit to a reduction of wages: though in these cases there is neither more

nor less capital than before. This is true; and is one of those complications in

the concrete phenomena, which obscure and disguise the operation of general

causes: but it is not really inconsistent with the principles laid down. Capital

which the owner does not employ in purchasing labour, but keeps idle in his

hands, is the same thing to the labourers, for the time being, as if it did not

exist. All capital is, from the variations of trade, occasionally in this state. A

manufacturer, finding a slack demand for his commodity, forbears to employ

labourers in increasing a stock which he finds it difficult to dispose of; or if

he goes on until all his capital is locked up in unsold goods, then at least he

must of necessity pause until he can get paid for some of them. But no one

expects either of these states to be permanent; if he did, he would at the first

opportunity remove his capital to some other occupation, in which it would

still continue to employ labour. The capital remains unemployed for a time,

during which the labour market is overstocked, and wages fall. Afterwards

the demand revives, and perhaps becomes unusually brisk, enabling the

manufacturer to sell his commodity even faster than he can produce it: his

whole capital is then brought into complete efficiency, and if he is able, he

borrows capital in addition, which would otherwise have gone into some

other employment. At such times wages, in his particular occupation, rise. If

we suppose, what in strictness is not absolutely impossible, that one of these

fits of briskness or of stagnation should affect all occupations at the same

time, wages altogether might undergo a rise or a fall. These, however, are but

temporary fluctuations: the capital now lying idle will next year be in activeemployment, that which is this year unable to keep up with the demand will

in its turn be locked up in crowded warehouses; and wages in these several

departments will ebb and flow accordingly: but nothing can permanently alter

general wages, except an increase or a diminution of capital itself (always

meaning by the term, the funds of all sorts, devoted to the payment of labour)

compared with the quantity of labour offering itself to be hired.

              Again, it is another common notion that high prices make high

wages; because the producers and dealers, being better off, can afford to pay

more to their labourers. I have already said that a brisk demand, which causes

temporary high prices, causes also temporary high wages. But high prices, in

themselves, can only raise wages if the dealers, receiving more, are induced

to save more, and make an addition to their capital, or at least to their

purchases of labour. This is indeed likely enough to be the case; and if the

high prices came direct from heaven, or even from abroad, the labouring

class might he benefited, not by the high prices themselves, but by the

increase of capital occasioned by them. The same effect, however, is often

attributed to a high price which is the result of restrictive laws, or which is in

some way or other to be paid by the remaining members of the community;

they having no greater means than before to pay it with. High prices of this

sort, if they benefit one class of labourers, can only do so at the expense of

others; since if the dealers by receiving high prices are enabled to make

greater savings, or otherwise increase their purchases of labour, all other

people by paying those high prices have their means of saving, or of

purchasing labour, reduced in an equal degree; and it is a matter of accident

whether the one alteration or the other will have the greatest effect on the

labour market. Wages will probably be temporarily higher in the employment

in which prices have risen, and somewhat lower in other employments: in

which case, while the first half of the phenomenon excites notice, the other is

generally overlooked, or if observed, is not ascribed to the cause which really

produced it. Nor will the partial rise of wages last long: for though the dealers

in that one employment gain more, it does not follow that there is room to

employ a greater amount of savings in their own business: their increasing

capital will probably flow over into other employments, and there

counterbalance the diminution previously made in the demand for labour by

the diminished savings of other classes.

              Another opinion often maintained is, that wages (meaning of coursemoney wages) vary with the price of food; rising when it rises, and falling

when it falls. This opinion is, I conceive, only partially true; and in so far as

true, in no way affects the dependence of wages on the proportion between

capital and labour: since the price of food, when it affects wages at all, affects

them through that law. Dear or cheap food, caused by variety of seasons,

does not affect wages (unless they are artificially adjusted to it by law or

charity): or rather, it has some tendency to affect them in the contrary way to

that supposed; since in times of scarcity people generally compete more

violently for employment, and lower the labour market against themselves.

But dearness or cheapness of food, when of a permanent character, and

capable of being calculated on beforehand, may affect wages. In the first

place, if the labourers have, as is often the case, no more than enough to keep

them in working condition, and enable them barely to support the ordinary

number of children, it follows that if food grows permanently dear.er without

a rise of wages, a greater number of the children will prematurely die; and

thus wages will ultimately be higher, but only because the number of people

will be smaller, than if food had remained cheap. But, secondly, even though

wages were high enough to admit of food’s becoming more costly without

depriving the labourers and their families of necessaries; though they could

bear, physically speaking, to be worse off, perhaps they would not consent to

be so. They might have habits of comfort which were to them as necessaries,

and sooner than forego which, they would put an additional restraint on their

power of multiplication; so that wages would rise, not by increase of deaths

but by diminution of births. In these cases, then, wages do adapt themselves

to the price of food, though after an interval of almost a generation. Mr.

Ricardo considers these two cases to comprehend all cases. He assume, that

there is everywhere a minimum rate of wages: either the lowest with which it

is physically possible to keep up the population, or the lowest with which the

people will choose to do so. To this minimum he assumes that the general

rate of wages always tends; that they can never be lower, beyond the length

of time required for a diminished rate of increase to make itself felt, and can

never long continue higher. This assumption contains sufficient truth to

render it admissible for the purposes of abstract science; and the conclusion

which Mr. Ricardo draws from it, namely, that wages in the long run rise and

fall with the permanent price of food, is, like almost all his conclusions, true

hypothetically, that is, granting the suppositions from which he sets out. But

in the application to practice, it is necessary to consider that the minimum ofwhich he speaks, especially when it is not a physical, but what may be termed

a moral minimum, is itself liable to vary. If wages were previously so high

that they could bear reduction, to which the obstacle was a high standard of

comfort habitual among the labourers, a rise in the price of food, or any other

disadvantageous change in their circumstances, may operate in two ways : it

may correct itself by a rise of wages brought about through a gradual effect

on the prudential check to population; or it may permanently lower the

standard of living of the class, in case their previous habits in respect of

population prove stronger than their previous habits in respect of comfort. In

that case the injury done to them will be permanent, and their deteriorated

condition will become a new minimum, tending to perpetuate itself as the

more ample minimum did before. It is to be feared that of the two modes in

which the cause may operate, the last is the most frequent, or at all events

sufficiently so, to render all propositions ascribing a self-repairing quality to

the calamities which befal the labouring classes, practically of no validity.

There is considerable evidence that the circumstances of the agricultural

labourers in England have more than once in our history sustained great

permanent deterioration, from causes which operated by diminishing the

demand for labour, and which, if population had exercised its power of self-

adjustment in obedience to the previous standard of comfort, could only have

had a temporary effect: but unhappily the poverty in which the class was

plunged during a long series of years brought that previous standard into

disuse; and the next generation, growing up without having possessed those
                                                                                      150
pristine comforts, multiplied in turn without any attempt to retrieve them.

              The converse case occur when, by improvements in agriculture, the

repeal of corn laws, or other such causes, the necessaries of the labourers are

cheapened, and they are enabled, with the same wages, to command greater

comforts than before. Wages will not fall immediately; it is even possible that

they may rise; but they will fall at last, so as to leave the labourers no better

off than before, unless during this interval of prosperity the standard of

comfort regarded as indispensable by the class, is permanently raised.

Unfortunately this salutary effect is by no means to be counted upon; it is a

much more difficult thing to raise, than to lower, the scale of living which the

labourer will consider as more indispensable than marrying and having a

family. If they content themselves with enjoying the greater comfort while it

lasts, but do not learn to require it, they will people down to their old scale of

living. If from poverty their children had previously been insufficiently fed orimproperly nursed, a greater number will now be reared, and the competition

of these, when they grow up, will depress wages, probably in full proportion

to the greater cheapness of food. If the effect is not produced in this mode, it

will be produced by earlier and more numerous marriages, or by an increased

number of births to a marriage. according to all experience, a great increase

invariably takes place in the number of marriages, in seasons of cheap food

and full employment. I cannot, therefore, agree in the importance so often

attached to the repeal of the corn laws, considered merely as a labourers’

question, or to any of the schemes, of which some one or other is at all times

in vogue, for making the labourers a very little better off. Things which only

affect them a very little, make no permanent impression upon their habits and

requirements, and they soon slide back into their former state. To produce

permanent advantage, the temporary cause operating upon them must be

sufficient to make a great change in their condition-a change such as will be

felt for many years, notwithstanding any stimulus which it may give during

one generation to the increase of people. When, indeed, the improvement is

of this signal character, and a generation grows up which has always been

used to an improved scale of comfort, the habits of this new generation in

respect to population become formed upon a higher minimum, and the

improvement in their condition becomes permanent. Of cases in point, the

most remarkable is France after the Revolution. The majority of the

population being suddenly raised from misery, to independence and

comparative comfort; the immediate effect was that population,

notwithstanding the destructive wars of the period, started forward with

unexampled rapidity, partly because improved circumstances enabled many

children to be reared who would otherwise have died, and partly from

increase of births. The succeeding generation however grew up with habits

considerably altered; and though the country was never before in so
                                                                                    151
prosperous a state, the annual number of births is now nearly stationary,
                                                      152
and the increase of population extremely slow.

              3. Wages depend, then, on the proportion between the number of the

labouring population, and the capital or other funds devoted to the purchase

of labour. we will say, for shortness, the capital. If wages are higher at one

time or place than at another, if the subsistence and comfort of the class of

hired labourers are more ample, it is for no other reason than because capital

bears a greater proportion to population. It is not the absolute amount of

accumulation or of production, that is of importance to the labouring class; itis not the amount even of the funds destined for distribution among the

labourers: it is the proportion between those funds and the numbers among

whom they are shared. The condition of the class can be bettered in no other

way than by altering that proportion to their advantage; and every scheme for

their benefit, which does not proceed on this as its foundation, is, for all

permanent purposes, a delusion.

              In countries like North America and the Australian colonies, where

the knowledge and arts of civilized life, and a high effective desire of

accumulation, co-exist with a boundless extent of unoccupied land, the

growth of capital easily keeps pace with the utmost possible increase of

population, and is chiefly retarded by the impracticability of obtaining

labourers enough. All, therefore, who can possibly be born, can find

employment without overstocking the market: every labouring family enjoys

in abundance the necessaries, many of the comforts, and some of the luxuries

of life; and, unless in case of individual misconduct, or actual inability to

work, poverty does not, and dependence need not, exist. A similar advantage,

though in a less degree, is occasionally enjoyed by some special class of

labourers in old countries, from an extraordinarily rapid growth, not of capital

generally, but of the capital employed in a particular occupation. So gigantic

has been the progress of the cotton manufacture since the inventions of Watt

and Arkwright, that the capital engaged in it has probably quadrupled in the

time which population requires for doubling. While, therefore, it has attracted

from other employments nearly all the hands which geographical

circumstances and the habits or inclinations of the people rendered available;

and while the demand it created for infant labour has enlisted the immediate

pecuniary interest of the operatives in favour of promoting, instead of

restraining, the increase of population; nevertheless wages in the great seats

of the manufacture are generally so high, that the collective earnings of a

family amounts, on an average of years, to a very satisfactory sum; and there

is, as yet, no sign of permanent decrease, while the effect has also been felt in

raising the general standard of agricultural wages in the counties adjoining.

              But those circumstances of a country, or of an occupation, in which

population can with impunity increase at its utmost rate, are rare, and

transitory. Very few are the countries presenting the needful union of

conditions. Either the industrial arts are backward and stationary, and capital

therefore increases slowly; or the effective desire of accumulation being low,the increase soon reaches its limit; or, even though both these elements are at

their highest known degree, the increase of capital is checked, because there

is not fresh land to be resorted to, of as good quality as that already occupied.

Though capital should for a time double itself simultaneously with

population, if all this capital and population are to find employment on the

same land, they cannot without an unexampled succession of agricultural

inventions continue doubling the produce; therefore, if wages do not fall,

profits must; and when profits fall, increase of capital is slackened. Besides,

even if wages did not fall, the price of food (as will be shown more fully

hereafter) would in these circumstances necessarily rise; which is equivalent

to a fall of wages.

              Except, therefore, in the very peculiar cases which I have just

noticed, of which the only one of any practical importance is that of a new

colony, or a country in circumstances equivalent to it; it is impossible that

population should increase at its utmost rate without lowering wages. Nor

will the fall be stopped at any point, short of that which either by its physical

or its moral operation, checks the increase of population. In no old country,

therefore, does population increase at anything like its utmost rate; in most, at

a very moderate rate: in some countries, not at all. These facts are only to be

accounted for in two ways. Either the whole number of births which nature

admits of, and which happen in some circumstances, do not take place; or if

they do, a large proportion of those who are born, die. The retardation of

increase results either from mortality or prudence; from Mr. Malthus’s

positive, or from his preventive check: and one or the other of these must and

does exist, and very powerfully too, in all old societies. Wherever population

is not kept down by the prudence either of individuals or of the state, it is

kept down by starvation or disease.

              Mr. Malthus has taken great pains to ascertain, for almost every

country in the world, which of these checks it is that operates; and the

evidence which he collected on the subject, in his Essay on Population, may

even now be read with advantage. Throughout Asia, and formerly in most

European countries in which the labouring classes were not in personal

bondage, there is, or was, no restrainer of population but death. The mortality

was not always the result of poverty: much of it proceeded from unskilful and

careless management of children, from uncleanly and otherwise unhealthy

habits of life among the adult population, and from the almost periodicaloccurrence of destructive epidemics. Throughout Europe these causes of

shortened life have much diminished, but they have not ceased to exist. Until

a period not very remote, hardy any of our large towns kept up its population,

independently of the stream always flowing into them from the rural districts:

this was still true of Liverpool until very recently; and even in London, the

mortality is larger, and the average duration of life shorter, than in rural

districts where there is much greater poverty. In Ireland, epidemic fevers, and

deaths from the exhaustion of the constitution by insufficient nutriment, have

always accompanied even the most moderate deficiency of the potato crop.

Nevertheless, it cannot now be said that in any part of Europe, population is

principally kept down by disease, still less by starvation, either in a direct or

in an indirect form. The agency by which it is limited is chiefly preventive,

not (in the language of Mr. Malthus) positive. But the preventive remedy

seldom, I believe, consists in the unaided operation of prudential motives on

a class wholly or mainly composed of labourers for hire, and looking forward

to no other lot. In England, for example, I much doubt if the generality of

agricultural labourers practise any prudential restraint whatever. They

generally marry as early, and have as many children to a marriage, as they

would or could do if they were settlers in the United States. During the

generation which preceded the enactment of the present Poor Law, they

received the most direct encouragement to this sort of improvidence: being

not only assured of support, on easy terms, whenever out of employment, but,

even when in employment, very commonly receiving from the parish a

weekly allowance proportioned to their number of children; and the married

with large families being always, from a short-sighted economy, employed in

preference to the unmarried; which last premium on population still exists.

Under such prompting, the rural labourers acquired habits of recklessness,

which are so congenial to the uncultivated mind that in whatever manner

produced, they in general long survive their immediate causes. There are so

many new elements at work in society, even in those deeper strata which are

inaccessible to the mere movements on the surface, that it is hazardous to

affirm anything positive on the mental state or practical impulses of classes

and bodies of men, when the same assertion may be true today, and may

require great modification in a few years time. It does, however, seem, that if

the rate of increase of population depended solely on the agricultural

labourers, it would, as far as dependent on births, and unless repressed by

deaths, be as rapid in the southern counties of England as in America. Therestraining principle lies in the very great proportion of the population

composed of the middle classes and the skilled artizans, who in this country

almost equal in number the common labourers, and on whom prudential

motives do, in a considerable degree, operate.

              4. Where a labouring class who have no property but their daily

wages, and no hope of acquiring it, refrain from over-rapid multiplication,the

cause, I believe, has always hitherto been, either actual legal restraint, or a

custom of some sort, which, without intention on their part, insensibly

moulds the conduct, or affords immediate inducements not to marry. It is not

generally known in how many countries of Europe direct legal obstacles are

opposed to improvident marriages. The communications made to the original

Poor Law Commission by our foreign ministers and consuls in different parts

of Europe, contain a considerable amount of information on this subject. Mr.
                                                      153
Senior, in his preface to those communications, says that in the countries

which recognise a legal right to relief, “marriage on the part of persons in the

actual receipt of relief appears to be everywhere prohibited, and the marriage

of those who are not likely to possess the means of independent support is

allowed by very few. Thus we are told that in Norway no one can marry

without ‘showing to the satisfaction of the clergyman, that he is permanently

settled in such a manner as to offer a fair prospect that he can maintain a

family.’

              “In Mecklenburg, that ‘marriages are delayed by conscription in the

twenty-second year, and military service for six years; besides, the parties

must have a dwelling, without which a clergyman is not permitted to marry

them. The men marry at from twenty-five to thirty, the women not much

earlier, as both must first gain by service enough to establish themselves.’

              “In Saxony, that ‘a man may not marry before he is twenty-one years

old, if liable to serve in the army. In Dresden, professionists (by which words

artizans are probably meant) may not marry until they become masters in

their trade.’

              “In Wurtemburg, that ‘no man is allowed to marry till his twenty-

fifth year, on account of his military duties, unless permission be especially

obtained or purchased: at that age he must also obtain permission, which is

granted on proving that he and his wife would have together sufficient to

maintain a family or to establish themselves; in large towns, say from 800 to1000 florins (from 66l. 13s. 4d. to 84l. 3s. 4d.); in smaller, from 400 to 500
                                                      154
florins; in villages, 200 florins (16l. 13s. 4d.)’"

              The minister at Munich says, “The great cause why the number of

the poor is kept so low in this country arises from the prevention by law of

marriages in cases in which it cannot be proved that the parties have

reasonable means of subsistence; and this regulation is in all places and at all

times strictly adhered to. The effect of a constant and firm observance of this

rule has, it is true, a considerable influence in keeping down the population of

Bavaria, which is at present low for the extent of country, but it has a most
                                                                                155
salutary effect in averting extreme poverty and consequent misery.”

              At Lubeck, “marriages among the poor are delayed by the necessity

a man is under, first, of previously proving that he is in a regular employ,

work, or profession, that will enable him to maintain a wife: and secondly, of

becoming a burgher, and equipping himself in the uniform of the burgher
                                                      156
guard, which together may cost him nearly 4l.” At Frankfort, “the

government prescribes no age for marrying, but the permission to marry is
                                            157
only granted on proving a livelihood.” 

              The allusion, in some of these statements, to military duties, points

out an indirect obstacle to marriage, interposed by the laws of some countries

in which there is no direct legal restraint. In Prussia, for instance, the

institutions which compel every able-bodied man to serve for several years in

the army, at the time of life at which imprudent marriages are most likely to

take place, are probably a full equivalent, in effect on population, for the legal

restrictions of the smaller German states.

              “So strongly,” says Mr. Kay, “do the people of Switzerland

understand from experience the expediency of their sons and daughters

postponing the time of their marriages, that the councils of state of four or

five of the most democratic of the cantons, elected, be it remembered, by

universal suffrage, have passed laws by which all young persons who marry

before they have proved to the magistrate of their district that they are able to

support a family, are rendered liable to a heavy fine. In Lucerne, Argovie,

Unterwalden, and I believe, St. Gall, Schweitz, and Uri, laws of this character
                                        158
have been in force for many years.”

              5. Where there is no general law restrictive of marriage, there are

often customs equivalent to it. When the guilds or trade corporations of theMiddle Ages were in vigour, their bye-laws or regulations were conceived

with a very vigilant eye to the advantage which the trade derived from

limiting competition: and they made it very effectually the interest of artizans

not to marry until after passing through the two stages of apprentice and

journeyman, and attaining the rank of master.

        141
               In Norway, where the labour is chiefly agricultural, it is forbidden

by law to engage a farm-servant for less than a year; which was the general

English practice until the poor-laws destroyed it, by enabling the farmer to

cast his labourers on parish pay whenever he did not immediately require

their labour. In consequence of this custom, and of its enforcement by law,

the whole of the rather limited class of agricultural labourers in Norway have

an engagement for a year at least, which, if the parties are content with one

another, naturally becomes a permanent engagement: hence it is known in

every neighbourhood whether there is, or is likely to be, a vacancy, and

unless there is, a young man does not marry, knowing that he could not

obtain employment. The custom still exists in Cumberland and

Westmoreland, except that the term is half a year instead of a year; and seems

to be still attended with the same consequences. The farm-servants “are

lodged and boarded in their masters’ houses, which they seldom leave until,

through the death of some relation or neighbour, they succeed to the

ownership or lease of a cottage farm. What is called surplus labour does not
            159
here exist.”  I have mentioned in another chapter the check to population in

England during the last century, from the difficulty of obtaining a separate
                160
dwelling place. Other customs restrictive of population might be specified:

in some parts of Italy, it is the practice, according to Sismondi, among the

poor, as it is well known to be in the higher ranks, that all but one of the sons

remain unmarried. But such family arrangements are not likely to exist

among day-labourers. They are the resource of small proprietors and

metayers, for preventing too minute a subdivision of the land.

              In England generally there is now scarcely a relic of these indirect

checks to population; except that in parishes owned by one or a very small

number of landowners, the increase of resident labourers is still occasionally

obstructed, by preventing cottages from being built, or by pulling down those

which exist; thus restraining the population liable to become locally

chargeable, without any material effect on population generally, the work

required in those parishes being performed by labourers settled elsewhere.The surrounding districts always feel themselves much aggrieved by this

practice, against which they cannot defend themselves by similar means,

since a single acre of land owned by any one who does not enter into the

combination, enables him to defeat the attempt, very profitably to himself, by

covering that acre with cottages. To meet these complaints an Act has within

the last few years been passed by Parliament, by which the poor-rate is made

a charge not on the parish, but on the whole union. This enactment, in other

respects very beneficial, removes the small remnant of what was once a

check to population: the value of which, however, from the narrow limits of

its operation, had become very trifling.

              6. In the case, therefore, of the common agricultural labourer, the

checks to population may almost be considered as non-existent. If the growth

of the towns, and of the capital there employed, by which the factory

operatives are maintained at their present average rate of wages

notwithstanding their rapid increase, did not also absorb a great part of the

annual addition to the rural population, there seems no reason in the present

habits of the people why they should not fall into as miserable a condition as

the Irish previous to 1846; and if the market for our manufactures should, I

do not say fall off, but even cease to expand at the rapid rate of the last fifty

years, there is no certainty that this fate may not be reserved for us. Without

carrying our anticipations forward to such a calamity, which the great and

growing intelligence of the factory population would, it may be hoped, avert,

by an adaptation of their habits to their circumstances; the existing condition

of the labourers of some of the most exclusively agricultural counties,

Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, is

sufficiently painful to contemplate. The labourers of these counties, with

large families, and eight or perhaps nine shillings for their weekly wages

when in full employment, have for some time been one of the stock objects of

popular compassion: it is time that they had the benefit also of some

application of common sense.

              Unhappily, sentimentality rather than common sense usually

presides over the discussion of these subjects; and while there is a growing

sensitiveness to the hardships of the poor, and a ready disposition to admit

claims in them upon the good offices of other people, there is an all but

universal unwillingness to face the real difficulty of their position, or advert

at all to the conditions which nature has made indispensable to theimprovement of their physical lot. Discussions on the condition of the

labourers, lamentations over its wretchedness, denunciations of all who are

supposed to be indifferent to it, projects of one kind Or another for improving

it, were in no country and in no time of the world so rife as in the present

generation; but there is a tacit agreement to ignore totally the law of wages,

or to dismiss it in a parenthesis, with such terms as “hardhearted

Malthusianism;” as if it were not a thousand times more hardhearted to tell

human beings that they may, than that they may not, call into existence

swarms of creatures who are sure to he miserable, and most likely to be

depraved; and forgetting that the conduct, which it is reckoned so cruel to

disapprove, is a degrading slavery to a brute instinct in one of the persons

concerned, and most commonly, in the other, helpless submission to a

revolting abuse of power.

              So long as mankind remained in a semi-barbarous state, with the

indolence and the few wants of a savage, it probably was not desirable that

population should be restrained; the pressure of physical want may have been

a necessary stimulus, in that stage of the human mind, to the exertion of

labour and ingenuity required for accomplishing that greatest of all past

changes in human modes of existence, by which industrial life attained

predominance over the hunting, the pastoral, and the military or predatory

state. Want, in that age of the world, had its uses, as even slavery had; and

there may be corners of the earth where those uses are not yet superseded,

though they might easily be so were a helping hand held out by more

civilized communities. But in Europe the time, if it ever existed, is long past,

when a life of privation had the smallest tendency to make men either better

workmen or more civilized beings. It is, on the contrary, evident, that if the

agricultural labourers were better off, they would both work more efficiently,

and be better citizens. I ask, then, is it true, or not, that if their numbers were

fewer they would obtain higher wages? This is the question, and no other:

and it is idle to divert attention from it, by attacking any incidental position of

Malthus or some other writer, and pretending that to refute that, is to disprove

the principle of population. Some, for instance, have achieved an easy victory

over a passing remark of Mr. Malthus, hazarded chiefly by way of

illustration, that the increase of food may perhaps be assumed to take place in

an arithmetical ratio, while population increases in a geometrical: when every

candid reader knows that Mr. Malthus laid no stress on this unlucky attempt

to give numerical precision to things which do not admit of it, and everyperson capable of reasoning must see that it is wholly superfluous to his

argument. Others have attached immense importance to a correction which

more recent political economists have made in the mere language of the

earlier followers of Mr. Malthus. Several writers had said that it is the

tendency of population to increase faster than the means of subsistence. The

assertion was true in the sense in which they meant it, namely, that

population would in most circumstances increase faster than the means of

subsistence, if it were not checked either by mortality or by prudence. But

inasmuch as these checks act with unequal force at different times and places,

it was possible to interpret the language of these writers as if they had meant

that population is usually gaining ground upon subsistence, and the poverty

of the people becoming greater. Under this interpretation of their meaning, it

was urged that the reverse is the truth: that as civilization advances, the

prudential check tends to become stronger, and population to slacken its rate

of increase, relatively to subsistence; and that it is an error to maintain that

population, in any improving community, tends to increase faster than, or

even so fast as, subsistence. The word tendency is here used in a totally

different sense from that of the writers who Armed the proposition: but

waving the verbal question, is it not allowed on both sides, that in old

countries, population presses too closely upon the means of subsistence? And

though its pressure diminishes, the more the ideas and habits of the poorest

class of labourers can be improved, to which it is to be hoped that there is

always some tendency in a progressive country, yet since that tendency has

hitherto been, and still is, extremely faint, and (to descend to particulars) has

not yet extended to giving to the Wiltshire labourers higher wages than eight

shillings a week, the only thing which it is necessary to consider is, whether

that is a sufficient and suitable provision for a labourer? for if not, population

does, as an existing fact, bear too great a proportion to the wages-fund; and

whether it pressed still harder or not quite so hard at some former period, is

practically of no moment, except that, if the ratio is an improving one, there

is the better hope that by proper aids and encouragements it may be made to

improve more and faster.

              It is not, however, against reason, that the argument on this subject

has to struggle; but against a feeling of dislike, which will only reconcile

itself to the unwelcome truth, when every device is exhausted by which the

recognition of that truth can be evaded. It is necessary, therefore, to enter into

a detailed examination of these devices, and to force every position which istaken up by the enemies of the population principle in their determination to

find some refuge for the labourers, some plausible means of improving their

condition, without requiring the exercise, either enforced or voluntary, of any

self-restraint, or any greater control than at present over the animal power of

multiplication. This will be the object of the next chapter.

        142
               See the historical sketch of the condition of the English peasantry,

prepared from the best authorities by Mr William Thornton, in his work

entitled Over–Population and its Remedy: a work honourably distinguished

from most others which have been published in the present generation, by its

rational treatment of questions affecting the economical condition of the

labouring classes.

        143
               Supra, pp. 287 to 291.

        144
               A similar, though not an equal improvement in the standard of

living took place among the labourers of England during the remarkable fifty

years from 1715 to 1765, which were distinguished by such an extraordinary

succession of fine harvests (the years of decided deficiency not exceeding

five in all that period) that the average price of wheat during those years was

much lower than during the previous half century. Mr Malthus computes that

on the average of sixty years preceding 1720, the labourer could purchase

with a day’s earnings only two-thirds of a peck of wheat, while from 1720 to

1750 he could purchase a whole peck. The average price of wheat, according

to the Eton tables, for fifty years ending with 1715 was 41s. 7 3/4d. per

quarter, and for the last twenty-three of these 45s. 8d., while for the fifty

years following, it was no more than a generation, had time to work a change

in the habitual requirements of the labouring class; and this period is always

noted as the date of “a marked improvement of the quality of the food

consumed, and a decided elevation in the standard of their comforts and

conveniences” — (Malthus, Principles of Political Economy, p. 225.) For the

character of the period, see Mr Tooke’s excellent History of Prices, vol. i. pp.

38 to 61, and for the prices of corn, the Appendix to that work.

        145
               Forming an Appendix (F) to the General Report of the

Commissioners, and also published by authority as a separate volume.

        146
               Preface, p. xxxix.

        147
               Preface, p. xxxiii., or p. 554 of the Appendix itself.        148
               Appendix, p. 419.

        149
               Ibid. p. 567.

        150
               Kay, op. cit. i. 68.

        151
               “En general,” says Sismondi, “le nobre des maitres etait fixe dans

chaque communaute, et le maitre pouvait seul tenir boutique, acheter et

vendre pour son compte. Chaque maitre ne pouvait former qu’un certain

nombre d’apprentis, auxquels il enseignait son metier; et dans plusieurs

communautes, il n’en pouvait tenir qu’un seul. Chaque maitre pouvait de

meme tenir un nombre limite d’ouvriers, qui portaient le nom de

compagnons; et, dans les metiers ou l’on ne pouvait avoir qu’un seul

apprenti, on ne pouvait acheter, vendre, ou travailler dans un metier, s’il

n’etait apprenti, compagnon, ou maitre d’annees determine comme

compagnon; et s’il n’avait de plus fait son chef-d’oeuvre, au execute un

travail designe dans son metier, qui devait etre juge par sa jurande. On voit

que cette organisation mettait entierment dans la main des maitres le

renouvellement des corps de metier. Eux seuls pouvaient recevoir des

apprentis; mais ils n’etaient point obliges a en prendre; aussi se faisaient-ils

payer cette faveur, et souvent a un prix tres-eleve; en sorte qu’on jeune

homme ne pouvait entrer dans un metier s’il n’avait, au prealable, la somme

qu’il fallait payer pour son apprentissage, et celle qui lui etait necessaire pour

se sustenter pendant la duree de cet apprentissage; car pendant quatre, cinq,

ou sept ans, tout son travail appartenait a son maitre. Sa dependance de ce

maitre etait tout aussi longtemps absolue; car un seul acte de la volonte, ou

meme du caprice de celui-ci, pouvait lui fermer l’entree des professions

lucratives. L’apprenti, devenu compagnon, acquerait un peu plus de liberte; il

pouvait s’engager avec quel maitre il voulait, passer de l’un a l’autre; et

comme l’entree au compagnonage n’etait ouverte que par l’apprentissage, il

commencait a profiter du monopole dont il avait souffert, et il etait a peu pres

sur de se faire bien payer un travail que personne ne pouvait faire, si ce n’est

lui. Cependant il dependait de la jurande pour obtenir la maitrise; aussi ne se

regardait-il point encore comme assure de son sort, comme ayant un etat. En

general, il ne se mariate point qu’il ne fut passe maitre.

              “Il est bien certain, et comme fait et comme theorie, que

l’etablissement des corps de metier empechait et devait empecher la

naissance d’une population surabondante. D’apres les statuts de presque tousles corps de metier, un homme ne pouvait etre passe maitre qu’apres vingt-

cinq ans; mais s’il n’avait pas un capital a lui, s’il n’avait pas fait des

economies suffisantes, il continuait bien plus longtemps a travailler comme

compagnon; plusieurs, et peut-etre le plus grand nombre des artisans,

demeuraient compagnons toute leur vie. Il etait presque sans exemple,

cependant, qu’ils se mariassent avant d’etre recus maitres; quand ils auraient

ete assez imprudens pour le desirer, aucun pere n’aurait voulu donner sa fille

a un homme qui n’avait point d’etat.” — Nouveaux Principes, book iv, ch.

10. See also Adam Smith, book i, ch. 10, part 2.

        152
               See Thornton on Over–Population, page 18, and the authorities

there cited.

        153
               Supra, p. 158.

 

 

             Chapter 12 – Of Popular Remedies for Low Wages

 

 

              1. The simplest expedient which can be imagined for keeping the

wages of labour up to the desirable point, would be to fix them by law: and

this is virtually the object aimed at in a variety of plans which have at

different times been, or still are, current, for remodelling the relation between

labourers and employers. No one probably ever suggested that wages should

be absolutely fixed; since the interests of all concerned, often require that

they should be variable: but some have proposed to fix a minimum of wages,

leaving the variations above that point to be adjusted by competition. Another

plan which has found many advocates among the leaders of the operatives, is

that councils should be formed, which in England have been called local

boards of trade, in France “conseils de prud’hommes,” and other names;

consisting of delegates from the workpeople and from the employers, who

meeting in conference, should agree upon a rate of wages, and promulgate it

from authority, to be binding generally on employers and workmen; the

ground of decision being, not the state of the labour-market, but natural

equity; to provide that the workmen shall have reasonable wages, and the

capitalist reasonable profits.

              Others again (but these are rather philanthropists interesting

themselves for the labouring classes, than the labouring people themselves)

are shy of admitting the interference of authority in contracts for labour: they

fear that if law intervened, it would intervene rashly and ignorantly; they are

convinced that two parties, with opposite interests, attempting to adjust those

interests by negotiation through their representatives on principles of equity,

when no rule could be laid down to determine what was equitable, would

merely exasperate their differences instead of healing them; but what it is

useless to attempt by the legal sanction, these persons desire to compass by

the moral. Every employer, they think, ought to give sufficient wages; and if

he does it not willingly, should be compelled to it by general opinion; the test

of sufficient wages being their own feelings, or what they suppose to be those

of the public. This is, I think, a fair representation of a considerable body of

existing opinion on the subject.

              I desire to confine my remarks to the principle involved in all thesesuggestions, without taking into account practical difficulties, serious as these

must at once be seen to be. I shall suppose that by one or other of these

contrivances, wages could be kept above the point to which they would be

brought by competition. This is as much as to say, above the highest rate

which can be afforded by the existing capital consistently with employing all

the labourers. For it is a mistake to suppose that competition merely keeps

down wages. It is equally the means by which they are kept up. When there

are any labourers unemployed, these, unless maintained by charity, become

competitors for hire, and wages fall; but when all who were out of work have

found employment, wages will not, under the freest system of competition,

fall lower. There are strange notions afloat concerning the nature of

competition. Some people seem to imagine that its effect is something

indefinite; that the competition of sellers may lower prices, and the

competition of labourers may lower wages, down to zero, or some

unassignable minimum. Nothing can be more unfounded. Goods can only be

lowered in price by competition, to the point which calls forth buyers

sufficient to take them off; and wages can only be lowered by competition

until room is made to admit all the labourers to a share in the distribution of

the wages-fund. If they fell below this point, a portion of capital would

remain unemployed for want of labourers; a counter-competition would

commence on the side of capitalists, and wages would rise.

              Since, therefore, the rate of wages which results from competition

distributes the whole existing wages-fund among the whole labouring

population; if law or opinion succeeds in fixing wages above this rate, some

labourers are kept out of employment; and as it is not the intention of the

philanthropists that these should starve, they must be provided for by a forced

increase of the wages-fund; by a compulsory saving. It is nothing to fix a

minimum of wages, unless there be a provision that work, or wages at least,

be found for all who apply for it. This, accordingly, is always part of the

scheme; and is consistent with the ideas of more people than would approve

of either a legal or a moral minimum of wages. Popular sentiment looks upon

it as the duty of the rich, or of the state, to find employment for all the poor.

If the moral influence of opinion does not induce the rich to spare from their

consumption enough to set all the poor to work at “reasonable wages,” it is

supposed to be incumbent on the state to lay on taxes for the purpose, either

by local rates or votes of public money. The proportion between labour and

the wages-fund would thus be modified to the advantage of the labourers, notby restriction of population, but by an increase of capital.

              2. If this claim on society could be limited to the existing generation;

if nothing more were necessary than a compulsory accumulation, sufficient to

provide permanent employment at ample wages for the existing numbers of

the people; such a proposition would have no more strenuous supporter than

myself. Society mainly consists of those who live by bodily labour; and if

society, that is, if the labourers, lend their physical force to protect

individuals in the enjoyment of superfluities, they are entitled to do so, and

have always done so, with the reservation of a power to tax those

superfluities for purposes of public utility; among which purposes the

subsistence of the people is the foremost. Since no one is responsible for

having been born, no pecuniary sacrifice is too great to be made by those who

have more than enough, for the purpose of securing enough to all persons

already in existence.

              But it is another thing altogether, when those who have produced

and accumulated are called upon to abstain from consuming until they have

given food and clothing, not only to all who now exist, but to all whom these

or their descendants may think fit to call into existence. Such an obligation

acknowledged and acted upon, would suspend all checks, both positive and

preventive; there would he nothing to hinder population from starting

forward at its rapidest rate; and as the natural increase of capital would, at the

best, not be more rapid than before, taxation, to make up the growing

deficiency, must advance with the same gigantic strides. The attempt would

of course be made to exact labour in exchange for support. But experience

has shown the sort of work to be expected from recipients of public charity.

When the pay is not given for the sake of the work, but the work found for

the sake of the pay, inefficiency is a matter of certainty: to extract real work

from day-labourers without the power of dismissal, is only practicable by the

power of the lash. It is conceivable, doubtless, that this objection might be

got over. The fund raised by taxation might be spread over the labour market

generally, as seems to be intended by the supporters of the droit au travail in

France; without giving to any unemployed labourer a right to demand support

in a particular place or from a particular functionary. The power of dismissal

as regards individual labourers, would then remain; the government only

undertaking to create additional employment when there was a deficiency,

and reserving, like other employers, the choice of its own workpeople. But letthem work ever so efficiently, the increasing population could not, as we

have so often shown, increase the produce proportionally: the surplus, after

all were fed, would bear a less and less proportion to the whole produce, and

to the population: and the increase of people going on in a constant ratio,

while the increase of produce went on in a diminishing ratio, the surplus

would in time be wholly absorbed; taxation for the support of the poor would

engross the whole income of the country; the payers and the receivers would

be melted down into one mass. The check to population either by death or

prudence, could not then be staved off any longer, but must come into

operation suddenly and at once; everything which places mankind above a

nest of ants or a colony of beavers, having perished in the interval.

              These consequences have been so often and so clearly pointed out by

authors of reputation, in writings known and accessible, that ignorance of

them on the part of educated persons is no longer pardonable. It is doubly

discreditable in any person setting up for a public teacher, to ignore these

considerations; to dismiss them silently, and discuss or declaim on wages and

poor-laws, not as if these arguments could be refuted, but as if they did not

exist.

              Every one has a right to live. We will suppose this canted. But no

one has a right to bring creatures into life, to be supported by other people.

Whoever means to stand upon the first of these rights must renounce all

pretension to the last. If a man cannot support even himself unless others help

him, those others are entitled to say that they do not also undertake the

support of any offspring which it is physically possible for him to summon

into the world. Yet there are abundance of writers and public speakers,

including many of most ostentatious pretensions to high feeling, whose views

of life are so truly brutish, that they see hardship in preventing paupers from

breeding hereditary paupers in the workhouse itself. Posterity will one day

ask with astonishment, what sort of people it could be among whom such

preachers could find proselytes.

              It would be possible for the state to guarantee employment at ample

wages to all who are born. But if it does this, it is bound in self-protection,

and for the sake of every purpose for which government exists, to provide

that no person shall be born without its consent. If the ordinary and

spontaneous motives to self-restraint are removed, others must be substituted.

Restrictions on marriage, at least equivalent to those existing in some of theGerman states, or severe penalties on those who have children when unable

to support them, would then be indispensable. Society can feed the

necessitous, if it takes their multiplication under its control; or (if destitute of

all moral feeling for the wretched offspring) it can leave the last to their

discretion, abandoning the first to their own care. But it cannot with impunity

take the feeding upon itself, and leave the multiplying free.

              To give profusely to the people, whether under the name of charity

or of employment, without placing them under such influences that prudential

motives shall act powerfully upon them, is to lavish the means of benefiting

mankind, without attaining the object. Leave the people in a situation in

which their condition manifestly depends upon their numbers, and the

greatest permanent benefit may be derived from any sacrifice made to

improve the physical well-being of the present generation, and raise, by that

means, the habits of their children. But remove the regulation of their wages

from their own control; guarantee to them a certain payment, either by law, or

by the feeling of the community; and no amount of comfort that you can give

them will make either them or their descendants look to their own self-

restraint as the proper means of preserving them in that state. You will only

make them indignantly claim the continuance of your guarantee, to

themselves and their full complement of possible posterity.

              On these grounds some writers have altogether condemned the

English poor-law, and any system of relief to the able-bodied, at least when

uncombined with systematic legal precautions against over-population. The

famous Act of the 43d of Elizabeth undertook, on the part of the public, to

provide work and wages for all the destitute able-bodied: and there is little

doubt that if the intent of that Act had been fully carried out, and no means

had been adopted by the administrators of relief to neutralize its natural

tendencies, the poor-rate would by this time have absorbed the whole net

produce of the land and labour of the country. It is not at all surprising,

therefore, that Mr. Malthus and others should at first have concluded against

all poor-laws whatever. It required much experience, and careful examination

of different modes of poor-law management, to give assurance that the

admission of an absolute right to be supported at the cost of other people,

could exist in law and in fact, without fatally relaxing the springs of industry

and the restraints of prudence. This, however, was fully substantiated, by the

investigations of the original Poor Law Commissioners. Hostile as they areunjustly accused of being to the principle of legal relief, they are the first who

fully proved the compatibility of any Poor Law, in which a right to relief was

recognised, with the permanent interests of the labouring class and of

posterity. By a collection of facts, experimentally ascertained in parishes

scattered throughout England, it was shown that the guarantee of support

could be freed from its injurious effects upon the minds and habits of the

people, if the relief, though ample in respect to necessaries, was accompanied

with conditions which they disliked, consisting of some restraints on their

freedom, and the privation of some indulgences. Under this proviso, it may

be regarded as irrevocably established, that the fate of no member of the

community needs be abandoned to chance; that society can and therefore

ought to insure every individual belonging to it against the extreme of want;

that the condition even of those who are unable to find their own support,

needs not be one of physical suffering, or the dread of it, but only of

restricted indulgence, and enforced rigidity of discipline. This is surely

something gained for humanity, important in itself, and still more so as a step

to something beyond; and humanity has no worse enemies than those who

lend themselves, either knowingly or unintentionally, to bring odium on this

law, or on the principles in which it originated.

              3. Next to the attempts to regulate wages, and provide artificially

that all who are willing to work shall receive an adequate price for their

labour, we have to consider another class of popular remedies, which do not

profess to interfere with freedom of contract; which leave wages to be fixed

by the competition of the market, but, when they are considered insufficient,

endeavour by some subsidiary resource to make up to the labourers for the

insufficiency. Of this nature was the expedient resorted to by parish

authorities during thirty or forty years previous to 1834, generally known as

the Allowance System. This was first introduced, when, through a succession

of bad seasons, and consequent high prices of food, the wages of labour had

become inadequate to afford to the families of the agricultural labourers the

amount of support to which they had been accustomed. Sentiments of

humanity, joined with the idea then inculcated in high quarters, that people

ought not to be allowed to suffer for having enriched their country with a

multitude of inhabitants, induced the magistrates of the rural districts to

commence giving parish relief to persons already in private employment: and

when the practice had once been sanctioned, the immediate interest of the

farmers, whom it enabled to throw part of the support of their labourers uponthe other inhabitants of the parish, led to a great and rapid extension of it. The

principle of this scheme being avowedly that of adapting the means of every

family to its necessities, it was a natural consequence that more should be

given to the married than to the single, and to those who had large families

than to those who had not: in fact, an allowance was usually canted for every

child. So direct and positive an encouragement to population is not, however,

inseparable from the scheme: the allowance in aid of wages might be a fixed

thing, given to all labourers alike, and as this is the least objectionable form

which the system can assume, we will give it the benefit of the supposition.

              It is obvious that this is merely another mode of fixing a minimum of

wages; no otherwise differing from the direct mode, than in allowing the

employer to buy the labour at its market price, the difference being made up

to the labourer from a public fund. The one kind of guarantee is open to all

the objections which have been urged against the other. It promises to the

labourers that they shall all have a certain amount of wages, however

numerous they may be: and removes, therefore, alike the positive and the

prudential obstacles to an unlimited increase. But besides the objections

common to all attempts to regulate wages without regulating population, the

allowance system has a peculiar absurdity of its own. This is, that it

inevitably takes from wages with one hand what it adds to them with the

other. There is a rate of wages, either the lowest on which the people can, or

the lowest on which they will consent, to live. We will suppose this to be

seven shillings a week. Shocked at the wretchedness of this pittance, the

parish authorities humanely make it up to ten. But the labourers are

accustomed to seven, and though they would gladly have more, will live on

that (as the fact proves) rather than restrain the instinct of multiplication.

Their habits will not be altered for the better by giving them parish pay.

Receiving three shillings from the parish, they will be as well off as before

though they should increase sufficiently to bring down wages to four

shillings. They will accordingly people down to that point; or perhaps,

without waiting for an increase of numbers, there are unemployed labourers

enough in the workhouse to produce the effect at once. It is well known that

the allowance system did practically operate in the mode described, and that

under its influence wages sank to a lower rate than had been known in

England before. During the last century, under a rather rigid administration of

the poor-laws, population increased slowly, and agricultural wages were

considerably above the starvation point. Under the allowance system thepeople increased so fast, and wages sank so low, that with wages and

allowance together, families were worse off than they had been before with

wages alone. When the labourer depends solely on wages, there is a virtual

minimum. If wages fall below the lowest rate which will enable the

population to be kept up, depopulation at least restores them to that lowest

rate. But if the deficiency is to be made up by a forced contribution from all

who have anything to give, wages may fall below starvation point; they may

fall almost to zero. This deplorable system, worse than any other form of

poor-law abuse yet invented, inasmuch as it pauperizes not merely the

unemployed part of the population but the whole, received a severe check

from the Poor Law of 1834: I wish it could be said that there are no signs of

its revival.

              4. But while this is generally condemned, there is another mode of

relief in aid of wages, which is still highly popular; a mode greatly preferable,

morally and socially, to parish al1owance, but tending, it is to be feared, to a

very similar economical result: I mean the much-boasted Allotment System.

This, too, is a contrivance to compensate the labourer for the insufficiency of

his wages, by giving him something else as a supplement to them: but instead

of having them made up from the poor-rate, he is enabled to make them up

for himself, by renting a small piece of ground, which he cultivates like a

garden by spade labour, raising potatoes and other vegetables for home

consumption, with perhaps some additional quantity for sale. If he hires the

ground ready manured, he sometimes pays for it at as high a rate as eight

pounds an acre: but getting his own labour and that of his family for nothing,
                                                                      161
he is able to gain several pounds by it even at so high a rent. The patrons of

the system make it a great point that the allotment shall be in aid of wages,

and not a substitute for them; that it shall not be such as a labourer can live

on, but only sufficient to occupy the spare hours and days of a man in

tolerably regular agricultural employment, with assistance from his wife and

children. They usually limit the extent of a single allotment to a quarter, or

something between a quarter and half an acre. If it exceeds this, without

being enough to occupy him entirely, it will make him, they say, a bad and

uncertain workman for hire: if it is sufficient to take him entirely out of the

class of hired labourers, and to become his sole means of subsistence, it will

make him an Irish cottier: for which assertion, at the enormous rents usually

demanded, there is some foundation. But in their precautions against

cottierism, these well-meaning persons do not perceive, that if the systemthey patronize is not a cottier system, it is, in essentials, neither more nor less

than a system of conacre.

              There is no doubt a material difference between eking out

insufficient wages by a fund raised by taxation, and doing the same thing by

means which make a clear addition to the gross produce of the country. There

is also a difference between helping a labourer by means of his own industry,

and subsidizing him in a mode which tends to make him careless and idle. On

both these points, allotments have an unquestionable advantage over parish

allowances. But in their effect on wages and population, I see no reason why

the two plans should substantially differ. All subsidies in aid of wages enable

the labourer to do with less remuneration, and therefore ultimately bring

down the price of labour by the full amount, unless a change be wrought in

the ideas and requirements of the labouring class; an alteration in the relative

value which they set upon the gratification of their instincts, and upon the

increase of their comforts and the comforts of those connected with them.

That any such change in their character should be produced by the allotment

system, appears to me a thing not to be expected. The possession of land, we

are sometimes told, renders the labourer provident. Property in land does so;

or what is equivalent to property, occupation on fixed terms and on a

permanent tenure. But mere hiring from year to year was never found to have

any such effect. Did possession of land render the Irishman provident?

Testimonies, it is true, abound, and I do not seek to discredit them, of the

beneficial change produced in the conduct and condition of labourers, by

receiving allotments. Such an effect is to be expected while those who hold

them are a small number; a privileged class, having a status above the

common level, which they are unwilling to lose. They are also, no doubt,

almost always, originally a select class, composed of the most favourable

specimens of the labouring people: which, however, is attended with the

inconvenience that the persons to whom the system facilitates marrying and

having children, are precisely those who would otherwise he the most likely

to practise prudential restraint. As affecting the general condition of the

labouring class, the scheme, as it seems to me, must be either nugatory or

mischievous. If only a few labourers have allotments, they are naturally those

who could do best without them, and no good is done to the class: while, if

the system were general, and every or almost every labourer had an

allotment, I believe the effect would be much the same as when every or

almost every labourer had an allowance in aid of wages. I think there can beno doubt that if, at the end of the last century, the Allotment instead of the

Allowance system had been generally adopted in England, it would equally

have broken down at that time did really exist; population would have started

forward exactly as in fact it did; and in twenty years, wages plus the

allotment would have been, as wages plus the allowance actually were, no

more than equal to the former wages without any allotment. The only

difference in favour of allotments would have been, that they make the

people grow their own poor-rates.

              I am at the same time quite ready to allow, that in some

circumstances, the possession of land at a fair rent, even without ownership,

by the generality of labourers for hire, operates as a cause not of low, but of

high wages. This, however, is when their land renders them, to the extent of

actual necessaries, independent of the market for labour. There is the greatest

difference between the position of people who live by wages, with land as an

extra resource, and of people who can, in case of necessity, subsist entirely

on their land, and only work for hire to add to their comforts. Wages are

likely to be high where none are compelled by necessity to sell their labour.

“People who have at home some kind of property to apply their labour to,

will not sell their labour for wages that do not afford them a better diet than

potatoes and maize, although in saving for themselves, they may live very

much on potatoes and maize. We are often surprised in travelling on the

Continent, to hear of a rate of day’s wages very high, considering the

abundance and cheapness of food. It is want of the necessity or the

inclination to take work, that makes day-labour scarce, and, considering the

price of provisions, dear, in many parts of the Continent, where property in
                                                  162
land is widely diffused among the people.” There are parts of the

Continent, where, even of the inhabitants of the towns, scarcely one seems to

be exclusively dependent on his ostensible employment; and nothing else can

explain the high price they put on their services, and the carelessness they

evince as to whether they are employed at all. But the effect would be far

different if their land or other resources gave them only a fraction of a

subsistence, leaving them under an undiminished necessity of selling their

labour for wages in an overstocked market. Their land would then merely

enable them to exist on smaller wages, and to carry their multiplication so

much the further before reaching the point below which they either could not,

or would not descend.              To the view I have taken of the effect of allotments, I see no
                                                                                  163
argument which can be opposed, but that employed by Mr. Thornton, with

whom on this subject I am at issue. His defence of allotments is grounded on

the general doctrine, that it is only the very poor who multiply without regard

to consequences, and that if the the condition of the existing generation could

be greatly improved, which he thinks might be done by the allotment system,

their successors would grow up with an increased standard of requirements,

and would not have families until they could keep them in as much comfort

as that in which they had been brought up themselves. I agree in as much of

this argument as goes to prove that a sudden and great improvement in the

condition of the poor, has always, through its effect on their habits of life, a

chance of becoming permanent. What happened at the time of the French

Revolution is an example. But I cannot think that the addition of a quarter or

even half an acre to every labourer’s cottage, and that too at a rack rent,

would (after the fall of wages which would be necessary to absorb the already

existing mass of pauper labour) make so great a difference in the comforts of

the family for a generation to come, as to raise up from childhood a labouring

population with a really higher permanent standard of requirements and

habits. So small a portion of land could only be made a permanent benefit, by

holding out encouragement to acquire by industry and saving, the means of

buying it outright: a permission which, if extensively made use of, would be a

kind of education in forethought and frugality to the entire class, the effects

of which might not cease with the occasion. The benefit would however

arise, not from what was given them, but from what they were stimulated to

acquire.

              No remedies for low wages have the smallest chance of being

efficacious, which do not operate on and through the minds and habits of the

people. While these are unaffected, any contrivance, even if successful, for

temporarily improving the condition of the very poor, would but let slip the

reins by which population was previously curbed; and could only, therefore,

continue to produce its effect, if, by the whip and spur of taxation, capital

were compelled to follow at an equally accelerated pace. But this process

could not possibly continue for long together, and whenever it stopped, it

would leave the country with an increased number of the poorest class, and a

diminished proportion of all except the poorest, or, if it continued long

enough, with none at all. For “to this complexion must come at last” all social

arrangements, which remove the natural checks to population withoutsubstituting any others.

        154
               See the Evidence on the subject of Allotments, collected by teh

Commissioners of Poor Law Enquiry.

        155
               Laing’s Notes of a Traveller, p. 456.

        156
               See Thornton on Over–Population, ch. viii.

 

 

     Chapter 13 – The Remedies for Low Wages Further Considered

 

 

              1. By what means, then, is poverty to be contended against? How is

the evil of low wages to be remedied? If the expedients usually recommended

for the purpose are not adapted to it, can no others be thought of? Is the

problem incapable of solution? Can political economy do nothing, but only

object to everything, and demonstrate that nothing can be done?

              If this were so, political economy might have a needful, but would

have a melancholy, and a thankless task. If the bulk of the human race are

always to remain as at present, slaves to toil in which they have no interest,

and therefore feel no interest — drudging from early morning till late at night

for bare necessaries, and with all the intellectual and moral deficiencies

which that implies — without resources either in mind or feelings —

untaught, for they cannot be better taught than fed; selfish, for all their

thoughts are required for themselves; without interests or sentiments as

citizens and members of society, and with a sense of injustice rankling in

their minds, equally for what they have not, and for what others have; I know

not what there is which should make a person with any capacity of reason,

concern himself about the destinies of the human race. There would be no

wisdom for any one but in extracting from life, with Epicurean indifference,

as much personal satisfaction to himself and those with whom he sympathies,

as it can yield without injury to any one, and letting the unmeaning bustle of

so-called civilized existence roll by unheeded. But there is no ground for such

a view of human affairs. Poverty, like most social evils, exists because men

follow their brute instincts without due consideration. But society is possible,

precisely because man is not necessarily a brute. Civilization in every one of

its aspects is a struggle against the animal instincts. Over some even of the

strongest of them, it has shown itself capable of acquiring abundant control.

It has artificialized large portions of mankind to such an extent, that of many

of their most natural inclinations they have scarcely a vestige or a

remembrance left. If it has not brought the instinct of population under as

much restraint as is needful, we must remember that it has never seriously

tried. What efforts it has made, have mostly been in the contrary direction.

Religion, morality, and statesmanship have vied with one another inincitements to marriage, and to the multiplication of the species, so it be but

in wedlock. Religion has not even yet discontinued its encouragements. The

Roman Catholic clergy (of any other clergy it is unnecessary to speak, since

no other have any considerable influence over the poorer classes) everywhere

think it their duty to promote marriage, in order to prevent fornication. There

is still in many minds a strong religious prejudice against the true doctrine.

The rich, provided the consequences do not touch themselves, think it

impugns the wisdom of Providence to suppose that misery can result from the

operation of a natural propensity.. the poor think that “God never sends

mouths but he sends meat.” No one would guess from the language of either,

that man had any voice or choice in the matter. So complete is the confusion

of ideas on the whole subject; owing in a great degree to the mystery in

which it is shrouded by a spurious delicacy, which prefer that right and

wrong should be mismeasured and confounded on one of the subjects most

momentous to human welfare, rather than that the subject be freely spoken of

and discussed. People are little aware of the cost to mankind of this

scrupulosity of speech. The diseases of society can, no more than corporal

maladies, he prevented or cured without being spoken about in plain

language. All experience shows that the mass of mankind never judge of

moral questions for themselves, never see anything to be right or wrong until

they have been frequently told it; and who tells them that they have any

duties in the matter in question, while they keep within matrimonial limits?

Who meets with the smallest condemnation, or rather, who does not meet

with sympathy and benevolence, for any amount of evil which he may have

brought upon himself and those dependent on him, by this species of

incontinence? While a man who is intemperate in drink, is discountenanced

and despised by all who profess to be moral people, it is one of the chief

grounds made use of in appeals to the benevolent, that the applicant has a
                                                  164
large family and is unable to maintain them.

              One cannot wonder that silence on this great department of human

duty should produce unconsciousness of moral obligations, when it produces

oblivion of physical facts. That it is possible to delay marriage, and to live in

abstinence while unmarried, most people are willing to, allow. but when

persons are once married, the idea, in this country, never seems to enter any

one’s mind that having or not having a family, or the number of which it shall

consist, is amenable to their own control. One would image that children

were rained down upon married people, direct from heaven, without theirbeing art or part in the matter; that it was really, as the common phrases have

it, God’s will, and not their own, which decided the numbers of their

offspring. Let us see what is a Continental philosopher’s opinion on this

point; a man among the most benevolent of his time, and the happiness of

whose married life has been celebrated.

                                                                      165
              “Lorsque des prejuges dangereux,” says Sismondi, “ne sont point

accredites, lorsqu’une morale contraire à nos vrais devoirs envers les autres et

surtout envers les creatures qui nous doivent la vie, n’est point enseignee au

nom de l’autorite la plus sacree, aucun homme sage ne se marie avant de se

trouver dans une condition qui lui donne un moyen assure de vivre; aucun

père de famille n’a plus d’enfans qu’il n’en peut convenablement elever. Ce

dernier compte à bon droit que ses enfans devront se contenter du sort dans

lequel il a vecu; aussi doit-il desirer que la generation naissante represente

exactement celle qui s’en va; qu’un fils et une fille arrives à l’âge nubile

remplacent son père et sa mère; que les enfans de ses enfans le remplacent à

son tour avec sa femme; que sa fille trouve dans une autre maison

precisement le sort qu’il donnera à la fille d’une autre maison dans la sienne,

et que le revenu qui suffisait aux pères suffise aux enfans.” In a count

increasing in wealth, some increase of numbers would be admissible, but that

is a question of detail, not of principle. “Une fois que cette famille est formee,

la justice et l’humanite exigent qu’il s’impose la même contrainte à laquelle

se soumettent les celibataires. Lorsqu’on voit combien est petit, en tout pays,

le nombre des enfans naturels, on doit reconnaître que cette contrainte est

suffisamment efficace. Dans un pays où la population ne peut pas s’accroître,

ou du moins dans lequel son progrès doit être si lent qu’il soit à peine

perceptible, quand il n’y a point de places nouvelles pour de nouveaux

etablissemens, un père qui a huit enfans doit compter, ou que six de ses

enfans mourront en bas âge, ou que trois de ses contemporains et trois de ses

contemporaines, et dans la generation suivante, trois de ses fils et trois de ses

filles, ne se marieront pas à cause de lui.”

              2. Those who think it hopeless that the labouring classes should be

induced to practise a sufficient degree of prudence in regard to the increase of

their families, because they have hitherto stopt short of that point, show an

inability to estimate the ordinary principles of human action. Nothing more

would probably be necessary to secure that result, than an opinion generally

diffused that it was desirable. As a moral principle, such an opinion has neveryet existed in any country: it is curious that it does not so exist in countries in

which, from the spontaneous operation of individual forethought, population

is, comparatively speaking, efficiently repressed. What is practised as

prudence is still not recognised as duty. the talkers and writers are mostly on

the other side, even in France, where a sentimental horror of Malthus is

almost as rife as in this country. Many causes may be assigned, besides the

modern date of the doctrine, for its not having yet gained possession of the

general mind. Its truth has, in some respects, been its detriment. One may be

permitted to doubt whether, except among the poor themselves (for whose

prejudices on this subject there is no difficulty in accounting) there has ever

yet been, in any class of society, a sincere and earnest desire that wages

should be high. There has been plenty of desire to keep down the poor-rate;

but, that done, people have been very willing that the working classes should

be ill off. Nearly all who are not labourers themselves, are employers of

labour, and are not sorry to get the commodity cheap. It is a fact, that even

Boards of Guardians, who are supposed to be official apostles of anti-

population doctrines, will seldom hear patiently of anything which they are

pleased to designate as Malthusianism. Boards of Guardians in rural districts,

principally consist of farmers, and farmers, it is well known, in general

dislike even allotments, as making the labourers “too independent.” From the

gentry, who are in less immediate contact and collision of interest with the

labourers, better things might be expected, and the gentry of England are

usually charitable. But charitable people have human infirmities, and would,

very often, be secretly not a little dissatisfied if no one needed their charity: it

is from them one oftenest hears the base doctrine, that God has decreed there

shall always be poor. When one adds to this, that nearly every person who

has had in him any active spring of exertion for a social object, has had some

favourite reform to effect which he thought the admission of this great

principle would throw into the shade; has had corn laws to repeal, or taxation

to reduce, or small notes to issue, or the charter to carry, or the church to

revive or abolish, or the aristocracy to pull down, and looked upon every one

as an enemy who thought anything important except his object; it is scarcely

wonderful that since the population doctrine was first promulgated, nine-

tenths of the talk has always been against it, and the remaining tenth only

audible at intervals; and that it has not yet penetrated far among those who

might be expected to be the least willing recipients of it, the labourers

themselves.              But let us try to imagine what would happen if the idea became

general among the labouring class, that the competition of too great numbers

was the special cause of their poverty; so that every labourer looked (with

Sismondi) upon every other who had more than the number of children which

the circumstances of society allowed to each, as doing him a wrong — as

filling up the place which he was entitled to share. Any one who supposes

that this state of opinion would not have a great effect on conduct, must be

profoundly ignorant of human nature; can never have considered how large a

portion of the motives which induce the generality of men to take care even

of their own interest, is derived from regard for opinion — from the

expectation of being disliked or despised for not doing it. In the particular

case in question, it is not too much to say that over-indulgence is as much

caused by the stimulus of opinion as by the mere animal propensity; since

opinion universally, and especially among the most uneducated classes, has

connected ideas of spirit and power with the strength of the instinct, and of

inferiority with its moderation or absence; a perversion of sentiment caused

by its being the means, and the stamp, of a dominion exercised over other

human being. The effect would be great of merely removing this factitious

stimulus; and when once opinion shall have turned itself into an adverse

direction, a revolution will soon take place in this department of human

conduct. We are often told that the most thorough perception of the

dependence of wages on population will not influence the conduct of a

labouring man, because it is not the children he himself can have that will

produce any effect in generally depressing the labour market. True: and it is

also true, that one soldier’s running away will not lose the battle; accordingly

it is not that consideration which keeps each soldier in his rank: it is the

disgrace which naturally and inevitably attends on conduct by any one

individual, which if pursued by a majority, everybody can see would be fatal.

Men are seldom found to brave the general opinion of their class, unless

supported either by some principle higher than regard for opinion, or by some

strong body of opinion elsewhere.

              It must be borne in mind also, that the opinion here in question, as

soon as it attained any prevalence, would have powerful auxiliaries in the

great majority of women. It is seldom by the choice of the wife that families

are too numerous; on her devolves (along with all the physical suffering and

at least a full share of the privations) the whole of the intolerable domestic

drudgery resulting from the excess. To be relieved from it would be hailed asa blessing by multitudes of women who now never venture to urge such a

claim, but who would urge it, if supported by the moral feelings of the

community. Among the barbarisms which law and morals have not yet

ceased to sanction, the most disgusting surely is, that any human being

should be permitted to consider himself as having a right to the person of

another.

              If the opinion were once generally established among the labouring

class that their welfare required a due regulation of the numbers of families,

the respectable and well-conducted of the body would conform to the

prescription, and only those would exempt themselves from it, who were in

the habit of making light of social obligations generally; and there would be

then an evident justification for converting the moral obligation against

bringing children into the world who are a burthen to the community, into a

legal one; just as in many other cases of the progress of opinion, the law ends

by enforcing against recalcitrant minorities, obligations which to be useful

must be general, and which, from a sense of their utility, a large majority

have voluntarily consented to take upon themselves. There would be no need,

however, of legal sanctions, if women were admitted, as on all other grounds

they have the clearest title to be, to the same rights of citizenship with men.

Let them cease to be confined by custom to one physical function as their

means of living and their source of influence, and they would have for the

first time an equal voice with men in what concerns that function: and of all

the improvements in reserve for mankind which it is now possible to foresee,

none might be expected to be so fertile as this in almost every kind of moral

and social benefit.

              It remains to consider what chance there is that opinions and

feelings, grounded on the law of the dependence of wages on population, will

arise among the labouring classes; and by what means such opinions and

feelings can be called forth. Before considering the grounds of hope on this

subject, a hope which many persons, no doubt, will be ready, without

consideration, to pronounce chimerical, I will remark, that unless a

satisfactory answer can be made to these two questions, the industrial system

prevailing in this country, and regarded by many writers as the ne plus ultra

of civilization — the dependence of the whole labouring class of the

community on the wages of hired labour, is irrevocably condemned. The

question we are considering is, whether, of this state of things,overpopulation and a degraded condition of the labouring class are the

inevitable consequence. If a prudent regulation of population be not

reconcilable with the system of hired labour, the system is a nuisance, and the

grand object of economical statesmanship should be (by whatever

arrangements of property, and alterations in the modes of applying industry),

to bring the labouring people under the influence of stronger and more

obvious inducements to this kind of prudence, than the relation of workmen

and employers can afford.

              But there exists no such incompatibility. The causes of poverty are

not so obvious at first sight to a population of hired labourers, as they are to

one of proprietors, or as they would be to a socialist community. They are,

however, in no way mysterious. The dependence of wages on the number of

the competitors for employment, is so far from hard of comprehension, or

unintelligible to the labouring classes, that by great bodies of them it is

already recognised and habitually acted on. It is familiar to all Trades Unions:

every successful combination to keep up wages, owes its success to

contrivances for restricting the number of the competitors; all skilled trades

are anxious to keep down their own numbers, and many impose, or

endeavour to impose, as a condition upon employers, that they shall not take

more than a prescribed number of apprentices. There is, of course, a great

difference between limiting their numbers by excluding other people, and

doing the same thing by a restraint imposed on themselves: but the one as

much as the other shows a clear perception of the relation between their

numbers and their remuneration. The principle is understood in its application

to any one employment, but not to the general mass of employment. For this

there are several reasons: first, the operation of causes is more easily and

distinctly seen in the more circumscribed field; secondly, skilled artizans are

a more intelligent class than, ordinary manual labourers: and the habit of

concert, and of passing in review their general condition as a trade, keeps up

a better understanding of their collective interests: thirdly and lastly, they are

the most provident, because they are the best off, and have the most to

preserve. What, however, is clearly perceived and admitted in particular

instances, it cannot be hopeless to see understood and acknowledged as a

general truth. Its recognition, at least in theory, seems a thing which must

necessarily and immediately come to pass, when the minds of the labouring

classes become capable of taking any rational view of their own aggregate

condition. Of this the great majority of them have until now been incapable,either from the uncultivated state of their intelligence, or from poverty, which

leaving them neither the fear of worse, nor the smallest hope of better, makes

them careless of the consequences of their actions, and without thought for

the future.

              3. For the purpose therefore of altering the habits of the labouring

people, there is need of a twofold action, directed simultaneously upon their

intelligence and their poverty. An effective national education of the children

of the labouring class, is the first thing needful: and, coincidently with this, a

system of measures which shall (as the Revolution did in France ) extinguish

extreme poverty for one whole generation.

              This is not the place for discussing, even in the most general manner,

either the principles or the machinery of national education. But it is to be

hoped that opinion on the subject is advancing, and that an education of mere

words would not now be deemed sufficient, slow as our progress is towards

providing anything better even for the classes to whom society professes to

give the very best education it can devise. Without entering into disputable

points, it may be asserted without scruple, that the aim of all intellectual

training for the mass of the people, should be to cultivate common sense; to

qualify them for forming a sound practical judgment of the circumstances by

which they are surrounded. Whatever, in the intellectual department, can be

superadded to this, is chiefly ornamental; while this is the indispensable

groundwork on which education must rest. Let this object be acknowledged

and kept in view as the thing to be first aimed at, and there will be little

difficulty in deciding either what to teach, or in what manner to teach it.

              An education directed to diffuse good sense among the people, with

such knowledge as would qualify them to judge of the tendencies of their

actions, would be certain, even without any direct inculcation, to raise up a

public opinion by which intemperance and improvidence of every kind would

be held discreditable, and the improvidence which overstocks the labour

market would be severely condemned, as an offence against the common

weal. But though the sufficiency of such a state of opinion, supposing it

formed, to keep the increase of population within proper limits, cannot, I

think, be doubted; yet, for the formation of the opinion, it would not do to

trust to education alone. Education is not compatible with extreme poverty. It

is impossible effectually to teach an indigent population. And it is difficult to

make those feel the value of comfort who have never enjoyed it, or thoseappreciate the wretchedness of a precarious subsistence, who have been made

reckless by always living from hand to mouth. Individuals often struggle

upwards into a condition of ease; but the utmost that can be expected from a

whole people is to maintain themselves in it; and improvement in the habits

and requirements of the mass of unskilled day-labourers will be difficult and

tardy, unless means can be contrived of raising the entire body to a state of

tolerable comfort, and maintaining them in it until a new generation grows

up.

              Towards effecting this object there are two resources available,

without wrong to any one, without any of the liabilities of mischief attendant

on voluntary or legal charity, and not only without weakening, but on the

contrary strengthening, every incentive to industry, and every motive to

forethought.

              4. The first is, a great national measure of colonization. I mean, a

grant of public money, sufficient to remove at once, and establish in the

colonies, a considerable fraction of the youthful agricultural population. By

giving the preference, as Mr. Wakefield proposes, to young couples, or when

these cannot be obtained, to families with children nearly grown up, the

expenditure would be made to go the farthest possible towards accomplishing

the end, while the colonies would be supplied with the greatest amount of

what is there in deficiency and here in superfluity, present and prospective

labour. It has been shown by others, and the grounds of the opinion will be

exhibited in a subsequent part of the present work, that colonization on an

adequate scale might be so conducted as to cost the country nothing, or

nothing that would not be certainly repaid; and that the funds required, even

by way of advance, would not be drawn from the capital employed in

maintaining labour, but from that surplus which cannot find employment at

such profit as constitutes an adequate remuneration for the abstinence of the

possessor, and which is therefore sent abroad for investment, or wasted at

home in reckless speculations. That portion of the income of the country

which is habitually ineffective for any purpose of benefit to the labouring

class, would bear any draught which it could be necessary to make on it for

the amount of emigration which is here in view.

              The second resource would he, to devote all common land, hereafter

brought into cultivation, to raising a class of small proprietors. It has long

enough been the practice to take these lands from public use for the merepurpose of adding to the domains of the rich. It is time that what is left of

them should be retained as an estate sacred to the benefit of the poor. The

machinery for administering it already exists, having been created by the

General Inclosure Act. What I would propose (though, I confess, with small

hope of its being soon adopted) is, that in all future cases in which common

land is permitted to be enclosed, such portion should first be sold or assigned

as is sufficient to compensate the owners of manorial or common rights, and

that the remainder should be divided into sections of five acres or

thereabouts, to be conferred in absolute property on individuals of the

labouring class who would reclaim and bring them into cultivation by their

own labour. The preference should he given to such labourers, and there are

many of them, as had saved enough to maintain them until their first crop was

got in, or whose character was such as to induce some responsible person to

advance to them the requisite amount on their personal security. The tools,

the manure, and in some cases the subsistence also might be supplied by the

parish, or by the state; interest for the advance, at the rate yielded by the

public funds, being laid on as a perpetual quit-rent, with power to the peasant

to redeem it at any time for a moderate number of years’ purchase. These

little landed estates might, if it were thought necessary, be made indivisible

by law; though, if the plan worked in the manner designed, I should not

apprehend any objectionable degree of subdivision. In case of intestacy, and

in default of amicable arrangement among the heirs, they might be bought by

government at their value, and recanted to some other labourer who would

give security for the price. The desire to possess one of these small properties

would probably become, as on the Continent, an inducement to prudence and

economy pervading the whole labouring population; and that great

desideratum among a people of hired labourers would be provided, an

intermediate class between them and their employers; affording them the

double advantage, of an object for their hopes, and, as there would be good

reason to anticipate, an example for their imitation.

              It would, however, be of little avail that either or both of these

measures of relief should be adopted, unless on such a scale, as would enable

the whole body of hired labourers remaining on the soil to obtain not merely

employment, but a large addition to the present wages — such an addition as

would enable them to live and bring up their children in a degree of comfort

and independence to which they have hitherto been strangers. When the

object is to raise the permanent condition of a people, small means do notmerely produce small effects, they produce no effect at all. Unless comfort

can be made as habitual to a whole generation as indigence is now, nothing is

accomplished; and feeble half-measures do but fritter away resources, far

better reserved until the improvement of public opinion and of education

shall raise up politicians who will not think that merely because a scheme

promises much, the part of statesmanship is to have nothing to do with it.

              I have left the preceding paragraphs as they were written, since they

remain true in principle, though it is no longer urgent to apply these specific

recommendations to the present state of this country. The extraordinary

cheapening of the means of transport, which is one of the great scientific

achievements of the age, and the knowledge which nearly all classes of the

people have now acquired, or are in the way of acquiring, of the condition of

the labour market in remote parts of the world, have opened up a spontaneous

emigration from these islands to the new countries beyond the ocean, which

does not tend to diminish, but to increase; and which, without any national

measure of systematic colonization, may prove sufficient to effect a material

rise of wages in Great Britain, as it has already done in Ireland, and to

maintain that rise unimpaired for one or more generations. Emigration,

instead of an occasional vent, is becoming a steady outlet for superfluous

numbers; and this new fact in modern history, together with the flush of

prosperity occasioned by free trade, have canted to this overcrowded country

a temporary breathing-time, capable of being employed in accomplishing

those moral and intellectual improvements in all classes of the people, the

very poorest included, which would render improbable any relapse into the

over-peopled state. Whether this golden opportunity will be properly used,

depends on the wisdom of our councils; and whatever depends on that, is

always in a high degree precarious. The grounds of hope are, that there has

been no time in our history when mental progress has depended so little on

governments, and so much on the general disposition of the people; none in

which the spirit of improvement has extended to so many branches of human

affairs at once, nor in which all kinds of suggestions tending to the public

good in every department, from the humblest physical to the highest moral or

intellectual, were heard with so little prejudice, and had so good a chance of

becoming known and being fairly considered.

        157
               Little improvement can be expected in morality until the

producing large families is regarded with the same feelings as drunkenness orany other physical excess. But while the aristocracy and clergy are foremost

to set the example of this kind of incontinence, what can be expected from

the poor?

        158
               Nouveaux Principes, liv, ch. 5.

 

 

   Chapter 14 – Of the Differences of Wages in Different Employments

 

 

              1. In treating of wages, we have hitherto confined ourselves to the

causes which operate on them generally, and en masse; the laws which

govern the remuneration of ordinary or average labour: without reference to

the existence of different kinds of work which are habitually paid at different

rates, depending in some degree on different laws. We will now take into

consideration these differences, and examine in what manner they affect or

are affected by the conclusions already established.

                                                                            166
              A well-known and very popular chapter of Adam Smith contains

the best exposition yet given of this portion of the subject. I cannot indeed

think his treatment so complete and exhaustive as it has sometimes been

considered; but as far as it goes, his analysis is tolerably successful.

              The differences, he says, arise partly from the policy of Europe,

which nowhere leaves things at perfect liberty, and partly “from certain

circumstances in the employments themselves, which either really, or at least

in the imaginations of men, make up for a small pecuniary gain in some, and

counterbalance a great one in others.” These circumstances he considers to

be: “First, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments

themselves; secondly, the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty and

expense of learning them; thirdly, the constancy or inconstancy of

employment in them; fourthly, the small or great trust which must be reposed

in those who exercise them; and fifthly, the probability or improbability of

success in them.”

              Several of these points he has very copiously illustrated: though his

examples are sometimes drawn from a state of facts now no longer existing.

“The wages of labour vary with the ease or hardship, the cleanliness or

dirtiness, the honourableness or dishonourableness of the employment. Thus,

in most places, take the year round, a journeyman tailor earns less than a

journeyman weaver. His work is much easier.” Things have much altered, as

to a weaver’s remuneration, since Adam Smith’s time; and the artizan whose

work was more difficult than that of a tailor, can never, I think, have been the

common weaver. “A journeyman weaver earns less than a journeyman smith.His work is not always easier, but it is much cleanlier.” A more probable

explanation is, that it requires less bodily strength. “A journeyman

blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom earns so much in twelve hours as a

collier, who is only a labourer, does in eight. His work is not quite so dirty, is

less dangerous, and is carried on in daylight, and above ground. Honour

makes a great part of the reward of all honourable professions. In point of

pecuniary gain, all things considered,” their recompense is, in his opinion,

below the average. “Disgrace has the contrary effect. The trade of a butcher is

a brutal and an odious business; but it is in most places more profitable than

the greater part of common trades. The most detestable of all employments,

that of public executioner, is, in proportion to the quantity of work done,

better paid than any common trade whatever.”

              One of the causes which make hand-loom weavers cling to their

occupation in spite of the scanty remuneration which it now yields, is said to

be a peculiar attractiveness arising from the freedom of action which it allows
                                                                        167
to the workman. “He can play or idle,” says a recent authority, “as feeling

or inclination lead him; rise early or late, apply himself assiduously or

carelessly, as he pleases, and work up at any time by increased exertion,

hours previously sacrificed to indulgence or recreation. There is scarcely

another condition of any portion of our working population thus free from

external control. The factory operative is not only mulcted of his wages for

absence, but, if of frequent occurrence, discharged altogether from his

employment. The bricklayer, the carpenter, the painter, the joiner, the

stonemason, the outdoor labourer, have each their appointed daily hours of

labour, a disregard of which would lead to the same result.” Accordingly,

“the weaver will stand by his loom while it will enable him to exist, however

miserably; and many, induced temporarily to quit it, have returned to it again,

when work was to be had.”

              “Employment is much more constant,” continues Adam Smith, “in

some trades than in others. In the greater part of manufactures, a journeyman

may be pretty sure of employment almost every day in the year that he is able

to work” (the interruptions of business arising from overstocked markets, or

from a suspension of demand, or from a commercial crisis, must be

excepted). “A mason or bricklayer, On the contrary, can work neither in hard

frost nor in foul weather, and his employment at all other times depends upon

the occasional calls of his customers. He is liable, in consequence, to befrequently without any. What he earns, therefore, while he is employed, must

not only maintain him while he is idle, hut make him some compensation for

those anxious thought of so precarious a situation must sometimes computed

earnings of the greater part of manufacturers, are nearly upon a level with the

day wages of common labourers, those of masons and bricklayers are

generally from one-half more to double those wages. No species of skilled

labour, however, seems more easy to learn than that of masons and

bricklayers. The high wages of those workmen, therefore, are not so much the

recompense of their skill, as the compensation for the inconstancy of their

employment.

              “When the inconstancy of the employment is combined with the

hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness of the work, it sometimes raises the

wages of the most common labour above those of the most skilled artificers.

A collier working by the piece, is supposed, at Newcastle, to earn commonly

about double, and in many parts of Scotland about three times, the wages of

common labour. His high wages arise altogether from the hardship,

disagreeableness, and dirtiness of his work. His employment may, upon most

occasions, be as constant as he pleases. The coal-heavers in London exercise

a trade which in hardship, dirtiness, and disagreeableness, almost equals that

of colliers; and from the unavoidable irregularity in the arrival of coal-ships,

the employment of the greater part of them is necessarily very inconstant. If

colliers, therefore, commonly earn double and triple the wages of common

labour, it ought not to seem unreasonable that coal-heavers should sometimes

earn four or five times those wages. In the inquiry made into their condition a

few years ago, it was found that at the rate at which they were then paid, they

could earn about four times the wages of common labour in London. How

extravagant soever these earnings may appear, if they were more than

sufficient to compensate all the disagreeable circumstances of the business,

there would soon be so great a number of competitors as, in a trade which has

no exclusive privilege, would quickly reduce them to a lower rate.”

              These inequalities of remuneration, which are supposed to

compensate for the disagreeable circumstances of particular employments,

would, under certain conditions, be natural consequences of perfectly free

competition: and as between employments of about the same grade, and filled

by nearly the same description of people, they are, no doubt, for the most

part, realized in practice. But it is altogether a false view of the state of facts,to present this as the relation which generally exists between agreeable and

disagreeable employments. The really exhausting and the really repulsive

labours, instead of being better paid than others, are almost invariably paid

the worst of all, because performed by those who have no choice. It would be

otherwise in a favourable state of the general labour market. If the labourers

in the aggregate, instead of exceeding, fell short of the amount of

employment, work which was generally disliked would not be undertaken,

except for more than ordinary wages. But when the supply of labour so far

exceeds the demand that to find employment at all is an uncertainty, and to be

offered it on any terms a favour, the case is totally the reverse. Desirable

labourers, those whom every one is anxious to have, can still exercise a

choice. The undesirable must take what they can get. The more revolting the

occupation, the more certain it is to receive the minimum of remuneration,

because it devolves on the most helpless and degraded, on those who from

squalid poverty, or from want of skill and education, are rejected from all

other employments. Partly from this cause, and partly from the natural and

artificial monopolies which will be spoken of presently, the inequalities of

wages are generally in an opposite direction to the equitable principle of

compensation erroneously represented by Adam Smith as the general law of

the remuneration of labour. The hardships and the earnings, instead of being

directly proportional, as in any just arrangements of society they would be,

are generally in an inverse ratio to one another.

              One of the points best illustrated by Adam Smith, is the influence

exercised on the remuneration of an employment by the uncertainty of

success in it. If the chances are great of total failure, the reward in case of

success must be sufficient to make up, in the general estimation, for those

adverse chances. But, owing to another principle of human nature, if the

reward comes in the shape of a few great prizes, it usually attracts

competitors in such numbers, that the average remuneration may be reduced

not only to zero, but even to a negative quantity. The success of lotteries

proves that this is possible: since the aggregate body of adventurers in

lotteries necessarily lose, otherwise the undertakers could not gain. The case

of certain professions is considered by Adam Smith to be similar. “The

probability that any particular person shall ever be qualified for the

employment to which he is educated, is very different in different

occupations. In the greater part of mechanic trades, success is almost certain,

but very uncertain in the liberal professions. Put your son apprentice to ashoemaker, there is little doubt of his learning to make a pair of shoes; but

send him to study the law, it is at least twenty to one if ever he makes such

proficiency as will enable him to live by the business. In a perfectly fair

lottery, those who draw the pries ought to gain all that is lost by those who

draw the blanks. In a profession where twenty fail for one that succeeds, that

one ought to gain all that should have been gained by the unsuccessful

twenty. The counsellor-at-law, who, perhaps, at near forty years of age,

begins to make something by his profession, ought to receive the retribution,

not only of his own so tedious and expensive education, but of that of more

than twenty others who are never likely to make anything by it. How

extravagant soever the fees of counsellors-at-law may sometimes appear,

their real retribution is never equal to this. Compute in any particular place,

what is likely to be annually gained, and what is likely to be annually spent,

by all the different workmen in any common trade, such as that of

shoemakers or weavers, and you will find that the former sum will generally

exceed the latter. But make the same computation with regard to all the

counsellors and students of law, in all the different inns of court, and you will

find that their annual gains bear but a small proportion to their annual

expense, even though you rate the former as high, and the latter as low, as

can well be done.”

              Whether this is true in our own day, when the gains of the few are

incomparably greater than in the time of Adam Smith, but also the

unsuccessful aspirants much more numerous, those who have the appropriate

information must decide. It does not, however, seem to be sufficiently

considered by Adam Smith, that the prizes which he speaks of comprise not

the fees of counsel only, but the places of emolument and honour to which

their profession gives access, together with the coveted distinction of a

conspicuous position in the public eye.

              Even where there are no great prizes, the mere love of excitement is

sometimes enough to cause an adventurous employment to be overstocked.

This is apparent “in the readiness of the common people to enlist as soldiers,

or to go to sea..... The dangers and hair-breadth escapes of a life of

adventures, instead of disheartening young people, seem frequently to

recommend a trade to them. A tender mother, among the inferior ranks of

people, is often afraid to send her son to school at a sea-port town, lest the

sight of the ships and the conversation and adventures of the sailors shouldentice him to go to sea. The distant prospect of hazards from which we can

hope to extricate ourselves by courage and address, is not disagreeable to us,

and does not raise the wages of labour in any employment. It is otherwise

with those in which courage and address can be of no avail. In trades which

are known to be very unwholesome, the wages of labour are always

remarkably high. Unwholesomeness is a species of disagreeableness, and its

effects upon the wages of labour are to be ranked under that general head.”

              2. The preceding are cases in which inequality of remuneration is

necessary to produce equality of attractiveness, and are examples of the

equalizing effect of free competition. The following are cases of real

inequality, and arise from a different principle. “The wages of labour vary

according to the small or great trust which must be reposed in the workmen.

The wages of goldsmiths and jewellers are everywhere superior to those of

many other workmen, not only of equal, but of much superior ingenuity; on

account of the precious materials with which they are intrusted. We trust our

health to the physician, our fortune and sometimes our life and reputation to

the lawyer and attorney. Such confidence could not safely be reposed in

people of a very mean or low condition. Their reward must be such,

therefore, as may give them that rank in society which so important a trust

requires.”

              The superiority of reward is not here the consequence of

competition, but of its absence: not a compensation for disadvantages

inherent in the employment, but an extra advantage; a kind of monopoly

price, the effect not of a legal, but of what has been termed a natural

monopoly. If all labourers were trustworthy, it would not be necessary to give

extra pay to working goldsmiths on account of the trust. The degree of

integrity required being supposed to be uncommon, those who can make it

appear that they possess it are able to take advantage of the peculiarity, and

obtain higher pay in proportion to its rarity. This opens a class of

considerations which Adam Smith, and most other political economists, have

taken into far too little account, and from inattention to which, he has given a

most imperfect exposition of the wide difference between the remuneration of

common labour and that of skilled employments.

              Some employments require a much longer time to learn, and a much

more expensive course of instruction than others; and to this extent there is,

as explained by Adam Smith, an inherent reason for their being more highlyremunerated. If an artizan must work several years at learning his trade

before he can earn anything, and several years more before becoming

sufficiently skilful for its finer operations, he must have a prospect of at last

earning enough to pay the wages of all this past labour, with compensation

for the delay of payment, and an indemnity for the expenses of his education.

His wages, consequently, must yield, over and above the ordinary amount, an

annuity sufficient to repay these sums, with the common rate of profit, within

the number of years he can expect to live and to be in working condition.

This, which is necessary to place the skilled employments, all circumstances

taken together, on the same level of advantage with the unskilled, is the

smallest difference which can exist for any length of time between the two

remunerations, since otherwise no one would learn the skilled employments.

And this amount of difference is all which Adam Smith’s principles account

for. When the disparity is greater, he seems to think that it must be explained

by apprentice laws, and the rules of corporations which restrict admission

into many of the skilled employments. But, independently of these or any

other artificial monopolies, there is a natural monopoly in favour of skilled

labourers against the unskilled, which makes the difference of reward exceed,

sometimes in a manifold proportion, what is sufficient merely to equalize

their advantages. If unskilled labourers had it in their power to compete with

skilled, by merely taking the trouble of learning the trade, the difference of

wages might not exceed what would compensate them for that trouble, at the

ordinary rate at which labour is remunerated. But the fact that a course of

instruction is required, of even a low degree of costliness, or that the labourer

must be maintained for a considerable time from other sources, suffices

everywhere to exclude the great body of the labouring people from the

possibility of any such competition. Until lately, all employments which

required even the humble education reading and writing, could be recruited

only from a select class, the majority having had no opportunity of acquiring

those attainments. All such employments, accordingly, were immensely

overpaid, as measured by the ordinary remuneration of labour. Since reading

and writing have been brought within the reach of a multitude, the monopoly

price of the lower grade of educated employments has greatly fallen, the

competition for them having increased in an almost incredible degree. There

is still, however, a much greater disparity than can be accounted for on the

principle of competition. A clerk from whom nothing is required but the

mechanical labour of copying, gains more than an equivalent for his mereexertion if he receives the wages of a bricklayer’s labourer. His work is not a

tenth part as hard, it is quite as easy to learn, and his condition is less

precarious, a clerk’s place being generally a place for life. The higher rate of

his remuneration, therefore, must be partly ascribed to monopoly, the small

degree of education required being not even yet so generally diffused as to

call forth the natural number of competitors; and partly to the remaining

influence of an ancient custom, which requires that clerks should maintain

the dress and appearance of a more highly paid class. In some manual

employments, requiring a nicety of hand which can only be acquired by long

practice, it is difficult to obtain at any cost workmen in sufficient numbers,

who are capable of the most delicate kind of work; and the wages paid to

them are only limited by the price which purchasers are willing to give for the

commodity they produce. This is the case with some working watchmakers,

and with the makers of some astronomical and optical instruments. If

workmen competent to such employments were ten times as numerous as

they are, there would be purchasers for all which they could make, not indeed

at the present prices, but at those lower prices which would be the natural

consequence of lower wages. Similar considerations apply in a still greater

degree to employments which it is attempted to confine to persons of a

certain social rank, such as what are called the liberal professions; into which

a person of what is considered too low a class of society, is not easily

admitted, and if admitted, does not easily succeed.

              So complete, indeed, has hitherto been the separation, so strongly

marked the line of demarcation, between the different grades of labourers, as

to be almost equivalent to an hereditary distinction of caste; each

employment being chiefly recruited from the children of those already

employed in it, or in employments of the same rank with it in social

estimation, or from the children of persons who, if originally of a lower rank,

have succeeded in raising themselves by their exertions. The liberal

professions are mostly supplied by the sons of either the professional, or the

idle classes: the more highly skilled manual employments are filled up from

the sons of skilled artizans, or the class of tradesmen who rank with them: the

lower classes of skilled employments are in a similar case; and unskilled

labourers, with occasional exceptions, remain from father to son in their

pristine condition. Consequently the wages of each class have hitherto been

regulated by the increase of its own population, rather than of the general

population of the country. If the professions are overstocked, it is because theclass of society from which they have always mainly been supplied, has

greatly increased in number, and because most of that class have numerous

families, and bring up some at least of their sons to professions. If the wages

of artizans remain so much higher than those of common labourers, it is

because artizans are a more prudent class, and do not marry so early or so

inconsiderately. The changes, however, now so rapidly taking place in usages

and ideas, are undermining all these distinctions; the habits or disabilities

which chained people to their hereditary condition are fast wearing away, and

every class is exposed to increased and increasing competition from at least

the class immediately below it. The general relaxation of conventional

barriers, and the increased facilities of education which already are, and will

be in a much greater degree, brought within the reach of all, tend to produce,

among many excellent effects, one which is the reverse; they tend to bring

down the wages of skilled labour. The inequality of remuneration between

the skilled and the unskilled is, without doubt, very much greater than is

justifiable; but it is desirable that this should be corrected by raising the

unskilled, not by lowering the skilled. If, however, the other changes taking

place in society are not accompanied by a strengthening of the checks to

population on the part of labourers generally, there will be a tendency to

bring the lower grades of skilled labourers under the influence of a rate of

increase regulated by a lower standard of living than their own, and thus to

deteriorate their condition without rising that of the general mass; the

stimulus given to the multiplication of the lowest class being sufficient to fill

up without difficulty the additional space gained by them from those

immediately above.

              3. A modifying circumstance still remains to be noticed, which

interferes to some extent with the operation of the principles thus far brought

to view. While it is true, as a general rule, that the earnings of skilled labour,

and especially of any labour which requires school education, are at a

monopoly rate, from the impossibility, to the mass of the people, of obtaining

that education; it is also true that the policy of nations, or the bounty of

individuals, formerly did much to counteract the effect of this limitation of

competition, by offering eleemosynary instruction to a much larger class of

persons than could have obtained the same advantages by paying their price.

Adam Smith has pointed out the operation of this cause in keeping down the

remuneration of scholarly or bookish occupations generally, and in particular

of clergymen, literary men, and schoolmasters, or other teachers of youth. Icannot better set forth this part of the subject than in his words.

              “It has been considered as of so much importance that a proper

number of young people should he educated for certain professions, that

sometimes the public, and sometimes the piety of private founders, have

established many pensions, scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, &c. for this

purpose, which draw many more people into those trades than could

otherwise pretend to follow them. In all Christian countries, I believe, the

education of the greater part of churchmen is paid for in this manner. Very

few of them are educated altogether at their own expense. The long, tedious,

and expensive education, therefore, of those who are, will not always procure

them a suitable reward, the church being crowded with people who, in order

to get employment, are willing to accept of a much smaller recompense than

what such an education would otherwise have entitled them to; and in this

manner the competition of the poor takes away the reward of the rich. It

would be indecent, no doubt, to compare either a curate or a chaplain with a

journeyman in any common trade. The pay of a curate or a chaplain,

however, may very properly be considered as of the same nature with the

wages of a journeyman. They are, all three, paid for their work according to

the contract which they may happen to make with their respective superiors.

Till after the middle of the fourteenth century, five marks, containing as much

silver as ten pounds of our present money, was in England the usual pay of a

curate or a stipendiary parish priest, as we find it regulated by the decrees of

several different national councils. At the same period fourpence a day,

containing the same quantity of silver as a shilling of our present money, was

declared to be the pay of a master-mason, and threepence a day, equal to
                                                                        168
ninepence of our present money, that of a journeyman mason. The wages

of both these labourers, therefore, supposing them to have been constantly

employed, were much superior to those of the curate. The wages of the

master-mason, supposing him to have been without employment one-third of

the year, would have fully equalled them. By the 12th of Queen Anne, c. 12,

it is declared, ‘That whereas for want of sufficient maintenance and

encouragement to curates, the cures have in several places been meanly

supplied, the bishop is therefore empowered to appoint by writing under his

hand and seal a sufficient certain stipend or allowance, not exceeding fifty,

and not less than twenty pounds a year.’ Forty pounds a year is reckoned at

present very good pay for a curate, and notwithstanding this act of

parliament, there are many curacies under twenty pounds a year. This lastsum does not exceed what is frequently earned by common labourers in many

country parishes. Whenever the law has attempted to regulate the wages of

workmen, it has always been rather to lower them than to raise them. But the

law has upon many occasions attempted to raise the wages of curates, and for

the dignity of the Church, to oblige the rectors of parishes to give them more

than the wretched maintenance which they themselves might be willing to

accept of. And in both cases the law seems to have been equally ineffectual,

and has never been either able to raise the wages of curates or to sink those of

labourers to the degree that was intended, because it has never been able to

hinder either the one from being willing to accept of less than the legal

allowance, on account of the indigence of their situation and the multitude of

their competitors; or the other from receiving more, on account of the contra

competition of those who expected to derive either profit or pleasure from

employing them.”

              In professions in which there are no benefices, such as law (?) and

physic, if an equal proportion of people were educated at the public expense,

the competition would soon be so great as to sink very much their pecuniary

reward. It might then not be worth any man’s while to educate his son to

either of those professions at his own expense. They would be entirely

abandoned to such as had been educated by those public charities; whose

numbers and necessities would oblige them in general to content themselves

with a very miserable recompense.

              “That unprosperous race of men, commonly called men of letters,

are pretty much in the situation which lawyers and physicians probably

would be in upon the foregoing supposition. In every part of Europe, the

greater part of them have been educated for the church, but have been

hindered by different reasons from entering into holy orders. They have

generally, therefore, been educated at the public expense, and their numbers

are everywhere so great as to reduce the price of their labour to a very paltry

recompense.

              “Before the invention of the art of printing the only employment by

which a man of letters could make anything of his talents, was that of a

public or private teacher, or by communicating to other people the curious

and useful knowledge which he had acquired himself: and this is still surely a

more honourable, a more useful, and in general even a more profitable

employment than that other of writing for a bookseller, to which the art ofprinting has given occasion. The time and study, the genius, knowledge, and

application requisite to qualify an eminent teacher of the sciences, are at least

equal to what is necessary for the greatest practitioners in law and physic. But

the usual reward of the eminent teacher bears no proportion to that of the

lawyer or physician; because the trade of the one is crowded with indigent

people who have been brought up to it at the public expense, where those of

the other two are encumbered with very few who have not been educated at

their own. The usual recompense, however, of public and private teachers,

small as it may appear, would undoubtedly be less than it is, if the

competition of those yet more indigent men of letters who write for bread

was not taken out of the market. Before the invention of the art of printing, a

scholar and a beggar seem to have been terms very nearly synonymous. The

different governors of the universities before that time appear to have often

granted licences to their scholars to beg.”

              4. The demand for literary labour has so greatly increased since

Adam Smith wrote, while the provisions for eleemosynary education have

nowhere been much added to, and in the countries which have undergone

revolutions have been much diminished, that little effect in keeping down the

recompense of literary labour can now be ascribed to the influence of those

institutions. But an effect nearly equivalent is now produced by a cause

somewhat similar — the competition of persons who, by analog with other

arts, may be called amateurs. Literary occupation is one of those pursuits in

which success may be attained by persons the greater part of whose time is

taken up by other employments; and the education necessary for it, is the

common education of all cultivated persons. The inducements to it,

independently of money, in the present state of the world, to all who have

either vanity to gratify, or personal or public objects to promote, are strong.

These motives now attract into this career a great and increasing number of

persons who do not need its pecuniary fruits, and who would equally resort to

it if it afforded no remuneration at all. In our own country (to cite known

examples), the most influential, and on the whole most eminent philosophical

writer of recent times (Bentham), the greatest political economist (Ricardo),

the most ephemerally celebrated, and the really greatest poets (Byron and

Shelley), and the most successful writer of prose (Scott), were none of them

author by profession; and only two of the five, Scott and Byron, could have

supported themselves by the works which they wrote. Nearly all the higher

departments of authorship are, to a great extent, similarly filled. Inconsequence, although the highest pecuniary prizes of successful authorship

are incomparably greater than at any former period, yet on any rational

calculation of the chances, in the existing competition, scarcely any writer

can hope to gain a living by books, and to do so by magazines and reviews

becomes daily more difficult. It is only the more troublesome and

disagreeable kinds of literary labour, and those which confer no personal

celebrity, such as most of those connected with newspapers, or with the

smaller periodicals, on which an educated person can now rely for

subsistence. Of these, the remuneration is, on the whole, decidedly high;

because, though exposed to the competition of what used to be called “poor

scholars” (persons who have received a learned education from some public

or private charity), they are exempt from that of amateurs, those who have

other means of support being seldom candidates for such employments.

Whether these considerations are not connected with something radically

amiss in the idea of authorship as a profession, and whether any social

arrangement under which the teachers of mankind consist of persons giving

out doctrines for bread, is suited to be, or can possibly be, a permanent thing

— would be a subject well worthy of the attention of thinkers.

              The clerical, like the literary profession, is frequently adopted by

persons of independent means, either from religious zeal, or for the sake of

the honour or usefulness which may belong to it, or for a chance of the high

prizes which it holds out: and it is now principally for this reason that the

salaries of curates are so low., those salaries, though considerably raised by

the influence of public opinion, being still generally insufficient as the sole

means of support for one who has to maintain the externals expected from a

clergyman of the established church.

              When an occupation is carried on chiefly by persons who derive the

main portion of their subsistence from other sources, its remuneration may be

lower almost to any extent, than the wages of equally severe labour in other

employments. The principal example of the kind is domestic manufactures.

When spinning and knitting were carried on in every cottage, by families

deriving their principal support from agriculture, the price at which their

produce was sold (which constituted the remuneration of the labour) was

often so low, that there would have been required great perfection of

machinery to undersell it. The amount of the remuneration in such a case,

depends chiefly upon whether the quantity of the commodity, produced bythis description of labour, suffices to supply the whole of the demand. If it

does not, and there is consequently a necessity for some labourers who

devote themselves entirely to the employment, the price of the article must be

sufficient to pay those labourers at the ordinary rate, and to reward therefore

very handsomely the domestic producers. But if the demand is so limited that

the domestic manufacture can do more than satisfy it, the price is naturally

kept down to the lowest rate at which peasant families think it worth while to

continue the production. It is, no doubt, because the Swiss artizans do not

depend for the whole of their subsistence upon their looms, that Zurich is

able to maintain a competition in the European market with English capital,
                                    169
and English fuel and machinery. Thus far, as to the remuneration of the

subsidiary employment; but the effect to the labourers of having this

additional resource, is almost certain to be (unless peculiar counteracting

causes intervene) a proportional dilution of the wages of their main

occupation. The habits of the people (as has already been so often remarked)

everywhere require some particular scale of living, and no more, as the

condition without which they will not bring up a family. Whether the income

which maintains them in this condition comes from one source or from two,

makes no difference: if there is a second source of income, they require less

from the first; and multiply (at least this has always hitherto been the case) to

a point which leaves them no more from both employments, than they would

probably have had from either if it had been their sole occupation.

              For the same reason it is found that, caeteris paribus, those trades are

generally the worst paid, in which the wife and children of the artizan aid in

the work. The income which the habits of the class demand, and down to

which they are almost sure to multiply, is made up, in those trades, by the

earnings of the whole family, while in others the same income must be

obtained by the labour of the man alone. It is even probable that their

collective earnings will amount to a smaller sum than those of the man alone

in other trades; because the prudential restraint on marriage is unusually weak

when the only consequence immediately felt is an improvement of

circumstances, the joint earnings of the two going further in their domestic

economy after marriage than before. Such accordingly is the fact, in the case

of hand-loom weavers. In most kinds of weaving, women can and do earn as

much as men, and children are employed at a very early age; but the

aggregate earnings of a family are lower than in almost any other kind of

industry, and the marriages earlier. It is noticeable also that there are certainbranches of hand-loom weaving in which wages are much above the rate

common in the trade, and that these are the branches in which neither women

nor young persons are employed. These facts were authenticated by the

inquiries of the Hand-loom Weavers Commission, which made its report in

1841. No argument can be hence derived for the exclusion of women from

the liberty of competing in the labour market; since, even when no more is

earned by the labour of a man and a woman than would have been earned by

the man alone, the advantage to the woman of not depending on a master for

subsistence may be more than an equivalent. It cannot, however, be

considered desirable as a permanent element in the condition of a labouring

class, that the mother of the family (the case of a single woman is totally

different) should be under the necessity of working for subsistence, at least

elsewhere than in their place of abode. In the case of children, who are

necessarily dependent, the influence of their competition in depressing the

labour market is an important element in the question of limiting their labour,

in order to provide better for their education.

              5. It deserves consideration, why the wages of women are generally

lower, and very much lower, than those of men. They are not universally so.

Where men and women work at the same employment, if it be one for which

they are equally fitted in point of physical power, they are not always

unequally paid. Women, in factories, sometimes earn as much as men; and so

they do in hand-loom weaving, which, being paid by the piece, brings their

efficiency to a sure test. When the efficiency is equal, but the pay unequal,

the only explanation that can be given is custom; grounded either in a

prejudice, or in the present constitution of society, which, making almost

every woman, socially speaking, an appendage of some man, enables men to

take systematically the lion’s share of whatever belongs to both. But the

principal question relates to the peculiar employments of women. The

remuneration of these is always, I believe, greatly below that of employments

of equal skill and equal disagreeableness, carried on by men. In some of these

cases the explanation is evidently that already given: as in the case of

domestic servants, whose wages, speaking generally, are not determined by

competition, but are greatly in excess of the market value of the labour, and

in this excess, as in almost all things which are regulated by custom, the male

sex obtains by far the largest share. In the occupations in which employers

take full advantage of competition, the low wages of women as compared

with the ordinary earnings of men, are a proof that the employments areoverstocked; that although so much smaller a number of women, than of

men, support themselves by wages, the occupations which law and usage

make accessible to them are comparatively so few, that the field of their

employment is still more overcrowded. It must be observed, that as matters

now stand, a sufficient degree of overcrowding may depress the wages of

women to a much lower minimum than those of men. The wages, at least of

single women, must be equal to their support, but need not be more than

equal to it; the minimum, in their case, is the pittance absolutely requisite for

the sustenance of one human being. Now the lowest point to which the most

superabundant competition can permanently depress the wages of a man, is

always somewhat more than this. Where the wife of a labouring man does not

by general custom contribute to his earnings, the man’s wages must be at

least sufficient to support himself, a wife, and a number of children adequate

to keep up the population, since if it were less the population would not be

kept up. And even if the wife earns something, their joint wages must be

sufficient to support not only themselves, but (at least for some years) their

children also. The ne plus ultra of low wages, therefore (except during some

transitory crisis, or in some decaying employment), can hardly occur in any

occupation which the person employed has to live by, except the occupations

of women.

              6. Thus far, we have, throughout this discussion, proceeded on the

supposition that competition is free, so far as regards human interference;

being limited only by natural causes, or by unintended effect of general social

circumstances. But law or custom may interfere to limit competition. If

apprentice laws, or the regulations of corporate bodies, make the access to a

particular employment slow, costly, or difficult, the wages of that

employment may be kept much above their natural proportion to the wages of

common labour. They might be so kept without any assignable limit, were it

not that wages which exceed the usual rate require corresponding prices, and

that there is a limit to the price at which even a restricted number of

producers can dispose of all they produce. In most civilized countries, the

restrictions of this kind which once existed have been either abolished or very

much relaxed, and will, no doubt, soon disappear entirely. In some trades,

however, and to some extent, the combinations of workmen produce a similar

effect. Those combinations always fail to uphold wages at an artificial rate,

unless they also limit the number of competitors. But they do occasionally

succeed in accomplishing this. In several trades the workmen have been ableto make it almost impracticable for strangers to obtain admission either as

journeymen or as apprentices, except in limited numbers, and under such

restrictions as they choose to impose. It was given in evidence to the Hand-

loom Weavers Commission, that this is one of the hardships which aggravate

the grievous condition of that depressed class. Their own employment is

overstocked and almost ruined; but there are many other trades which it

would not be difficult for them to learn: to this, however, the combinations of

workmen in those other trades are said to interpose an obstacle hitherto

insurmountable.

              Notwithstanding, however, the cruel manner in which the exclusive

principle of these combinations operates in a case of this peculiar nature, the

question, whether they are on the whole more useful or mischievous, requires

to be decided on an enlarged consideration of consequences, among which

such a fact as this is not one of the most important items. Putting aside the

atrocities sometimes committed by workmen in the way of personal outrage

or intimidation, which cannot be too rigidly repressed; if the present state of

the general habits of the people were to remain for ever unimproved, these

partial combinations, in so far as they do succeed in keeping up the wages of

any trade by limiting its numbers, might be looked upon as simply

intrenching around a particular spot against the inroads of over-population,

and making the wages of the class depend upon their own rate of increase,

instead of depending on that of a more reckless and improvident class than

themselves. What at first sight seems the injustice of excluding the more

numerous body from sharing the gains of a comparatively few, disappears

when we consider that by being admitted they would not be made better off,

for more than a short time; the only permanent effect which their admission

would produce, would be to lower the others to their own level. To what

extent the force of this consideration is annulled when a tendency commences

towards diminished over-crowding in the labouring classes generally, and

what grounds of a different nature there may be for regarding the existence of

trade combinations as rather to be desired than deprecated, will be considered

in a subsequent chapter of this work, with the subject of Combination Laws.

              7. To conclude this subject, I must repeat an observation already

made, that there are kinds of labour of which the wages are fixed by custom,

and not by competition. Such are the fees or charges of professional persons:

of physicians, surgeons, barristers, and even attorneys. These, as a generalrule, do not vary, and though competition operates upon those classes as

much as upon any others, it is by dividing the business, not, in general, by

diminishing the rate at which it is paid. The cause of this, perhaps, has been

the prevalence of an opinion that such persons are more trustworthy if paid

highly in proportion to the work they perform; insomuch that if a lawyer or a

physician offered his services at less than the ordinary rate, instead of gaining

more practice, he would probably lose that which he already had. For

analogous reasons it is usual to pay greatly beyond the market price of their

labour, all persons in whom the employer wishes to place peculiar trust, or

from whom he requires something besides their mere services. For example,

most persons who can afford it, pay to their domestic servants higher wages

than would purchase in the market the labour of persons fully as competent to

the work required. They do this, not merely from ostentation, but also from

more reasonable motives; either because they desire that those they employ

should serve them cheerfully, and be anxious to remain in their service; or

because they do not like to drive a hard bargain with people whom they are in

constant intercourse with; or because they dislike to have near their persons,

and continuity in their sight, people with the appearance and habits which are

the usual accompaniments of a mean remuneration. Similar feelings operate

in the minds of persons in business, with respect to their clerks, and other

employes. Liberality, generosity, and the credit of the employer, are motives

which, to whatever extent they operate, preclude taking the utmost advantage

of competition: and doubtless such motives might, and even now do, operate

on employers of labour in all the great departments of industry; and most

desirable is it that they should. But they can never raise the average wages of

labour beyond the ratio of population to capital. By giving more to each

person employed, they limit the power of giving employment to numbers;

and however excellent their moral effect, they do little good economically,

unless the pauperism of those who are shut out, leads indirectly to a

readjustment by means of an increased restraint on population.

        159
               Wealth of Nations, book i, ch. 10.

        160
               Mr Muggerridge’s Report to the Handloom Weavers Inquiry

Commission.

        161
               See the Statute of Labourers, 25 Edw. III.

        162
               Four-fifths of the manufacturers of the Canton of Zurich are smallfarmers, generally proprietors of their farms. The cotton manufacture

occupies either wholly or partially 23,000 people, nearly a tenth part of the

population; and they consume a greater quantity of cotton per inhabitant than

either France or England. See the Statistical Account of Zurich formerly

cited, pp. 105, 108, 110.

 

                              Chapter 15 – Of Profits

 

 

              1. Having treated of the labourer’s share of the produce, we next

proceed to the share of the capitalist; the profits of capital or stock; the gains

of the person who advances the expenses of production — who, from funds

in his possession, pays the wages of the labourers, or supports them during

the work; who supplies the requisite building, materials, and tools or

machinery. and to whom, by the usual terms of the contract, the produce

belongs, to be disposed of at his pleasure. After indemnifying him for his

outlay, there commonly remains a surplus, is his profit; the net income from

his capital: the amount which he can afford to spend in necessaries or

pleasures, or from which by further saving he can add to his wealth.

              As the wages of the labourer are the remuneration of labour, so the

profits of the capitalist are properly, according to Mr. Senior’s well-chosen

expression, the remuneration of abstinence. They are what he gains by

forbearing to consume his capital for his own uses, and allowing it to be

consumed by productive labourers for their uses. For this forbearance he

requires a recompense. Very often in personal enjoyment he would be a

gainer by squandering his capital, the capital amounting to more than the sum

of the profits which it will yield during the years he can expect to live. But

while he retains it undiminished, he has always the power of consuming it if

he wishes or needs; he can bestow it upon others at his death; and in the

meantime he derives from it an income, which he can without

impoverishment apply to the satisfaction of his own wants or inclinations.

              Of the gains, however, which the possession of a capital enables a

person to make, a part only is properly an equivalent for the use of the capital

itself; namely, as much as a solvent person would be willing to pay for the

loan of it. This, which as everybody knows is called interest, is all that aperson is enabled to get by merely abstaining from the immediate

consumption of his capital, and allowing it to be used for productive purposes

by others. The remuneration which is obtained in any country for mere

abstinence, is measured by the current rate of interest on the best security;

such security as precludes any appreciable chance of losing the principal.

What a person expects to gain, who superintends the employment of his own

capital, is always more, and generally much more, than this. The rate of profit

greatly exceeds the rate of interest. The surplus is partly compensation for

risk. By lending his capital, on unexceptionable security, he runs little or no

risk. But if he embarks in business on his own account, he always exposes his

capital to some, and in many cases to very great, danger of partial or total

loss. For this danger he must be compensated, otherwise he will not incur it.

He must likewise be remunerated for the devotion of his time and labour. The

control of the operations of industry usually belongs to the person who

supplies the whole or the greatest part of the funds by which they are carried

on, and who, according to the ordinary arrangement, is either alone

interested, or is the person most interested (at least directly), in the result. To

exercise this control with efficiency, if the concern is large and complicated,

requires great assiduity, and often, no ordinary skill. This assiduity and skill

must he remunerated.

              The gross profits from capital, the gains returned to those who

supply the funds for production, must suffice for these three purposes. They

must afford a sufficient equivalent for abstinence, indemnity for risk, and

remuneration for the labour and skill required for superintendence. These

different compensations may be either paid to the same, or to different

persons. The capital, or some part of it, may be borrowed: may belong to

some one who does not undertake the risks or the trouble of business. In that

case, the lender, or owner, is the person who practises the abstinence; and is

remunerated for it by the interest paid to him, while the difference between

the interest and the gross profits remunerates the exertions and risks of the
            170
undertaker. Sometimes, again, the capital, or a part of it, is supplied by

what is called a sleeping partner; who shares the risks of the employment, but

not the trouble, and who, in consideration of those risks, receives not a mere

interest, but a stipulated share of the gross profits. Sometimes the capital is

supplied and the risk incurred by one person, and the business carried on

exclusively in his name, while the trouble of management is made over to

another, who is engaged for that purpose at a fixed salary. Management,however, by hired servants, who have no interest in the result but that of

preserving their salaries, is proverbially inefficient, unless they act under the

inspecting eye, if not the controlling hand, of the person chiefly interested:

and prudence almost always recommends giving to a manager not thus

controlled, a remuneration partly dependent on the profits; which virtually

reduces the case to that of a sleeping partner. Or finally, the same person may

own the capital, and conduct the business; adding, if he will and can, to the

management of his own capital, that of as much more as the owners may be

willing to trust him with. But under any or all of these arrangements, the

same three things require their remuneration, and must obtain it from the

gross profit: abstinence, risk, exertion. And the three parts into which profit

may be considered as resolving itself, may be described respectively as

interest, insurance, and wages of superintendence.

              2. The lowest rate of profit which can permanently exist, is that

which is barely adequate, at the given place and time, to afford an equivalent

for the abstinence, risk, and exertion implied in the employment of capital.

From the gross profit, has first to be deducted as much as will form a fund

sufficient on the average to cover all losses incident to the employment. Next,

it must afford such an equivalent to the owner of the capital for forbearing to

consume it, as is then and there a sufficient motive to him to persist in his

abstinence. How much will be required to form this equivalent, depends on

the comparative value placed, in the given society, upon the present and the

future: (in the words formerly used) on the strength of the effective desire of

accumulation. Further, after covering all losses, and remunerating the owner

for forbearing to consume, there must be something left to recompense the

labour and skill of the person who devotes his time to the business. This

recompense too must be sufficient to enable at least the owners of the larger

capitals to receive for their trouble, or to pay to some manager for his, what

to them or him will be a sufficient inducement for undergoing it. If the

surplus is no more than this, none but large masses of capital will be

employed productively; and if it did not even amount to this, capital would be

withdrawn from production, and unproductively consumed, until, by an

indirect consequence of its diminished amount, to be explained hereafter, the

rate of profit was raised.

              Such, then, is the minimum of profits: but that minimum is

exceedingly variable, and at some times and places extremely low; onaccount of the great variableness of two out of its three elements. That the

rate of necessary remuneration for abstinence, or in other words the effective

desire of accumulation, differs widely in different states of society and

civilization, has been seen in a former chapter. There is a still wider

difference in the element which consists in compensation for risk. I am not

now speaking of the differences in point of risk between different

employments of capital in the same society, but of the very different degrees

of security of property in different states of society. Where, as in many of the

governments of Asia, property is in perpetual danger of spoliation from a

tyrannical government, or from its rapacious and ill-controlled officers;

where to possess or to be suspected of possessing wealth, is to be a mark not

only for plunder, but perhaps for personal ill-treatment to extort the

disclosure and surrender of hidden valuables; or where, as in the European

Middle Ages, the weakness of the government, even when not itself inclined

to oppress, leaves its subjects exposed without protection or redress to active

spoilation, or audacious withholding of just rights, by any power individual;

the rate of profit which persons of average dispositions will require, to make

them forego the immediate enjoyment of what they happen to possess, for the

purpose of exposing it and themselves to these perils, must be something very

considerable. And these contingencies affect those who live on the mere

interest of their capital, in common with those who personally engage in

production. In a generally secure state of society, the risks which may be

attendant on the nature of particular employments seldom fall on the person

who lends his capital, if he lends on good security; but in a state of society

like that of many parts of Asia, no security (except perhaps the actual pledge

of gold or jewels) is good: and the mere possession of a hoard, when known

or suspected, exposes it and the possessor to risks, for which scarcely any

profit he could expect to obtain would be an equivalent; so that there would

be still less accumulation than there is, if a state of insecurity did not also

multiply the occasions on which the possession of a treasure may be the

means of saving life or averting serious calamities. Those who lend, under

these wretched governments, do it at the utmost peril of never being paid. In

most of the native states of India, the lowest terms on which any one will

lend money, even to the government, are such, that if the interest is paid only

for a few years, and the principal not at all, the lender is tolerably well

indemnified. If the accumulation of principal and compound interest is

ultimately compromised at a few shil1ings in the pound, he has generallymade an advantageous bargain.

              3. The remuneration of capital in different employments, much more

than the remuneration of labour, varies according to the circumstances which

render one employment more attractive, or more repulsive, than another. The

profits, for example, of retail trade, in proportion to the capital employed,

exceed those of wholesale dealers or manufacturers, for this reason among

others, that there is less consideration attached to the employment. The

greatest, however, of these differences, is that caused by difference of risk.

The profits of a gunpowder manufacturer must be considerably greater than

the average, to make up for the peculiar risks to which he and his property are

constantly exposed. When, however, as in the case of marine adventure, the

peculiar risks are capable of being, and commonly are, commuted for a fixed

payment, the premium of insurance takes its regular place among the charges

of production, and the compensation which the owner of the ship or cargo

receives for that payment, does not appear in the estimate of his profits, but is

included in the replacement of his capital.

              The portion, too, of the gross profit, which forms the remuneration

for the labour and skill of the dealer or producer, is very different in different

employments. This is the explanation always given of the extraordinary rate

of apothecaries’ profit; the greatest part, as Adam Smith observes, being

frequently no more than the reasonable wages of professional attendance; for

which, until a late alteration of the law, the apothecary could not demand any

remuneration, except in the prices of his drugs. Some occupations require a

considerable amount of scientific or technical education, and can only be

carried on by persons who combine with that education a considerable

capital. Such is the business of an engineer, both in the original sense of the

term, a machine-maker, and in its popular or derivative sense, an undertaker

of public works. These are always the most profitable employments. There

are cases, again, in which a considerable amount of labour and skill is

required to conduct a business necessity of limited extent. In such cases, a

higher than common rate of profit is necessary to yield only the common rate

of remuneration. “In a small seaport-town,” says Adam Smith, “a little grocer

will make for or fifty per cent upon a stock of a single hundred pounds, while

a considerable wholesale merchant in the same place will scarce make eight

or ten per cent upon a stock of ten thousand. The trade of the grocer may be

necessary for the conveniency of the inhabitants, and the narrowness of themarket may not admit the employment of a larger capital in the business. The

man, however, must not only live by his trade, but live by it suitably to the

qualifications which it requires. Besides possessing a little capital, he must be

able to read, write, and account, and must be a tolerable judge, too, of

perhaps fifty or sixty different sorts of goods, their prices, qualities, and the

markets where they are to be had cheapest. Thirty or forty pounds a year

cannot be considered as too great a recompense for the labour of a person so

accomplished. Deduct this from the seemingly great profits of his capital, and

little more will remain, perhaps, than the ordinary profits of stock. The

greater part of the apparent profit is, in this case, too, real wages.”

              All the natural monopolies (meaning thereby those which are created

by circumstances, and not by law) which produce or aggravate the disparities

in the remuneration of different kinds of labour, operate similarly between

different employments of capital. If a business can only be advantageously

carried on by a large capital, this in most countries limits so narrowly the

class of persons who can enter into the employment, that they are enabled to

keep their rate of profit above the general level. A trade may also, from the

nature of the case, be confined to so few that profits may admit of being kept

up by a combination among the dealers. It is well known that even among so

numerous a body as the London booksellers, this sort of combination long

continued to exist. I have already mentioned the case of the gas and water

companies.

              4. After due allowance is made for these various causes of

inequality, namely, differences in the risk or agreeableness of different

employments, and natural or artificial monopolies; the rate of profit on capital

in all employments tends to an equality. Such is the proposition usually laid

down by political economists, and under proper explanations it is true.

              That portion of profit which is properly interest, and which forms the

real remuneration for abstinence, is strictly the same, at the same time and

place, whatever be the employment. The rate of interest on equally good

security, does not vary according to the destination of the principal, though it

does vary from time to time very much, according to the circumstances of the

market. There is no employment in which, in the present state of industry,

competition is so active and incessant as in the lending and borrowing of

money. All persons in business are occasionally, and most of them

constantly, borrowers: while all persons not in business, who possess moniedproperty are lender. Between these two great bodies there is a numerous,

keen, and intelligent class of middlemen, composed of bankers, stockbrokers,

discount brokers, and others, alive to the slightest breath of probable gain.

The smallest circumstance, or the most transient impression on the public

mind, which tends to an increase or diminution of the demand for loans either

at the time or prospectively, operates immediately on the rate of interest: and

circumstances in the general state of trade, really tending to cause this

difference of demand, are continually occurring, sometimes to such an extent,

that the rate of interest on the hest mercantile bills has been known to vary in

little more than a year (even without the occurrence of the great derangement

called a commercial crisis) from four, or less, to eight or nine per cent. But, at

the same time and place, the rate of interest is the same, to all who can give

equally good security. The market rate of interest is at all times a known and

definite thing.

              It is far otherwise with gross profit; which, though (as will presently

be seen) it does not vary much from employment to employment, varies very

greatly from individual to individual, and can scarcely be in any two cases

the same. It depends on the knowledge, talents, economy, and energy of the

capitalist himself, or of the agents whom he employs; on the accidents of

personal connexion; and even on chance. Hardly any two dealers in the same

trade, even if their commodities are equally good and equally cheap, carry on

their business at the same expense, or turn over their capital in the same time.

That equal capitals give equal profits, as a general maxim of trade, would be

as false as that equal age or size gives equal bodily strength, or that equal

reading or experience gives equal knowledge. The effect depends as much

upon twenty other things, as upon the single cause specified.

              But though profits thus vary, the parity on the whole, of different

modes of employing capital (in the absence of any natural or artificial

monopoly) is, in a certain, and a very important sense, maintained. On an

average (whatever may be the occasional fluctuation) the various

employments of capital are on such a footing as to hold out not equal profits,

but equal expectations of profit, to persons of average abilities and

advantages. By equal, I mean after making compensation for any inferiority

in the agreeableness or safety of an employment. If the case were not so; if

there were, evidently, and to common experience, more favourable chances

of pecuniary success in one business than in others, more persons wouldengage their capital in the business, or would bring up their sons to it; which

in fact always happens when a business, like that of an engineer at present, or

like any newly established and prosperous manufacture, is seen to be a

growing and thriving one. If, on the contrary, a business is not considered

thriving; if the chances of profit in it are thought to be inferior to those in

other employments; capital gradually leaves it, or at least new capital is not

attracted to it; and by this change in the distribution of capital between the

less profitable and the more profitable employments, a sort of balance is

restored. The expectation of profit, therefore, in different employments,

cannot long continue very different: they tend to a common average, though

they are generally oscillating from one side to the other side of the medium.

              This equalizing process, commonly described as the transfer of

capital from one employment to another, is not necessarily the onerous, slow,

and almost impracticable operation which it is very often represented to be.

In the first place, it does not always imply the actual removal of capital

already embarked in an employment. In a rapidly progressive state of capital,

the adjustment often takes place by means of the new accumulations of each

year, which direct themselves in preference towards the more thriving trades.

Even when a real transfer of capital is necessary, it is by no means implied

that any of those who are engaged in the unprofitable employment, relinquish

business and break up their establishments. The numerous and multifarious

channels of credit. through which, in commercial nations, unemployed capital

diffuses itself over the field of employment, flowing over in greater

abundance to the lower levels, are the means by which the equalization is

accomplished. The process consists in a limitation by one class of dealers or

producers, and an extension by the other, of that portion of their business

which is caRed on with borrowed capital. There is scarcely any dealer or

producer on a considerable scale, who confines his business to what can be

carried on by his own funds. When trade is good, he not only uses to the

utmost his own capital, but employs, in addition, much of the credit which

that capital obtains for him. When, either from over-supply or from some

slackening in the demand for his commodity, he finds that it sells more

slowly or obtains a lower price, he contracts his operations, and does not

apply to bankers or other money dealers for a renewal of their advances to the

same extent as before. A business which is increasing holds out, on the

contrary, a prospect of profitable employment for a larger amount of this

floating capital than previously, and those engaged in it become applicants tothe money dealers for larger advances, which, from their improving

circumstances, they have no difficulty in obtaining. A different distribution of

floating capital between two employments has as much effect in restoring

their profits to an equilibrium, as if the owners of an equal amount of capital

were to abandon the one trade and carry their capital into the other. This easy,

and as it were spontaneous, method of accommodating production to

demand, is quite sufficient to correct any inequalities arising from the

fluctuations of trade, or other causes of ordinary occurrence. In the case of an

altogether declining trade, in which it is necessary that the production should

be, not occasionally varied, but greatly and permanently diminished, or

perhaps stopped altogether, the process of extricating the capital is, no doubt,

tardy and difficult, and almost always attended with considerable loss; much

of the capital fixed in machinery, buildings, permanent works, &c. being

either not applicable to any other purpose, or only applicable after expensive

alterations; and time being seldom given for effecting the change in the mode

in which it would be effected with least loss, namely, by not replacing the

fixed capital as it wears out. There is besides, in totally changing the

destination of a capital, so great a sacrifice of established connexion, and of

acquired skill and experience, that people are always very slow in resolving

upon it, and hardly ever do so until long after a change of fortune has become

hopeless. These, however, are distinctly exceptional cases, and even in these

the equalization is at last effected. It may also happen that the return to

equilibrium is considerably protracted, when, before one inequality has been

corrected, another cause of inequality arises; which is said to have been

continually the case during a long series of years, with the production of

cotton in the Southern States of North America; the commodity having been

upheld at what was virtually a monopoly price, because the increase of

demand, from successive improvements in the manufacture, went on with a

rapidity so much beyond expectation that for many years the supply never

completely overtook it. But it is not often that a succession of disturbing

causes, all acting in the same direction, are known to follow one another with

hardly any interval. Where there is no monopoly, the profits of a trade are

likely to range sometimes above and sometimes below the general level, but

tending always to return to it; like the oscillations of the pendulum.

              In general, then, although profits are very different to different

individuals, and to the same individual in different years, there cannot be

much diversity at the same time and place in the average profits of differentemployments, (other than the standing differences necessary to compensate

for difference of attractiveness,) except for short periods, or when some great

permanent revulsion has overtaken a particular trade. If any popular

impression exists that some trades are more profitable than others,

independently of monopoly, or of such rare accidents as have been noticed in

regard to the cotton trade, the impression is in all probability fallacious, since

if it were shared by those who have greatest means of knowledge and motives

to accurate examination, there would take place such an influx of capital as

would soon lower the profits to the common level. It is true that, to persons

with the same amount of original means, there is more chance of making a

large fortune in some employments than in others. But it would be found that

in those same employments, bankruptcies also are more frequent, and that the

chance of greater success is balanced by a greater probability of complete

failure. Very often it is more than balanced: for, as was remarked in another

case, the chance of great prizes operates with a greater degree of strength than

arithmetic will warrant, in attracting competitors; and I doubt not that the

average gains, in a trade in which large fortunes may be made, are lower than

in those in which gains are slow, though comparatively sure, and in which

nothing is to be ultimately hoped for beyond a competency. The timber trade

of Canada is one example of an employment of capital partaking so much of

the nature of a lottery, as to make it an accredited opinion that, taking the

adventurers in the aggregate, there is more money lost by the trade than

gained by it; in other words, that the average rate of profit is less than

nothing. In such points as this, much depends on the characters of nations,

according as they partake more or less of the adventurous, or, as it is called

when the intention is to blame it, the gambling spirit. This spirit is much

stronger in the United States than in Great Britain; and in Great Britain than

in any country of the Continent. In some Continental countries the tendency

is so much the reverse, that safe and quiet employments probably yield a less

average profit to the capital engaged in them, than those which offer greater

gains at the price of greater hazards.

              It must not however be forgotten, that even in the countries of most

active competition, custom also has a considerable share in determining the

profits of trade. There is sometimes an idea afloat as to what the profit of an

employment should be, which though not adhered to by all the dealers, nor

perhaps rigidly by any, still exercises a certain influence over their

operations. There has been in England a kind of notion, how widelyprevailing I know not, that fifty per cent is a proper and suitable rate of profit

in retail transactions: understand, not fifty per cent on the whole capital, but

an advance of fifty per cent on the wholesale prices; from which have to be

defrayed bad debts, shop rent, the pay of clerks, shopmen, and agents of all

descriptions, in short all the expenses of the retail business. If this custom

were universal, and strictly adhered to, competition indeed would still

operate, but the consumer would not derive any benefit from it, at least as to

price; the way in which it would diminish the advantages of those engaged in

the retail trade, would be by a greater subdivision of the business. In some

parts of the Continent the standard is as high as a hundred per cent. The

increase of competition however, in England at least, is rapidly tending to

break down customs of this description. In the majority of trades (at least in

the great emporia of trade), there are now numerous dealers whose motto is,

“small gains and frequent” — a great business at low prices, rather than high

prices and few transactions; and by turning over their capital more rapidly,

and adding to it by borrowed capital when needed, the dealers often obtain

individually higher profits; though they necessarily lower the profits of those

among their competitors, who do not adopt the same principle. Nevertheless,
                            171
competition, as remarked in a previous chapter, has, as yet, but a limited

dominion over retail prices; and consequently the share of the whole produce

of land and labour which is absorbed in the remuneration of mere

distributors, continues exorbitant; and there is no function in the economy of

society which supports a number of persons so disproportioned to the amount

of work to be performed.

              5. The preceding remarks have, I hope, sufficiently elucidated what

is meant by the common phrase, “the ordinary rate of profit;” and the sense in

which, and the limitations under which, this ordinary rate has a real existence.

It now remains to consider, what causes determine its amount.

              To popular apprehension it seems as if the profits of business

depended upon prices. A producer or dealer seems to obtain his profits by

selling his commodity for more than it cost him. Profit altogether, people are

apt to think, is a consequence of purchase and sale. It is only (they suppose)

because there are purchasers for a commodity, that the producer of it is able

to make any profit. Demand — customers — a market for the commodity, are

the cause of the gains of capitalists. It is by the sale of their goods, that they

replace their capital, and add to its amount.              This, however, is looking only at the outside surface of the

economical machinery of society. In no case, we find, is the mere money

which passes from one person to another, the fundamental matter in any

economical phenomenon. If we look more narrowly into the operations of the

producer, we shall perceive that the money he obtains for his commodity is

not the cause of his having a profit, but only the mode in which his profit is

paid to him.

              The cause of profit is, that labour produces more than is required for

its support. The reason why agricultural capital yields a profit, is because

human beings can grow more food, than is necessary to feed them while it is

being grown, including the time occupied in constructing the tools, and

making all other needful preparations: from which it is a consequence, that if

a capitalist undertakes to feed the labourers on condition of receiving the

produce, he has some of it remaining for himself after replacing his advances.

To vary the form of the theorem: the reason why capital yields a profit, is

because food, clothing, materials, and tools, last longer than the time which

was required to produce them; so that if a capitalist supplies a party of

labourers with these things, on condition of receiving all they produce, they

will, in addition to reproducing their own necessaries and instruments, have a

portion of their time remaining, to work for the capitalist. We thus see that

profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive

power of labour; and the general profit of the country is always what the

productive power of labour makes it, whether any exchange takes place or

not. If there were no division of employments, there would be no buying or

selling, but there would still be profit. If the labourers of the country

collectively produce twenty per cent more than their wages, profits will be

twenty per cent, whatever prices may or may not be. The accidents of price

may for a time make one set of producers get more than the twenty per cent,

and another less, the one commodity being rated above its natural value in

relation to other commodities, and the other below, until prices have again

adjusted themselves; but there will always be just twenty per cent divided

among them all.

              I proceed, in expansion of the considerations thus briefly indicated,

to exhibit more minutely the mode in which the rate of profit is determined.

              6. I assume, throughout, the state of things, which, where the

labourers and capitalists are separate classes, prevails, with few exceptions,universally; namely, that the capitalist advances the whole expenses,

including the entire remuneration of the labourer. That he should do so, is not

a matter of inherent necessity; the labourer might wait until the production is

complete, for all that part of his wages which exceeds mere necessaries; and

even for the whole, if he has funds in hand, sufficient for his temporary

support. But in the latter case, the labourer is to that extent really a capitalist,

investing capital in the concern, by supplying a portion of the funds necessary

for carrying it on; and even in the former case he may be looked upon in the

same light, since, contributing his labour at less than the market price, he may

be regarded as lending the difference to his employer, and receiving it back

with interest (on whatever principle computed) from the proceeds of the

enterprise.

              The capitalist, then, may be assumed to make all the advances, and

receive all the produce. His profit consists of the excess of the produce above

the advances; his rate of profit is the ratio which that excess bears to the

amount advanced. But what do the advances consist of?

              It is, for the present, necessary to suppose, that the capitalist does not

pay any rent; has not to purchase the use of any appropriated natural agent.

This indeed is scarcely ever the exact truth. The agricultural capitalist, except

when he is the owner of the soil he cultivates, always, or almost always, pays

rent: and even in manufactures, (not to mention ground-rent,) the materials of

the manufacture have generally paid rent, in some stage of their production.

The nature of rent, however, we have not yet taken into consideration; and it

will hereafter appear, that no practical error, on the question we are now

examining, is produced by disregarding it.

              If, then, leaving rent out of the question, we inquire in what it is that

the advances of the capitalist, for purposes of production, consist, we shall

find that they consist of wages of labour.

              A large portion of the expenditure of every capitalist consists in the

direct payment of wages. What does not consist of this, is composed of

materials and implements, including buildings. But materials and implements

are produced by labour; and as our supposed capitalist is not meant to

represent a single employment, but to be a type of the productive industry of

the whole country, we may suppose that he makes his own tools, and raises

his own materials. He does this by means of previous advances, which, again,consist wholly of wages. If we suppose him to buy the materials and tools

instead of producing them, the case is not altered: he then repays to a

previous producer the wages which that previous producer has paid. It is true,

he repays it to him with a profit; and if he had produced the things himself, he

himself must have had that profit, on this part of his outlay, as well as on

every other part. The fact, however, remains, that in the whole process of

production, beginning with the materials and tools, and ending with the

finished product, all the advances have consisted of nothing but wages;

except that certain of the capitalists concerned have, for the sake of general

convenience, had their share of profit paid to them before the operation was

completed. Whatever, of the ultimate product, is not profit, is repayment of

wages.

              7. It thus appears that the two elements on which, and which alone,

the gains of the capitalists depend, are, first, the magnitude of the produce, in

other words, the productive power of labour; and secondly, the proportion of

that produce obtained by the labourers themselves; the ratio, which the

remuneration of the labourers bears to the amount they produce. These two

things form the data for determining the gross amount divided as profit

among all the capitalists of the country; but the rate of profit, the percentage

on the capital, depends only on the second of the two elements, the

1abourer’s proportional share, and not on the amount to be shared. If the

produce of labour were doubled, and the labourers obtained the same

proportional share as before, that is, if their remuneration was also doubled,

the capitalists, it is true, would gain twice as much; but as they would also

have had to advance twice as much, the rate of their profit would be only the

same as before.

              We thus arrive at the conclusion of Ricardo and others, that the rate

of profits depends on wages; rising as wages fall, and falling as wages rise. In

adopting, however, this doctrine, I must insist upon making a most necessary

alteration in its wording. Instead of saying that profits depend on wages, let

us say (what Ricardo really meant) that they depend on the cost of labour.

              Wages, and the cost of labour; what labour brings in to the labourer,

and what it costs to the capitalist; are ideas quite distinct, and which it is of

the utmost importance to keep so. For this purpose it is essential not to

designate them, as is almost always done, by the same name. Wages, in

public discussions, both oral and printed, being looked upon from the point ofview of the payers, much oftener than from that of the receivers, nothing is

more common than to say that wages are high or low, meaning only that the

cost of labour is high or low. The reverse of this would be oftener the truth:

the cost of labour is frequently at its highest where wages are lowest. This

may arise from two causes. In the first place, the labour, though cheap, may

be inefficient. In no European country are wages so low as they are (or at

least were) in Ireland: the remuneration of an agricultural labourer in the west

of Ireland not being more than half the wages of even the lowest-paid

Englishman, the Dorsetshire labourer. But if, from inferior skill and industry,

two days’ labour of an Irishman accomplished no more work than an English

labourer performed in one, the Irishman’s labour cost as much as the

Englishman’s, though it brought in so much less to himself. The capitalist’s

profit is determined by the former of these two things, not the latter. That a

difference to this extent really existed in the efficiency of the labour, is

proved not only by abundant testimony, but by the fact, that notwithstanding

the lowness of wages, profits of capital are not understood to have been

higher in Ireland than in England.

              The other cause which renders wages, and the cost of labour, no real

criteria of one another, is the varying costliness of the articles which the

labourer consumes. If these are cheap, wages, in the sense which is of

importance to the labourer, may be high, and yet the cost of labour may be

low; if dear, the labourer may be wretchedly off, though his labour may cost

much to the capitalist. This last is the condition of a country over-peopled in

relation to its land; in which, food being dear, the poorness of the labourer’s

real reward does not prevent labour from costing much to the purchaser, and

low wages and low profits co-exist. The opposite case is exemplified in the

United States of America. The labourer there enjoys a greater abundance of

comforts than in any other country of the world, except some of the newest

colonies; but owing to the cheap price at which these comforts can be

obtained (combined with the great efficiency of the labour), the cost of labour

to the capitalist is at least not higher, nor the rate of profit lower, than in

Europe.

              The cost of labour, then, is, in the language of mathematics, a

function of three variables: the efficiency of labour; the wages of labour

(meaning thereby the real reward of the labourer); and the greater or less cost

at which the articles composing that real reward can be produced or procured.It is plain that the cost of labour to the capitalist must be influenced by each

of these three circumstances, and by no others. These, therefore, are also the

circumstances which determine the rate of profit; and it cannot be in any way

affected except through one or other of them. If labour generally became

more efficient, without being more highly rewarded; if, without its becoming

less efficient, its remuneration fell, no increase taking place in the cost of the

articles composing that remuneration; or if those articles became less costly,

without the labourer’s obtaining more of them; in any one of these three

cases, profits would rise. If, on the contrary, labour became less efficient (as

it might do from diminished bodily vigour in the people, destruction of fixed

capital, or deteriorated education); or if the labourer obtained a higher

remuneration, without any increased cheapness in the things composing it; or

if, without his obtaining more, that which he did obtain became more costly;

profits, in all these cases, would suffer a diminution. And there is no other

combination of circumstances, in which the general rate of profit of a

country, in all employments indifferently, can either fall or rise.

              The evidence of these propositions can only be stated generally,

though, it is hoped, conclusively, in this stage of our subject. It will come out

in greater fulness and force when, having taken into consideration the theory

of Value and Price, we shall be enabled to exhibit the law of profits in the

concrete — in the complex entanglement of circumstances in which it

actually works. This can only be done in the ensuing Book. One topic still

remains to be discussed in the present one, so far as it admits of being treated

independently of considerations of Value; the subject of Rent; to which we

now proceed.

        163
               It is tobe regretted that this word, in this sense, is not familiar to

an English ear. French political economists enjoy a great advantage in being

able to speak currently of les profits de l’entrpreneur.

        164
               Vide supra, book ii. ch. iv. sect. 3.

 

 

                                 Chapter 16 – Of Rent

 

 

              1. The requisites of production being labour, capital, and natural

agents; the only person, besides the labourer and the capitalist, whose consent

is necessary to production, and who can claim a share of the produce as the

price of that consent, is the person who, by the arrangements of society,

possesses exclusive power over some natural agent. The land is the principal

of the natural agents which are capable of being appropriated, and the

consideration paid for its use is called rent. Landed proprietors are the only

class, of any number or importance, who have a claim to a share in the

distribution of the produce, through their ownership of something which

neither they nor any one else have produced. If there be any other cases of a

similar nature, they will be easily understood, when the nature and laws of

rent are comprehended.

              It is at once evident, that rent is the effect of a monopoly; though the

monopoly is a natural one, which may be regulated, which may even be held

as a trust for the community generally, but which cannot be prevented from

existing. The reason why landowners are able to require rent for their land, is

that it is a commodity which many want, and which no one can obtain but

from them. If all the land of the country belonged to one person, he could fix

the rent at his pleasure. The whole people would be dependent on his will for

the necessaries of life, and he might make what conditions he chose. This is

the actual state of things in those Oriental kingdoms in which the land is

considered the property of the state. Rent is then confounded with taxation,

and the despot may exact the utmost which the unfortunate cultivators have

to give. Indeed, the exclusive possessor of the land of a country could not

well be other than despot of it. The effect would be much the same if the land

belonged to so few people, that they could, and did, act together as one man,

and fix the rent by agreement among themselves. This case, however, is

nowhere known to exist: and the only remaining supposition is that of free

competition; the landowners being supposed to be, as in fact they are, too

numerous to combine.

              2. A thing which is limited in quantity, even though its possessors do

not act in concert, is still a monopolized article. But even when monopolized,a thing which is the gift of nature, and requires no labour or outlay as the

condition of its existence, will, if there be competition among the holders of

it, command a price, only if it exists in less quantity than the demand. If the

whole land of a country were required for cultivation, all of it might yield a

rent. But in no country of any extent do the wants of the population require

that all the land, which is capable of cultivation, should be cultivated. The

food and other agricultural produce which the people need, and which they

are willing and able to pay for at a price which remunerates the grower, may

always be obtained without cultivating all the land; sometimes without

cultivating more than a small part of it; the lands most easily cultivated being

preferred in a very early stage of society; the most fertile, or those in the most

convenient situations, in a more advanced state. There is always, therefore,

some land which cannot, in existing circumstances, pay any rent; and no land

ever pays rent, unless, in point of fertility or situation, it belongs to those

superior kinds which exist in less quantity than the demand-which cannot be

made to yield all the produce required for the community, unless on terms

still less advantageous than the resort to less favoured soils.

              There is land, such as the deserts of Arabia, which will yield nothing

to any amount of labour; and there is land, like some of our hard sandy

heaths, which would produce something, but, in the present state of the soil,

not enough to defray the expenses of production. Such lands, unless by some

application of chemistry to agriculture still remaining to be invented, cannot

be cultivated for profit, unless some one actually creates a soil, by spreading

new ingredients over the surface, or mixing them with the existing materials.

If ingredients fitted for this purpose exist in the subsoil, or close at hand, the

improvement even of the most unpromising spots may answer as a

speculation: but if those ingredients are costly, and must be brought from a

distance, it will seldom answer to do this for the sake of profit, though the

“magic of property” will sometimes effect it. Land which cannot possibly

yield a profit, is sometimes cultivated at a loss, the cultivators having their

wants partially supplied from other sources; as in the case of paupers, and

some monasteries or charitable institutions, among which may be reckoned

the Poor Colonies of Belgium. The worst land which can be cultivated as a

means of subsistence, is that which will just replace the seed, and the food of

the labourers employed on it, together with what Dr. Chalmers calls their

secondaries; that is, the labourers required for supplying them with tools, and

with the remaining necessaries of life. Whether any given land is capable ofdoing more than this, is not a question of political economy, but of physical

fact. The supposition leaves nothing for profits, nor anything for the labourers

except necessaries: the land, therefore, can only be cultivated by the labourers

themselves, or else at a pecuniary loss: and a fortiori, cannot in any

contingency afford a rent. The worst land which can be cultivated as an

investment for capital, is that which, after replacing the seed, not only feeds

the agricultural labourers and their secondaries, but affords them the current

rate of wages, which may extend to much more than mere necessaries; and

leaves for those who have advanced the wages of these two classes of

labourers, a surplus equal to the profit they could have expected from any

other employment of their capital. Whether any given land can do more than

this, is not merely a physical question, but depends partly on the market value

of agricultural produce. What the land can do for the labourers and for the

capitalist, beyond feeding all whom it directly or indirectly employs, of

course depends upon what the remainder of the produce can be sold for. The

higher the market value of produce, the lower are the soils to which

cultivation can descend, consistently with affording to the capital employed,

the ordinary rate of profit.

              As, however, differences of fertility slide into one another by

insensible gradations; and differences of accessibility, that is, of distance

from markets, do the same; and since there is land so barren that it could not

pay for its cultivation at any price; it is evident that, whatever the price may

be, there must in any extensive region be some land which at that price will

just pay the wages of the cultivators, and yield to the capital employed the

ordinary profit, and no more. Until, therefore, the price rises higher, or until

some improvement raises that particular land to a higher place in the scale of

fertility, it cannot pay any rent. It is evident, however, that the community

needs the produce of this quality of land; since if the lands more fertile or

better situated than it, could have sufficed to supply the wants of society, the

price would not have risen so high as to render its cultivation profitable. This

land, therefore, will be cultivated; and we may lay it down as a principle that

so long as any of the land of a country which is fit for cultivation, and not

withheld from it by legal or other factitious obstacles, is not cultivated, the

worst land in actual cultivation (in point of fertility and situation together)

pays no rent.

              3. If, then, of the land in cultivation, the part which yields least