great communities which have been founded beyond the Atlantic by the

descendants of Europeans.

              The world now contains several extensive regions, provided with the

various ingredients of wealth in a degree of abundance of which former ages

had not even the idea. Without compulsory labour, an enormous mass of food

is annuaLly extracted from the soil, and maintains, besides the actual

producers, an equal, sometimes a greater number of labourers, occupied in

producing conveniences and luxuries of innumerable kinds, or in transporting

them from place to place; also a multitude of persons employed in directing

and superintending these various labours; and over and above all these, a

class more numerous than in the most luxurious ancient societies, of persons

whose occupations are of a kind not directly productive, and of persons who

have no occupation at all. The food thus raised supports a far larger

population than had ever existed (at least in the same regions) on an equal

space of ground; and supports them with certainty, exempt from those

periodically recurring famines so abundant in the early history of Europe, and

in Oriental countries even now not unfrequent. Besides this great increase in

the quantity of food, it has greatly improved in quality and variety; while

conveniences and luxuries, other than food, are no longer limited to a small

and opulent class, but descend, in great abundance, through many widening

strata in society. The collective resources of one of these communities, when

it chooses to put them forth for any unexpected purpose; its ability to

maintain fleets and armies, to execute public works, either useful or

ornamental, to perform national acts of beneficence like the ransom of the

West India slaves; to found colonies, to have its people taught, to do anything

in short which requires expense, and to do it with no sacrifice of the

necessaries or even the substantial comforts of its inhabitants, are such as the

world never saw before.

              But in all these particulars, characteristic of the modern industrial

communities, those communities differ widely from one another. Though

abounding in wealth as compared with former ages, they do so in very

different degrees. Even of the countries which are justly accounted the

richest, some have made a more complete use of their productive resources,

and have obtained, relatively to their territorial extent, a much larger produce,

than others; nor do they differ only in amount of wealth, but also in the

rapidity of its increase. The diversities in the distribution of wealth are stillgreater than in the production. There are great differences in the condition of

the poorest class in different countries; and in the proportional numbers and

opulence of the classes which are above the poorest. The very nature and

designation of the classes who originally share among them the produce of

the soil, vary not a little in different places. In some, the landowners are a

class in themselves, almost entirely separate from the classes engaged in

industry. in others, the proprietor of the land is almost universally its

cultivator, owning the plough, and often himself holding it. Where the

proprietor himself does not cultivate, there is sometimes, between him and

the labourer, an intermediate agency, that of the farmer, who advances the

subsistence of the labourers, supplies the instruments of production, and

receives, after paying a rent to the landowner, all the produce: in other cases,

the landlord, his paid agents, and the labourers, are the only sharers.

Manufactures, again, are sometimes carried on by scattered individuals, who

own or hire the tools or machinery they require, and employ little labour

besides that of their own family; in other cases, by large numbers working

together in one building, with expensive and complex machinery owned by

rich manufacturers. The same difference exists in the operations of trade. The

wholesale operations indeed are everywhere carried on by large capitals,

where such exist; but the retail dealings, which collectively occupy a very

great amount of capital, are sometimes conducted in small shops, chiefly by

the personal exertions of the dealers themselves, with their families, and

perhaps an apprentice or two; and sometimes in large establishments, of

which the funds are supplied by a wealthy individual or association, and the

agency is that of numerous salaried shopmen or shopwomen. Besides these

differences in the economical phenomena presented by different parts of what

is usually called the civilized world, all those earlier states which we

previously passed in review, have continued in some part or other of the

world, down to our own time. Hunting communities still exist in America,

nomadic in Arabia and the steppes of Northern Asia; Oriental society is in

essentials what it has always been; the great empire of Russia is even now, in

many respects, the scarcely modified image of feudal Europe. Every one of

the great types of human society, down to that of the Esquimaux or

Patagonians, is still extant.

              These remarkable differences in the state of different portions of the

human race, with regard to the production and distribution of wealth, must,

like all other phenomena, depend on causes. And it is not a sufficientexplanation to ascribe them exclusively to the degrees of knowledge

possessed at different times and places, of the laws of nature and the physical

arts of life. Many other causes co-operate; and that very progress and unequal

distribution of physical knowledge are partly the effects, as well as partly the

causes, of the state of the production and distribution of wealth.

              In so far as the economical condition of nations turns upon the state

of physical knowledge, it is a subject for the physical sciences, and the arts

founded on them. But in so far as the causes are moral or psychological,

dependent on institutions and social relations, or on the principles of human

nature, their investigation belongs not to physical, but to moral and social

science, and is the object of what is called Political Economy.

              The production of wealth; the extraction of the instruments of human

subsistence and enjoyment from the materials of the globe, is evidently not an

arbitrary thing. It has its necessary conditions. Of these, some are physical,

depending on the properties of matter, and on the amount of knowledge of

those properties possessed at the particular place and time. These Political

Economy does not investigate, but assumes; referring for the grounds, to

physical science or common experience. Combining with these facts of

outward nature other truths relating to human nature, it attempts to trace the

secondary or derivative laws, by which the production of wealth is

determined; in which must lie the explanation of the diversities of riches and

poverty in the present and past, and the ground of whatever increase in

wealth is reserved for the future.

              Unlike the laws of Production, those of Distribution are partly of

human institution: since the manner in which wealth is distributed in any

given society, depends on the statutes or usages therein obtaining. But though

governments or nations have the power of deciding what institutions shall

exist, they cannot arbitrarily determine how those institutions shall work. The

conditions on which the power they possess over the distribution of wealth is

dependent, and the manner in which the distribution is effected by the various

modes of conduct which society may think fit to adopt, are as much a subject

for scientific enquiry as any of the physical laws of nature.

              The laws of Production and Distribution, and some of the practical

consequences deducible from them, are the subject of the following treatise.

  

                   Chapter 1 – Of the Requisites of Production

 

 

              1. The requisites of production are two: labour, and appropriate

natural objects.

              Labour is either bodily or mental; or, to express the distinction more

comprehensively, either muscular or nervous; and it is necessary to include in

the idea, not solely the exertion itself, but feelings of a disagreeable kind, all

bodily inconvenience or mental annoyance, connected with the employment

of one’s thoughts, or muscles, or both, in a particular occupation. Of the other

requisite — appropriate natural objects — it is to be remarked, that some

objects exist or grow up spontaneously, of a kind suited to the supply of

human wants. There are caves and hollow trees capable of affording shelter.

fruit, roots, wild honey, and other natural products, on which human life can

be supported; but even here a considerable quantity of labour is generally

required, not for the purpose of creating, but of finding and appropriating

them. In all but these few and (except in the very commencement of human

society) unimportant cases, the objects supplied by nature are only

instrumental to human wants, after having undergone some degree of

transformation by human exertion. Even the wild animals of the forest and of

the sea, from which the hunting and fishing tribes derive their sustenance —

though the labour of which they are the subject is chiefly that required for

appropriating them — must yet, before they are used as food, be killed,

divided into fragments, and subjected in almost all cases to some culinary

process, which are operations requiring a certain degree of human labour.

The amount of transformation which natural substances undergo before being

brought into the shape in which they are directly applied to human use, varies

from this or a still less degree of alteration in the nature and appearance of the

object, to a change so total that no trace is perceptible of the original shape

and structure. There is little resemblance between a piece of a mineral

substance found in the earth, and a plough, an axe, or a saw. There is less

resemblance between porcelain and the decomposing granite it is made, or

between sand mixed with sea-weed, and glass. The difference is greater still

between the fleece of a sheep, or a handful of cotton seeds, and a web of

muslin or broad cloth; and the sheep and seeds themselves are notspontaneous growths, but results of previous labour and care. In these several

cases the ultimate product is so extremely dissimilar to the substance supplied

by nature, that in the custom of language nature is represented as only

furnishing materials.

              Nature, however, does more than supply materials; she also supplies

powers. The matter of the globe is not an inert recipient of forms and

properties impressed by human hands; it has active energies by which it co-

operates with, and may even be used as a substitute for, labour. In the early

ages people converted their corn into flour by pounding it between two

stones; they next hit on a contrivance which enabled them, by turning a

handle, to make one of the stones revolve upon the other; and this process, a

little improved, is still the common practice of the East. The muscular

exertion, however, which it required, was very severe and exhausting,

insomuch that it was often selected as a punishment for slaves who had

offended their masters. When the time came at which the labour and

sufferings of slaves were thought worth economizing, the greater part of this

bodily exertion was rendered unnecessary, by contriving that the upper stone

should be made to revolve upon the lower, not by human strength, but by the

force of the wind or of falling water. In this case, natural agents, the wind or

the gravitation of the water, are made to do a portion of the work previously

done by labour.

              2. Cases like this, in which a certain amount of labour has been

dispensed with, its work being devolved upon some natural agent, are apt to

suggest an erroneous notion of the comparative functions of labour and

natural powers; as if the co-operation of those powers with human industry

were limited to the cases in which they are made to perform what would

otherwise be done by labour; as if, in the case of things made (as the phrase

is) by hand, nature only furnished passive materials. This is an illusion. The

powers of nature are as actively operative in the one case as in the other. A

workman takes a stalk of the flax or hemp plant, splits it into separate fibres,

twines together several of these fibres with his fingers, aided by a simple

instrument called a spindle; having thus formed a thread, he lays many such

threads side by side, and places other similar threads directly across them, so

that each passes alternately over and under those which are at right angles to

it; this part of the process being facilitated by an instrument called a shuttle.

He has now produced a web of cloth, either linen or sackcloth, according tothe material. He is said to have done this by hand, no natural force being

supposed to have acted in concert with him. But by what force is each step of

this operation rendered possible, and the web, when produced, held together?

By the tenacity, or force of cohesion, of the fibres: which is one of the forces

in nature, and which we can measure exactly against other mechanical forces,

and ascertain how much of any of them it suffices to neutralize or

counterbalance.

              If we examine any other case of what is called the action of man

upon nature, we shall find in like manner that the powers of nature, or in

other words the properties of matter, do all the work, when once objects are

put into the right position. This one operation, of putting things into fit places

for being acted upon by their own internal forces, and by those residing in

other natural objects, is all that man does, or can do, with matter. He only

moves one thing to or from another. He moves a seed into the ground; and

the natural forces of vegetation produce in succession a root, a stem, leaves,

flowers, and fruit. He moves an axe through a tree, and it falls by the natural

force of gravitation ; he moves a saw through it, in a particular manner, and

the physical properties by which a softer substance gives way before a harder,

make it separate into planks, which he arranges in certain positions, with

nails driven through them, or adhesive matter between them, and produces a

table, or a house. He moves a spark to fuel, and it ignites, and by the force

generated in combustion it cooks the food, melts or softens the iron, converts

into beer or sugar the malt or cane-juice, which he has previously moved to

the spot. He has no other means of acting on matter than by moving it.

Motion, and resistance to motion, are the only things which his muscles are

constructed for. By muscular contraction he can create a pressure on an

outward object, which, if sufficiently powerful, will set it in motion, or if it

be already moving, will check or modify or altogether arrest its motion, and

he can do no more. But this is enough to have given all the command which

mankind have acquired over natural forces immeasurably more powerful than

themselves; a command which, great as it is already, is without doubt

destined to become indefinitely greater. He exerts this power either by

availing himself of natural forces in existence, or by arranging objects in

those mixtures and combinations by which natural forces are generated; as

when by putting a lighted match to fuel, and water into a boiler over it, he

generates the expansive force of steam, a power which has been made so
                                                                1
largely available for the attainment of human purposes.              Labour, then, in the physical world, is always and solely employed

in putting objects in motion; the properties of matter, the laws of nature, do

the rest. The skill and ingenuity of human beings are chiefly exercised in

discovering movements, practicable by their powers, and capable of bringing

about the effects which they desire. But, while movement is the only effect

which man can immediately and directly produce by his muscles, it is not

necessary that he should produce directly by them all the movements which

he requires. The first and most obvious substitute is the muscular action of

cattle: by degrees the powers of inanimate nature are made to aid in this too,

as by making the wind, or water, things already in motion, communicate a

part of their motion to the wheels, which before that invention were made to

revolve by muscular force. This service is extorted from the powers of wind

and water by a set of actions, consisting like the former in moving certain

objects into certain positions in which they constitute what is termed a

machine; but the muscular action necessary for this is not constantly

renewed, but performed once for all, and there is on the whole a great

economy of labour.

              3. Some writers have raised the question, whether nature gives more

assistance to labour in one kind of industry or in another; and have said that

in some occupations labour does most, in others nature most. In this,

however, there seems much confusion of ideas. The part which nature has in

any work of man, is indefinite and incommensurable. It is impossible to

decide that in any one thing nature does more than in any other. One cannot

even say that labour does less. Less labour may be required; but if that which

is required is absolutely indispensable, the result is just as much the product

of labour, as of nature. When two conditions are equally necessary for

producing the effect at all, it is unmeaning to say that so much of it is

produced by one and so much by the other; it is like attempting to decide

which half of a pair of scissors has most to do in the act of cutting; or which

of the factors, five and six, contributes most to the production of thirty. The

form which this conceit usually assumes, is that of supposing that nature

lends more assistance to human endeavours in agriculture, than in

manufactures. This notion, held by the French Economistes, and from which

Adam Smith was not free, arose from a misconception of the nature of rent.

The rent of land being a price paid for a natural agency, and no such price

being paid in manufactures, these writers imagined that since a price was

paid, it was because there was a greater amount of service to be paid for.whereas a better consideration of the subject would have shown that the

reason why the use of land bears a price is simply the limitation of its

quantity, and that if air, heat, electricity, chemical agencies, and the other

powers of nature employed by manufacturers, were sparingly supplied, and

could, like land, be engrossed and appropriated, a rent could he exacted for

them also.

              4. This leads to a distinction which we shall find to be of primary

importance. Of natural powers, some are unlimited, others limited in

quantity. By an unlimited quantity is of course not meant literally, but

practically unlimited: a quantity beyond the use which can in any, or at least

in present circumstances, be made of it. Land is, in some newly settled

countries, practically unlimited in quantity: there is more than can be used by

the existing population of the country, or by any accession likely to be made

to it for generations to come. But even there, land favourably situated with

regard to markets or means of carriage, is generally limited in quantity: there

is not so much of it as persons would gladly occupy and cultivate, or

otherwise turn to use. In all old countries, land capable of cultivation, land at

least of any tolerable fertility, must be ranked among agents limited in

quantity. Water, for ordinary purposes, on the banks of rivers or lakes, may

be regarded as of unlimited abundance; but if required for irrigation, it may

even there be insufficient to supply all wants, while in places which depend

for their consumption on cisterns or tanks, or on wells which are not copious,

or are liable to fail, water takes its place among things the quantity of which

is most strictly limited. Where water itself is plentiful, yet waterpower, i.e. a

fall of water applicable by its mechanical force to the service of industry, may

be exceedingly limited, compared with the use which would be made of it if

it were more abundant. Coal, metallic ores, and other useful substances found

in the earth, are still more limited than land. They are not only strictly local

but exhaustible; though, at a given place and time, they may exist in much

greater abundance than would be applied to present use even if they could be

obtained gratis. Fisheries, in the sea, are in most cases a gift of nature

practically unlimited in amount; but the Arctic whale fisheries have long been

insufficient for the demand which exists even at the very considerable price

necessary to defray the cost of appropriation: and the immense extension

which the Southern fisheries have in consequence assumed, is tending to

exhaust them likewise. River fisheries are a natural resource of a very limited

character, and would be rapidly exhausted, if allowed to be used by every onewithout restraint. Air, even that state of it which we term wind, may, in most

situations, be obtained in a quantity sufficient for every possible use; and so

likewise, on the sea coast or on large rivers, may water carriage: though the

wharfage or harbour-room applicable to the service of that mode of transport

is in many situations far short of what would be used if easily attainable.

              It will be seen hereafter how much of the economy of society

depends on the limited quantity in which some of the most important natural

agents exist, and more particularly land. For the present I shall only remark

that so long as the quantity of a natural agent is practically unlimited, it

cannot, unless susceptible of artificial monopoly, bear any value in the

market, since no one will give anything for what can be obtained gratis. But

as soon as a limitation becomes practically operative; as soon as there is not

so much of the thing to be had, as would be appropriated and used if it could

be obtained for asking; the ownership or use of the natural agent acquires an

exchangeable value. When more water power is wanted in a particular

district, than there are falls of water to supply it, persons will give an

equivalent for the use of a fall of water. When there is more land wanted for

cultivation than a place possesses, or than it possesses of a certain quality and

certain advantages of situation, land of that quality and situation may be sold

for a price, or let for an annual rent. This subject will hereafter be discussed

at length; but it is often useful to anticipate, by a brief suggestion, principles

and deductions which we have not yet reached the place for exhibiting and

illustrating fully.

        1
               This essential and primary law of man’s power over nature was, I

believe, first illustrated and made prominant as a fundamental principle of

Political Economy, in the first chapter of Mr. Mill’s Elements.

 

 

               Chapter 2 – Of Labour as an Agent of Production

 

 

              1. The labour which terminates in the production of an article fitted

for some human use, is either employed directly about the thing, or in

previous operations destined to facilitate, perhaps essential to the possibility

of, the subsequent ones. In making bread, for example, the labour employed

about the thing itself is that of the baker; but the labour of the miller, though

employed directly in the production not of bread but of flour, is equally part

of the aggregate sum of labour by which the bread is produced; as is also the

labour of the sower and of the reaper. Some may think that all these persons

ought to be considered as employing their labour directly about the thing; the

corn, the flour, and the bread being one substance in three different states.

Without disputing about this question of mere language, there is still the

ploughman, who prepared the ground for the seed, and whose labour never

came in contact with the substance in any of its states; and the plough-maker,

whose share in the result was still more remote. All these persons ultimately

derive the remuneration of their labour from the bread, or its price: the

plough-maker as much as the rest; for since ploughs are of no use except for

tilling the soil, no one would make or use ploughs for any other reason than

because the increased returns, thereby obtained from the ground, afforded a

source from which an adequate equivalent could be assigned for the labour of

the plough-maker. If the produce is to be used or consumed in the form of

bread, it is from the bread that this equivalent must come. The bread must

suffice to remunerate all these labourers, and several others; such as the

carpenters and bricklayers who erected the farm-buildings; the hedgers and

ditchers who made the fences necessary for the protection of the crop; the

miners and smelters who extracted or prepared the iron of which the plough

and other instruments were made. These, however, and the plough-maker, do

not depend for their remuneration upon the bread made from the produce of a

single harvest, but upon that made from the produce of all the harvests which

are successively gathered until the plough, or the buildings and fences, are

worn out. We must add yet another kind of labour; that of transporting the

produce from the place of its production to the place of its destined use: the

labour of carrying the corn to market, and from market to the miller’s, theflour from the miller’s to the baker’s, and the bread from the baker’s to the

place of its final consumption. This labour is sometimes very considerable:

flour is transported to England from beyond the Atlantic, corn from the heart

of Russia; and in addition to the labourers immediately employed, the

waggoners and sailors, there are also costly instruments, such as ships, in the

construction of which much labour has been expended: that labour, however,

not depending for its whole remuneration upon the bread, but for a part only;

ships being usually, during the course of their existence, employed in the

transport of many different kinds of commodities.

              To estimate, therefore, the labour of which any given commodity is

the result, is far from a simple operation. The items in the calculation are very

numerous-as it may seem to some persons, infinitely sO; for if, as a part of

the labour employed in making bread, we count the labour of the blacksmith

who made the plough, why not also (it may be asked) the labour of making

the tools used by the blacksmith, and the tools used in making those tools,

and so back to the origin of things? But after mounting one or two steps in

this ascending scale, we come into a region of factions too minute for

calculation. Suppose, for instance, that the same plough will last, before

being worn out, a dozen years. Only one-twelfth of the labour of making the

plough must be placed to the account of each year’s harvest. A twelfth part of

the labour of making a plough is an appreciable quantity. But the same set of

tools, perhaps, suffice to the plough-maker for forging a hundred ploughs,

which serve during the twelve years of their existence to prepare the soil of as

many different farms. A twelve-hundredth part of the labour of making his

tools, is as much, therefore, as has been expended in procuring one year’s

harvest of a single farm: and when this fraction comes to be further

apportioned among the various sacks of corn and loaves of bread, it is seen at

once that such quantities are not worth taking into the account for any

practical purpose connected with the commodity. It is true that if the tool-

maker had not laboured, the corn and bread never would have been produced;

but they will not be sold a tenth part of a farthing dearer in consideration of

his labour.

              2. Another of the modes in which labour is indirectly or remotely

instrumental to the production of a thing, requires particular notice: namely,

when it is employed in producing subsistence, to maintain the labourers while

they are engaged in the production. This previous employment of labour is anindispensable condition to every productive operation, on any other than the

very smallest scale. Except the labour of the hunter and fisher, there is

scarcely any kind of labour to which the returns are immediate. Productive

operations require to be continued a certain time, before their fruits are

obtained. Unless the labourer, before commencing his work, possesses a store

of food, or can obtain access to the stores of some one else, in sufficient

quantity to maintain him until the production is completed, he can undertake

no labour but such as can be carried on at odd intervals, concurrently with the

pursuit of his subsistence. He cannot obtain food itself in any abundance; for

every mode of so obtaining it, requires that there be already food in store.

Agriculture only brings forth food after the lapse of months; and though the

labours of the agriculturist are not necessarily continuous during the whole

period, they must occupy a considerable part of it. Not only is agriculture

impossible without food produced in advance, but there must be a very great

quantity in advance to enable any considerable community to support itself

wholly by agriculture. A country like England or France is only able to carry

on the agriculture of the present year, because that of past years has provided,

in those countries or somewhere else, sufficient food to support their

agricultural population until the next harvest. They are only enabled to

produce so many other things besides food, because the food which was in

store at the close of the last harvest suffices to maintain not only the

agricultural labourers, but a large industrious population besides.

              The labour employed in producing this stock of subsistence, forms a

great and important part of the past labour which has been necessary to

enable present labour to be carried on. But there is a difference, requiring

particular notice, between this and the other kinds of previous or preparatory

labour. The miller, the reaper, the ploughman, the plough-maker, the

waggoner and waggon-maker, even the sailor and ship-builder when

employed, derive their remuneration from the ultimate product-the bread

made from the corn on which they have severally operated, or supplied the

instruments for operating. The labour that produced the food which fed all

these labourers, is as necessary to the ultimate result, the bread of the present

harvest, as any of those other portions of labour; but is not, like them,

remunerated from it. That previous labour has received its remuneration from

the previous food. In order to raise any product, there are needed labour,

tools, and materials, and food to feed the labourers. But the tools and

materials are of no use except for obtaining the product, or at least are to beapplied to no other use, and the labour of their construction can be

remunerated only from the product when obtained. The food, on the contrary,

is intrinsically useful, and is applied to the direct use of feeding human

beings. The labour expended in producing the food, and recompensed by it,

needs not be remunerated over again from the produce of the subsequent

labour which it has fed. If we suppose that the same body of labourers carried

on a manufacture, and grew food to sustain themselves while doing it, they

have had for their trouble the food and the manufactured article; but if they

also grew the material and made the tools, they have had nothing for that

trouble but the manufactured article alone.

              The claim to remuneration founded on the possession of food,

available for the maintenance of labourers, is of another kind; remuneration

for abstinence, not for labour. If a person has a store of food, he has it in his

power to consume it himself in idleness, or in feeding others to attend on

him, or to fight for him, or to sing or dance for him. If, instead of these

things, he gives it to productive labourers to support them during their work,

he can, and naturally will, claim a remuneration from the produce. He will

not be content with simple repayment; if he receives merely that, he is only in

the same situation as at first, and has derived no advantage from delaying to

apply his savings to his own benefit or pleasure. He will look for some

equivalent for this forbearance: he will expect his advance of food to come

back to him with an increase, called in the language of business, a profit; and

the hope of this profit will generally have been a part of the inducement

which made him accumulate a stock, by economizing in his own

consumption; or, at any rate, which made him forego the application of it,

when accumulated, to his personal ease or satisfaction. The food also which

maintained other workmen while producing the tools or materials, must have

been provided in advance by some one, and he, too, must have his profit from

the ultimate product; but there is this difference, that here the ultimate

product has to supply not only the profit, but also the remuneration of the

labour. The tool-maker (say, for instance, the ploughmaker) does not indeed

usually wait for his payment until the harvest is reaped; the farmer advances

it to him, and steps into his place by becoming the owner of the plough.

Nevertheless, it is from the harvest that the payment is to come; since the

farmer would not undertake this outlay unless he expected that the harvest

would repay him, and with a profit too on this fresh advance; that is, unless

the harvest would yield, besides the remuneration of the farm labourers (anda profit for advancing it) , a sufficient residue to remunerate the plough-

maker’s labourers, give the plough-maker a profit, and a profit to the farmer

on both.

              3. From these considerations it appears, that in an enumeration and

classification of the kinds of industry which are intended for the indirect or

remote furtherance of other productive labour, we need not include the labour

of producing subsistence or other necessaries of life to be consumed by

productive labourers; for the main end and purpose of this labour is the

subsistence itself; and though the possession of a store of it enables other

work to be done, this is but an incidental consequence. The remaining modes

in which labour is indirectly instrumental to production, may be arranged

under five heads.

              First: Labour employed in producing materials, on which industry is

to be afterwards employed. This is, in many cases, a labour of mere

appropriation; extractive industry, as it has been aptly named by M. Dunoyer

. The labour of the miner, for example, consists of operations for digging out

of the earth substances convertible by industry into various articles fitted for

human use. Extractive industry, however, is not confined to the extraction of

materials. Coal, for instance, is employed, not only in the process of industry,

but in directly warming human beings. When so used, it is not a material of

production, but is itself the ultimate product. So, also, in the case of a mine of

precious stones. These are to some small extent employed in the productive

arts, as diamonds by the glass-cutter, emery and corundum for polishing, but

their principal destination, that of ornament, is a direct use; though they

commonly require, before being so used, some process of manufacture,

which may perhaps warrant our regarding them as materials. Metallic ores of

all sorts are materials merely.

              Under the head, production of materials, we must include the

industry of the wood-cutter, when employed in cutting and preparing timber

for building, or wood for the purposes of the carpenter’s or any other art. In

the forests of America, Norway, Germany, the Pyrenees and Alps, this sort of

labour is largely employed on trees of spontaneous growth. In other cases, we

must add to the labour of the wood-cutter that of the planter and cultivator.

              Under the same head are also comprised the labours of the

agriculturist in growing flax, hemp, cotton, feeding silkworms, rising food forcattle, producing bark, dye-stuffs, some oleaginous plants, and many other

things only useful because required in other departments of industry. So, too,

the labour of the hunter, as far as his object is furs or feathers; of the shepherd

and the cattle-breeder, in respect of wool, hides, horn, bristles, horse-hair, and

the like. The things used as materials in some process or other of manufacture

are of a most miscellaneous character, drawn from almost every quarter of

the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms. And besides this, the finished

products of many branches of industry are the materials of others. The thread

produced by the spinner is applied to hardly any use except as material for

the weaver. Even the product of the loom is chiefly used as material for the

fabricators of articles of dress or furniture, or of further instruments of

productive industry, as in the case of the sailmaker. The currier and tanner

find their whole occupation in converting raw material into what may be

termed prepared material. In strictness of speech, almost all food, as it comes

from the hands of the agriculturist, is nothing more than material for the

occupation of the baker or the cook.

              4. The second kind of indirect labour is that employed in making

tools or implements for the assistance of labour. I use these terms in their

most comprehensive sense, embracing all permanent instruments or helps to

production, from a flint and steel for striking a light, to a steam ship, or the

most complex apparatus of manufacturing machinery. There may be some

hesitation where to draw the line between implements and materials; and

some things used in production (such as fuel) would scarcely in common

language be called by either name, popular phraseology being shaped out by

a different class of necessities from those of scientific exposition. To avoid a

multiplication of classes and denominations answering to distinctions of no

scientific importance, political economists generally include all things which

are used as immediate means of production (the means which are not

immediate will be considered presently) either in the class of implements or

in that of materials. Perhaps the line is most usually and most conveniently

drawn, by considering as a material every instrument of production which

can only be used once, being destroyed (at least as an instrument for the

purpose in hand) by a single employment. Thus fuel, once burnt, cannot be

again used as fuel; what can be so used is only any portion which has

remained unburnt the first time. And not only it cannot be used without being

consumed, but it is only useful by being consumed; for if no part of the fuel

were destroyed, no heat would be generated. A fleece, again, is destroyed as afleece by being spun into thread; and the thread cannot be used as thread

when woven into cloth. But an axe is not destroyed as an axe by cutting down

a tree: it may be used afterwards to cut down a hundred or a thousand more;

and though deteriorated in some small degree by each use, it does not do its

work by being deteriorated, as the coal and the fleece do theirs by being

destroyed; on the contrary, it is the better instrument the better it resists

deterioration. There are some things, rightly classed as materials, which may

be used as such a second and a third time, but not while the product to which

they at first contributed remains in existence. The iron which formed a tank

or a set of pipes may be melted to form a plough or a steam-engine; the

stones with which a house was built may be used after it is pulled down, to

build another. But this cannot be done while the original product subsists;

their function as materials is suspended, until the exhaustion of the first use.

Not so with the things classed as implements; they may be used repeatedly

for fresh work, until the time, sometimes very distant, at which they are worn

out, while the work already done by them may subsist unimpaired, and when
                                                                          2
it perishes, does so by its own laws, or by casualties of its own.

              The only practical difference of much importance arising from the

distinction between materials and implements, is one which has attracted our

attention in another case. Since materials are destroyed as such by being once

used, the whole of the labour required for their production, as well as the

abstinence of the person who supplied the means for carrying it on, must be

remunerated from the fruits of that single use. Implements, on the contrary,

being susceptible of repeated employment, the whole of the products which

they are instrumental in bringing into existence are a fund which can be

drawn upon to remunerate the labour of their construction, and the abstinence

of those by whose accumulations that labour was supported. It is enough if

each product contributes a fraction, commonly an insignificant one, towards

the remuneration of that labour and abstinence, or towards indemnifying the

immediate producer for advancing that remuneration to the person who

produced the tools.

              5. Thirdly: Besides materials for industry to employ itself on, and

implements to aid it, provision must be made to prevent its operations from

being disturbed, and its products injured, either by the destroying agencies of

nature, or by the violence or rapacity of men. This gives rise to another mode

in which labour not employed directly about the product itself, isinstrumental to its production; namely, when employed for the protection of

industry. Such is the object of all buildings for industrial purposes; all

manufactories, warehouses, docks, granaries, barns, farm-buildings devoted

to cattle, or to the operations of agricultural labour. I exclude those in which

the labourers live, or which are destined for their personal accommodation:

these, like their food, supply actual wants, and must be counted in the

remuneration of their labour. There are many modes in which labour is still

more directly applied to the protection of productive operations. The

herdsman has little other occupation than to protect the cattle from harm: the

positive agencies concerned in the realization of the product, go on nearly of

themselves. I have already mentioned the labour of the hedger and ditcher, of

the builder of walls or dykes. To these must be added that of the soldier, the

policeman, and the judge. These functionaries are not indeed employed

exclusively in the protection of industry, nor does their payment constitute, to

the individual producer, a part of the expenses of production. But they are

paid from the taxes, which are derived from the produce of industry; and in

any tolerably governed country they render to its operations a service far

more than equivalent to the cost. To society at large they are therefore part of

the expenses of production; and if the returns to production were not

sufficient to maintain these labourers in addition to all the others required,

production, at least in that form and manner, could not take place. Besides, if

the protection which the government affords to the operations of industry

were not afforded, the producers would be under a necessity of either

withdrawing a large share of their time and labour from production, to

employ it in defence, or of engaging armed men to defend them; all which

labour, in that case, must be directly remunerated from the produce; and

things which could not pay for this additional labour, would not be produced.

Under the present arrangements, the product pays its quota towards the same

protection, and notwithstanding the waste and prodigality incident to

government expenditure, obtains it of better quality at a much smaller cost.

              6. Fourthly: There is a very great amount of labour employed, not in

bringing the product into existence, but in rendering it, when in existence,

accessible to those for whose use it is intended. Many important classes of

labourers find their sole employment in some function of this kind. There is

first the whole class of carriers, by land or water. muleteers, waggoners,

bargemen, sailors, wharfmen, coalheavers, porters, railway establishments,

and the like. Next, there are the constructors of all the implements oftransport; ships, barges, carts, locomotives, &c., to which must be added

roads, canals, and railways. Roads are sometimes made by the government,

and opened gratuitously to the public; but the labour of making them is not

the less paid for from the produce. Each producer, in paying his quota of the

taxes levied generally for the construction of roads, pays for the use of those

which conduce to his convenience; and if made with any tolerable judgment,

they increase the returns to his industry by far more than an equivalent

amount.

              Another numerous class of labourers employed in rendering the

things produced accessible to their intended consumers, is the class of dealers

and traders, or, as they may be termed, distributors. There would be a great

waste of time and trouble, and an inconvenience often amounting to

impracticability , if consumers could only obtain the articles they want by

treating directly with the producers. Both producers and consumers are too

much scattered, and the latter often at too great a distance from the former.

To diminish this loss of time and labour, the contrivance of fairs and markets

was early had recourse to, where consumers and producers might periodically

meet, without any intermediate agency; and this plan answers tolerably well

for many articles, especially agricultural produce, agriculturists having at

some seasons a certain quantity of spare time on their hands. But even in this

case, attendance is often very troublesome and inconvenient to buyers who

have other occupations, and do not live in the immediate vicinity; while, for

all articles the production of which requires continuous attention from the

producers, these periodical markets must be held at such considerable

intervals, and the wants of the consumers must either be provided for so long

beforehand, or must remain so long unsupplied, that even before the

resources of society admitted of the establishment of shops, the supply of

these wants fell universally into the hands of itinerant dealers: the pedlar,

who might appear once a month, being preferred to the fair, which only

returned once or twice a year. In country districts, remote from towns or large

villages, the industry of the pedlar is not yet wholly superseded. But a dealer

who has a fixed abode and fixed customers is so much more to be depended

on, that consumers prefer resorting to him if he is conveniently accessible;

and dealers therefore find their advantage in establishing themselves in every

locality where there are sufficient consumers near at hand to afford them a

remuneration.              In many cases the producers and dealers are the same persons, at

least as to the ownership of the funds and the control of the operations. The

tailor, the shoemaker, the baker, and many other tradesmen, are the producers

of the articles they deal in, so far as regards the last stage in the production.

This union, however, of the functions of manufacturer and retailer is only

expedient when the article can advantageously be made at or near the place

convenient for retailing it, and is, besides, manufactured and sold in small

parcels. When things have to be brought from a distance, the same person

cannot effectually superintend both the making and the retailing of them;

when they are best and most cheaply made on a large scale, a single

manufactory requires so many local channels to carry off its supply, that the

retailing is most conveniently delegated to other agency; and even shoes and

coats, when they are to be furnished in large quantities at once, as for the

supply of a regiment or of a workhouse, are usually obtained not directly

from the producers, but from intermediate dealers, who make it their business

to ascertain from what producers they can be obtained best and cheapest.

Even when things are destined to be at last sold by retail, convenience soon

creates a class of wholesale dealers. When products and transactions have

multiplied beyond a certain point; when one manufactory supplies many

shops, and one shop has often to obtain goods from many different

manufactories, the loss of time and trouble both to the manufacturers and to

the retailers by treating directly with one another makes it more convenient to

them to treat with a smaller number of great dealers or merchants, who only

buy to sell again, collecting goods from the various producers and

distributing them to the retailers, to be by them further distributed among the

consumers. Of these various elements is composed the Distributing Class,

whose agency is supplementary to that of the Producing Class: and the

produce so distributed, or its price, is the source from which the distributors

are remunerated for their exertions, and for the abstinence which enabled

them to advance the funds needful for the business of distribution.

              7. We have now completed the enumeration of the modes in which

labour employed on external nature is subservient to production. But there is

yet another mode of employing labour, which conduces equally, though still

more remotely, to that end: this is, labour of which the subject is human

beings. Every human being has been brought up from infancy at the expense

of much labour to some person or persons, and if this labour, or part of it, had

not been bestowed, the child would never have attained the age and strengthwhich enable him to become a labourer in his turn. To the community at

large, the labour and expense of rearing its infant population form a part of

the outlay which is a condition of production, and which is to be replaced

with increase from the future produce of their labour. By the individuals, this

labour and expense are usually incurred from other motives than to obtain

such ultimate return, and, for most purposes of political economy, need not

be taken into account as expenses of production. But the technical or

industrial education of the community; the labour employed in learning and

in teaching the arts of production, in acquiring and communicating skill in

those arts; this labour is really, and in general solely, undergone for the sake

of the greater or more valuable produce thereby attained, and in order that a

remuneration, equivalent or more than equivalent, may be reaped by the

learner, besides an adequate remuneration for the labour of the teacher, when

a teacher has been employed.

              As the labour which confers productive powers, whether of hand or

of head, may be looked upon as part of the labour by which society

accomplishes its productive operations, or in other words, as part of what the

produce costs to society, so too may the labour employed in keeping up

productive powers; in preventing them from being destroyed or weakened by

accident or disease. The labour of a physician or surgeon, when made use of

by persons engaged in industry, must be regarded in the economy of society

as a sacrifice incurred, to preserve from perishing by death or infirmity that

portion of the productive resources of society which is fixed in the lives and

bodily or mental powers of its productive members. To the individuals,

indeed, this forms but a part, sometimes an imperceptible part, of the motives

that induce them to submit to medical treatment: it is not principally from

economical motives that persons have a limb amputated, or endeavour to be

cured of a fever, though when they do so, there is generally sufficient

inducement for it even on that score alone. This is, therefore, one of the cases

of labour and outlay which, though conducive to production, yet not being

incurred for that end, or for the sake of the returns arising from it, are out of

the sphere of most of the general propositions which political economy has

occasion to assert respecting productive labour: though, when society and not

the individuals are considered, this labour and outlay must be regarded as part

of the advance by which society effects its productive operations, and for

which it is indemnified by the produce.              8. Another kind of labour, usually classed as mental, but conducing

to the ultimate product as directly, though not so immediately, as manual

labour itself, is the labour of the inventors of industrial processes. I say,

usually classed as mental, because in reality it is not exclusively so. All

human exertion is compounded of some mental and some bodily elements.

The stupidest hodman, who repeats from day to day the mechanical act of

climbing a ladder, performs a function partly intellectual; so much so, indeed,

that the most intelligent dog or elephant could not, probably, be taught to do

it. The dullest human being, instructed beforehand, is capable of turning a

mill; but a horse cannot turn it without somebody to drive and watch him. On

the other hand, there is some bodily ingredient in the labour most purely

mental, when it generates any external result. Newton could not have

produced the Principia without the bodily exertion either of penmanship or of

dictation; and he must have drawn many diagrams, and written out many

calculations and demonstrations, while he was preparing it in his mind.

Inventors, besides the labour of their brains, generally go through much

labour with their hands, in the models which they construct and the

experiments they have to make before their idea can realize itself successfully

in act. Whether mental, however, or bodily, their labour is a part of that by

which the production is brought about. The labour of Watt in contriving the

steam-engine was as essential a part of production as that of the mechanics

who build or the engineers who work the instrument; and was undergone, no

less than theirs, in the prospect of a remuneration from the produce. The

labour of invention is often estimated and paid on the very same plan as that

of execution. Many manufacturers of ornamental goods have inventors in

their employment, who receive wages or salaries for designing patterns,

exactly as others do for copying them. All this is strictly part of the labour of

production; as the labour of the author of a book is equally a part of its

production with that of the printer and binder.

              In a national, or universal point of view, the labour of the savant, or

speculative thinker, is as much a part of production in the very narrowest

sense, as that of the inventor of a practical art; many such inventions having

been the direct consequences of theoretic discoveries, and every extension of

knowledge of the powers of nature being fruitful of applications to the

purposes of outward life. The electro-magnetic telegraph was the wonderful

and most unexpected consequence of the experiments of OErsted and the

mathematical investigations of Ampère: and the modern art of navigation isan unforeseen emanation from the purely speculative and apparently merely

curious enquiry, by the mathematicians of Alexandria, into the properties of

three curves formed by the intersection of a plane surface and a cone. No

limit can be set to the importance, even in a purely productive and material

point of view, of mere thought. Inasmuch, however, as these material fruits,

though the result, are seldom the direct purpose of the pursuits of savants, nor

is their remuneration in general derived from the increased production which

may be caused incidentally, and mostly after a long interval, by their

discoveries; this ultimate influence does not, for most of the purposes of

political economy, require to be taken into consideration; are generally

classed as the producers only of books, or other useable or saleable articles,

which directly emanate from them. But when (as in political economy one

should always be prepared to do) we shift our point of view, and consider not

individual acts, and the motives by which they are determined, hut national

and universal results, intellectual speculation must be looked upon as a most

influential part of the productive labour of society, and the portion of its

resources employed in carrying on and in remunerating such labour, as a

highly productive part of its expenditure.

              9. In the foregoing survey of the modes of employing labour in

furtherance of production, I have made little use of the popular distinction of

industry into agricultural, manufacturing, and commercial. For, in truth, this

division fulfils very badly the purposes of a classification. Many great

branches of productive industry find no place in it, or not without much

straining; for example (not to speak of hunters or fishers) the miner, the road-

maker, and the sailor. The limit, too, between agricultural and manufacturing

industry cannot be precisely drawn. The miller, for instance, and the baker-

are they to be reckoned among agriculturists, or among manufacturers? Their

occupation is in its nature manufacturing; the food has finally parted

company with the soil before it is handed over to them: this, however, might

be said with equal truth of the thresher, the winnower, the makers of butter

and cheese; operations always counted as agricultural, probably because it is

the custom for them to be performed by persons resident on the farm, and

under the same superintendence as tillage. For many purposes all these

persons, the miller and baker inclusive, must be placed in the same class with

ploughmen and reapers. They are all concerned in producing food, and

depend for their remuneration on the food produced; when the one class

abounds and flourishes, the others do so too; they form collectively the“agricultural interest;” they render but one service to the community by their

united labours, and are paid from one common source. Even the tillers of the

soil, again, when the produce is not food, but the materials of what are

commonly termed manufactures, belong in many respects to the same

division in the economy of society as manufacturers. The cotton-planter of

Carolina, and the wool-grower of Australia, have more interests in common

with the spinner and weaver than with the corngrower. But, on the other

hand, the industry which operates immediately upon the soil has, as we shall

see hereafter, some properties on which many important consequences

depend, and which distinguish it from all the subsequent stages of production,

whether carried on by the same person or not; from the industry of the

thresher and winnower, as much as from that of the cotton-spinner. When I

speak, therefore, of agricultural labour, I shall generally mean this, and this

exclusively, unless the contrary is either stated or implied in the context. The

term manufacturing is too vague to be of much use when precision is

required, and when I employ it, I wish to be understood as intending to speak

popularly rather than scientifically.

        2
               The able and friendly reviewer of this treatise in the Edinburgh

Review (October 1848) conceives the distinction between materials and

implements rather differently; proposing to consider as materials “all things

which, after having undergone the change implied in production, are

themselves matter of exchange,” and as implements (or instruments) “the

things which are employed in producing that change, but do not themselves

become part of the exchangeable result.” According to these definitions, the

fuel consumed in a manufactory would be considered, not as a material, but

as an instrument. This use of the terms accords better that that proposed in the

text,with the primitive physical meaning of the word “material”; but the

distinction on which it is grounded is one almost irrelevant to political

economy.

 

 

                       Chapter 3 – Of Unproductive Labour

 

 

              1. Labour is indispensable to production, but has not always

production for its effect. There is much labour, and of a high order of

usefulness, of which production is not the object. Labour has accordingly

been distinguished into Productive and Unproductive. There has been not a

little controversy among political economists on the question, what kinds of

labour should be reputed to be unproductive; and they have not always

perceived, that there was in reality no matter of fact in dispute between them.

              Many writers have been unwilling to class any labour as productive,

unless its result is palpable in some material object, capable of being

transferred from one person to another. There are others (among whom are

Mr. M’Culloch and M. Say) who looking upon the word unproductive as a

term of disparagement, remonstrate against imposing it upon any labour

which is regarded as useful-which produces a benefit or a pleasure worth the

cost. The labour of officers of government, of the army and navy, of

physicians, lawyers, teachers, musicians, dancers, actors, domestic servants,

&c., when they really accomplish what they are paid for, and are not more

numerous than is required for its performance, ought not, say these writers, to

be “stigmatized” as unproductive, an expression which they appear to regard

as synonymous with wasteful or worthless. But this seems to be a

misunderstanding of the matter in dispute. Production not being the sole end

of human existence, the term unproductive does not necessarily imply any

stigma; nor was ever intended to do so in the present case. The question is

one of mere language and classification. Differences of language, however,

are by no means unimportant, even when not grounded on differences of

opinion; for though either of two expressions may be consistent with the

whole truth, they generally tend to fix attention upon different parts of it. We

must therefore enter a little into the consideration of the various meanings

which may attach to the words productive and unproductive when applied to

labour.

              In the first place, even in what is called the production of material

objects, it must be remembered that what is produced is not the matter

composing them. All the labour of all the human beings in the world couldnot produce one particle of matter. To weave broadcloth is but to rearrange,

in a peculiar manner, the particles of wool; to grow corn is only to put a

portion of matter called a seed, into a situation where it can draw together

particles of matter from the earth and air, to form the new combination called

a plant. Though we cannot create matter, we can cause it to assume

properties, by which, from having been useless to us, it becomes useful. What

we produce, or desire to produce, is always, as M. Say rightly terms it, an

utility. Labour is not creative of objects, but of utilities. Neither, again, do we

consume and destroy the objects themselves; the matter of which they were

composed remains, more or less altered in form: what has really been

consumed is only the qualities by which they were fitted for the purpose they

have been applied to. It is, therefore, pertinently asked by M. Say and others-

since, when we are said to produce objects, we only produce utility, why

should not all labour which produces utility be accounted productive? Why

refuse that title to the surgeon who sets a limb, the judge or legislator who

confers security, and give it to the lapidary who cuts and polishes a diamond?

Why deny it to the teacher from whom I learn an art by which I can gain my

bread, and accord it to the confectioner who makes bonbons for the

momentary pleasure of a sense of taste.

              It is quite true that all these kinds of labour are productive of utility;

an the question which now occupies us could not have been a question at all,

if the production of utility were enough to satisfy the notion which mankind

have usually formed of productive labour. Production, and productive, are of

course elliptical expressions, involving the idea of a something produced; but

this something, in common apprehension, I conceive to be, not utility, but

Wealth. Productive labour means labour productive of wealth. We are

recalled, therefore, to the question touched upon in our first chapter, what

Wealth is, and whether only material products, or all useful products, are to

be included in it.

              2. Now the utilities produced by labour are of three kinds. They are,

              First, utilities fixed and embodied in outward objects; by labour

employed in investing external material things with properties which render

them serviceable to human beings. This is the common case, and requires no

illustration.

              Secondly, utilities fixed and embodied in human beings; the labourbeing in this case employed in conferring on human beings, qualities which

render them serviceable to themselves and others. To this class belongs the

labour of all concerned in education; not only schoolmasters, tutors, and

professors, but governments, so far as they aim successfully at the

improvement of the people; moralists, and clergymen, as far as productive of

benefit; the labour of physicians, as far as instrumental in preserving life and

physical or mental efficiency; of the teachers of bodily exercises, and of the

various trades, sciences, and arts, together with the labour of the learners in

acquiring them; and all labour bestowed by any persons, throughout life, in

improving the knowledge or cultivating the bodily or mental faculties of

themselves or others.

              Thirdly and lastly, utilities not fixed or embodied in any object, but

consisting in a mere service rendered; a pleasure given, an inconvenience or a

pain averted, during a longer or a shorter time, but without leaving a

permanent acquisition in the improved qualities of any person or thing; the

labour being employed in producing an utility directly, not (as in the two

former cases) in fitting some other thing to afford an utility. Such, for

example, is the labour of the musical performer, the actor, the public

declaimer or reciter, and the showman. Some good may no doubt be

produced, and much more might be produced, beyond the moment, upon the

feelings and disposition, or general state of enjoyment of the spectators; or

instead of good there may be harm; but neither the one nor the other is the

effect intended, is the result for which the exhibitor works and the spectator

pays; nothing but the immediate pleasure. Such, again, is the labour of the

army and navy; they, at the best, prevent a country from being conquered, or

from being injured or insulted, which is a service, but in all other respects

leave the country neither improved nor deteriorated. Such, too, is the labour

of the legislator, the judge, the officer of justice, and all other agents of

government, in their ordinary functions, apart from any influence they may

exert on the improvement of the national mind. The service which they

render, is to maintain peace and security; these compose the utility which

they produce. It may appear to some, that carriers, and merchants or dealers,

should be placed in this same class, since their labour does not add any

properties to objects: but I reply that it does: it adds the property of being in

the place where they are wanted, instead of being in some other place: which

is a very useful property, and the utility it confers is embodied in the things

themselves, which now actually are in the place where they are required foruse, and in consequence of that increased utility could be sold at an increased

price, proportioned to the labour expended in conferring it. This labour,

therefore, does not belong to the third class, but to the first.

              3. We have now to consider which of these three classes of labour

should be accounted productive of wealth, since that is what the term

productive, when used by itself, must be understood to import. Utilities of the

third class, consisting in pleasures which only exist while being enjoyed, and

services which only exist while being performed, cannot be spoken of as

wealth, except by an acknowledged metaphor. It is essential to the idea of

wealth to be susceptible of accumulation: thing which cannot, after being

produced, be kept for some time before being used, are never, I think,

regarded as wealth, since however much of them may be produced and

enjoyed, the person benefited by them is no richer, is nowise improved in

circumstances. But there is not so distinct and positive a violation of usage in

considering as wealth any product which is both useful and susceptible of

accumulation. The skill, and the energy and perseverance, of the artisans of a

country, are reckoned part of its wealth, no less than their tools and
            3
machinery. According to this definition, we should regard all labour as

productive which is employed in creating permanent utilities, whether

embodied in human beings, or in any other animate or inanimate objects.
                                                          4
This nomenclature I have, in a former publication, recommended, as most

conducive to the ends of classification; and I am still of that opinion.

              But in applying the term wealth to the industrial capacities of human

being, there seems always, in popular apprehension, to be a tacit reference to

material products. The skill of an artisan is accounted wealth, only as being

the means of acquiring wealth in a material sense; and any qualities not

tending visibly to that object are scarcely so regarded at all. A country would

hardly be said to be richer, except by a metaphor, however precious a

possession it might have in the genius, the virtues, or the accomplishments of

its inhabitants; unless indeed these were looked upon as marketable articles,

by which it could attract the material wealth of other countries, as the Greeks

of old, and several modern nations have done. While, therefore, I should

prefer, were I constructing a new technical language, to make the distinction

turn upon the permanence rather than upon the materiality of the product, yet

when employing terms which common usage has taken complete possession

of, it seems advisable so to employ them as to do the least possible violenceto usage; since any improvement in terminology obtained by straining the

received meaning of a popular phrase, is generally purchased beyond its

value, by the obscurity arising from the conflict between new and old

associations.

              I shall, therefore, in this treatise, when speaking of wealth,

understand by it only what is called material wealth, and by productive labour

only those kinds of exertion which produce utilities embodied in material

objects. But in limiting myself to this sense of the word, I mean to avail

myself of the full extent of that restricted acceptation, and I shall not refuse

the appellation productive, to labour which yields no material product as its

direct result, provided that an increase of material products is its ultimate

consequence. Thus, labour expended in the acquisition of manufacturing

skill, I class as productive, not in virtue of the skill itself, but of the

manufactured products created by the skill, and to the creation of which the

labour of learning the trade is essentially conducive. The labour of officers of

government in affording the protection which, afforded in some manner or

other, is indispensable to the prosperity of industry, must be classed as

productive even of material wealth, because without it, material wealth, in

anything like its present abundance, could not exist. Such labour may be said

to be productive indirectly or mediately, in opposition to the labour of the

ploughman and the cotton-spinner, which are productive immediately. They

are all alike in this, that they leave the community richer in material products

than they found it; they increase, or tend to increase, material wealth.

              4. By Unproductive Labour, on the contrary, will be understood

labour which does not terminate in the creation of material wealth; which,

however largely or successfully practised, does not render the community,

and the world at large, richer in material products, but poorer by all that is

consumed by the labourers while so employed.

              All labour is, in the language of political economy, unproductive,

which ends in immediate enjoyment, without any increase of the accumulated

stock of permanent means of enjoyment. And all labour, according to our

present definition, must be classed as unproductive, which terminates in a

permanent benefit, however important, provided that an increase of material

products forms no part of that benefit. The labour of saving a friend’s life is

not productive, unless the friend is a productive labourer, and produces more

than he consumes. To a religious person the saving of a soul must appear afar more important service than the saving of a life; but he will not therefore

call a missionary or a clergyman productive labourers, unless they teach, as

the South Sea Missionaries have in some cases done, the arts of civilization

in addition to the doctrines of their religion. It is, on the contrary, evident that

the greater number of missionaries or clergymen a nation maintains, the less

it has to expend on other things; while the more it expends judiciously in

keeping agriculturists and manufacturers at work, the more it will have for

every other purpose. By the former it diminishes, caeteris paribus, its stock of

material products; by the latter, it increases them.

              Unproductive may be as useful as productive labour; it may be more

useful, even in point of permanent advantage; or its use may consist only in

pleasurable sensation, which when gone leaves no trace; or it may not afford

even this, but may be absolute waste. In any case society or mankind grow no

richer by it, but poorer. All material products consumed by any one while he

produces nothing, are so much subtracted, for the time, from the material

products which society would otherwise have possessed. But though society

grows no richer by unproductive labour, the individual may. An unproductive

labourer may receive for his labour, from those who derive pleasure or

benefit from it, a remuneration which may be to him a considerable source of

wealth; but his gain is balanced by their loss; they may have received a full

equivalent for their expenditure, but they are so much poorer by it. When a

tailor makes a coat and sells it, there is a transfer of the price from the

customer to the tailor, and a coat besides which did not previously exist; but

what is gained by an actor is a mere transfer from the spectator’s funds to his,

leaving no article of wealth for the spectator’s indemnification. Thus the

community collectively gains nothing by the actor’s labour; and it loses, of

his receipts, all that portion which he consumes, retaining only that which he

lays by. A community, however, may add to its wealth by unproductive

labour, at the expense of other communities, as an individual may at the

expense of other individuals. The gains of Italian opera singers, German

governesses, French ballet dancers, &c., are a source of wealth, as far as they

go, to their respective countries, if they return thither. The petty states of

Greece, especially the ruder and more backward of those states, were

nurseries of soldiers, who hired themselves to the princes and satraps of the

East to carry on useless and destructive wars, and returned with their savings

to pass their declining years in their own country.. these were unproductive

labourers, and the pay they received, together with the plunder they took, wasan outlay without return to the countries which furnished it; but, though no

gain to the world, it was a gain to Greece. At a later period the same country

and its colonies supplied the Roman empire with another class of

adventurers, who, under the name of philosophers or of rhetoricians, taught to

the youth of the higher classes what were esteemed the most valuable

accomplishments : these were mainly unproductive labourers, but their ample

recompense was a source of wealth to their own country. In none of these

cases was there any accession of wealth to the world. The services of the

labourers, if useful, were obtained at a sacrifice to the world of a portion of

material wealth; if useless, all that these labourers consumed was to the world

waste.

              To be wasted, however, is a liability not confined to unproductive

labour. Productive labour may equally be wasted, if more of it is expended

than really conduces to production. If defect of skill in labourers, or of

judgment in those who direct them, causes a misapplication of productive

industry; if a farmer persists in ploughing with three horses and two men,

when experience has shown that two horse and one man are sufficient, the

surplus labour, though employed for purposes of production, is wasted. If a

new process is adopted which proves no better, or not so good as those before

in use, the labour expended in perfecting the invention and in carrying it into

practice, though employed for a productive purpose, is wasted. Productive

labour may render a nation poorer, if the wealth it produces, that is, the

increase it makes in the stock of useful or agreeable things, be of a kind not

immediately wanted: as when a commodity is unsaleable, because produced

in a quantity beyond the present demand; or when speculators build docks

and warehouses before there is any trade. Some of the States of North

America, by making premature railways and canals, are thought to have made

this kind of mistake; and it was for some time doubtful whether England, in

the disproportionate development of railway enterprise, had not, in some

degree, followed the example. Labour sunk in expectation of a distant return,

when the great exigencies or limited resources of the community require that

the return be rapid, may leave the country not only poorer in the meanwhile,

by all which those labourers consume, but less rich even ultimately than if

immediate returns had been sought in the first instance, and enterprises for

distant profit postponed.

              5. The distinction of Productive and Unproductive is applicable toconsumption as well as to labour. All the members of the community are not

labourers, hut all are consumers, and consume either unproductively or

productively. Whoever contributes nothing directly or indirectly to

production, is an unproductive consumer. The only productive consumers are

productive labourers; the labour of direction being of course included, as well

as that of execution. But the consumption even of productive labourers is not

all of it productive consumption. There is unproductive consumption by

productive consumers. What they consume in keeping up or improving their

health, strength, and capacities of work, or in rearing other productive

labourers to succeed them, is productive consumption. But consumption on

pleasures or luxuries, whether by the idle or by the industrious, since

production is neither its object nor is in any way advanced by it, must be

reckoned unproductive: with a reservation perhaps of a certain quantum of

enjoyment which may be classed among necessaries, since anything short of

it would not be consistent with the greatest efficiency of labour. That alone is

productive consumption, which goes to maintain and increase the productive

powers of the community; either those residing in its soil, in its materials, in

the number and efficiency of its instruments of production, or in its people.

              There are numerous products which may be said not to admit of

being consumed otherwise than unproductively. The annual consumption of

gold lace, pine apples, or champagne, must be reckoned unproductive, since

these things give no assistance to production, nor any support to life or

strength, but what would equally be given by things much less costly. Hence

it might be supposed that the labour employed in producing them ought not to

be regarded as productive, in the sense in which the term is understood by

political economists. I grant that no labour tends to the permanent enrichment

of society, which is employed in producing things for the use of unproductive

consumers. The tailor who makes a coat for a man who produces nothing, is a

productive labourer; but in a few weeks or months the coat is worn out, while

the wearer has not produced anything to replace it, and the community is then

no richer by the labour of the tailor, than if the same sum had been paid for a

stall at the opera. Nevertheless, society has been richer by the labour while

the coat lasted, that is, until society, through one of its unproductive

members, chose to consume the produce of the labour unproductively. The

case of the gold lace or the pine apple is no further different, than that they

are still further removed than the coat from the character of necessaries.

These things also are wealth until they have been consumed.              6. We see, however, by this, that there is a distinction, more

important to the wealth of a community than even that between productive

and unproductive labour; the distinction, namely, between labour for the

supply of productive, and for the supply of unproductive, consumption;

between labour employed in keeping up or in adding to the productive

resources of the country, and that which is employed otherwise. Of the

produce of the country, a part only is destined to be consumed productively;

the remainder supplies the unproductive consumption of producers, and the

entire consumption of the unproductive classes. Suppose that the proportion

of the annual produce applied to the first purpose amounts to half; then one-

half the productive labourers of the country are all that are employed in the

operations on which the permanent wealth of the country depends. The other

half are occupied from year to year and from generation to generation in

producing things which are consumed and disappear without return; and

whatever this half consume is as completely lost, as to any permanent effect

on the national resources, as if it were consumed unproductively. Suppose

that this second half of the labouring population ceased to work, and that the

government or their parishes maintained them in idleness for a whole year:

the first half would suffice to produce, as they had done before, their own

necessaries and the necessaries of the second half, and to keep the stock of

materials and implements undiminished : the unproductive classes, indeed,

would be either stared or obliged to produce their own subsistence, and the

whole community would be reduced during a year to bare necessaries; but the

sources of production would be unimpaired, and the next year there would

not necessarily be a smaller produce than if no such interval of inactivity had

occurred; while if the case had been reversed, if the first half of the labourers

had suspended their accustomed occupations, and the second half had

continued theirs, the country at the end of the twelvemonth would have been

entirely impoverished.

              It would be a great error to regret the large proportion of the annual

produce, which in an opulent country goes to supply unproductive

consumption. It would be to lament that the community has so much to spare

from its necessities, for its pleasures and for all higher uses. This portion of

the produce is the fund from which all the wants of the community, other

than that of mere living, are provided for; the measure of its means of

enjoyment, and of its power of accomplishing all purposes not productive.

That so great a surplus should be available for such purposes, and that itshould be applied to them, can only be a subject of congratulation. The things

to be regretted, and which are not incapable of being remedied, are the

prodigious inequality with which this surplus is distributed, the little worth of

the objects to which the greater part of it is devoted, and the large share

which falls to the lot of persons who render no equivalent service in return.

        3
               Some authorities look upon it as an essential element in the idea of

wealth, that it should be capable not solely of being accumulated but of being

transferred; and inasmuch as the valuable qualities, and even the productive

capacities, of a human being, cannot be detached from him and passed to

some one else, they deny to these the appellation of wealth, and to the labour

expended in acquiring them the name of productive labour. It seems to me,

however, that the skill of an artisan (for instance) being both a desirable

possession, and one of a certain durability (not to say productive even of

national wealth), there is no better reason for refusing to it the title of wealth

because it is attached to a man, than to a coalpit or manufactory because they

are attached to a place. Besides, if the skill itself cannot be parted with to a

purchaser, the use of it may; if it cannot be sold, it can be hired; and it may

be, and is, sold outright in all countries whose laws permit that the man

himself should be sold along with it. Its defect of transferability does not

result from a natural but from a legal and moral obstacle. The human being

himself (as formerly observed) I do not class as wealth. He is the purpose for

which wealth exists. But his acquired capacities, which exist only as means,

and have been called into existence by labour, fall rightly, as it seems to me,

within that designation.

        4
               Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy. Essay

III. On the words Productive and Unproductive.

 

 

                               Chapter 4 – Of Capital

 

 

              1. It has been seen in the preceding chapters that besides the primary

and universal requisites of production, labour and natural agents, there is

another requisite without which no productive operations, beyond the rude

and scanty beginnings of primitive industry, are possible: namely, a stock,

previously accumulated, of the products of former labour. This accumulated

stock of the produce of labour is termed Capital. The function of Capital in

production, it is of the utmost importance thoroughly to understand, since a

number of the erroneous notions with which our subject is infested, originate

in an imperfect and confused apprehension of this point.

              Capital, by persons wholly unused to reflect on the subject, is

supposed to be synonymous with money. To expose this misapprehension,

would be to repeat what has been said in the introductory chapter. Money is

no more synonymous with capital than it is with wealth. Money cannot in

itself perform any part of the office of capital, since it can afford no

assistance to production. To do this, it must be exchanged for other things;

and anything, which is susceptible of being exchanged for other things, is

capable of contributing to production in the same degree. What capital does

for production, is to afford the shelter, protection, tools and materials which

the work requires, and to feed and otherwise maintain the labourers during

the process. These are the services which present labour requires from past,

and from the produce of past, labour. Whatever things are destined for this

use — destined to supply productive labour with these various prerequisites

— are Capital.

              To familiarize ourselves with the conception, let us consider what is

done with the capital invested in any of the branches of business which

compose the productive industry of a country. A manufacturer, for example,

has one part of his capital in the form of buildings, fitted and destined for

carrying on his branch of manufacture. Another part he has in the form of

machinery. A third consists, if he be a spinner, of raw cotton, flax, or wool; if

a weaver, of flaxen, woollen, silk, or cotton, thread; and the like, according to

the nature of the manufacture. Food and clothing for his operatives, it is not

the custom of the present age that he should directly provide; and fewcapitalists, except the producers of food or clothing, have any portion worth

mentioning of their capital in that shape. Instead of this, each capitalist has

money, which he pays to his workpeople, and so enables them to supply

themselves: he has also finished goods in his warehouses, by the sale of

which he obtains more money, to employ in the same manner, as well as to

replenish his stock of materials, to keep his buildings and machinery in

repair, and to replace them when worn out. His money and finished goods,

however, are not wholly capital, for he does not wholly devote them to these

purposes: he employs a part of the one, and of the proceeds of the other, in

supplying his personal consumption and that of his family, or in hiring

grooms and valets, or maintaining hunters and hounds, or in educating his

children, or in paying taxes, or in charity. What then is his capital? Precisely

that part of his possessions, whatever it be, which is to constitute his fund for

carrying on fresh production. It is of no consequence that a part, or even the

whole of it, is in a form in which it cannot directly supply the wants of

labourers.

              Suppose, for instance, that the capitalist is a hardware manufacturer,

and that his stock in trade, over and above his machinery, consists at present

wholly in iron goods. Iron goods cannot feed labourers. Nevertheless, by a

mere change of the destination of these iron goods, he can cause labourers to

be fed. Suppose that with a portion of the proceeds he intended to maintain a

pack of hounds, or an establishment of servants; and that he changes his

intention, and employs it in his business, paying it in wages to additional

workpeople. These workpeople are enabled to buy and consume the food

which would otherwise have been consumed by the hounds or by the

servants; and thus without the employer’s having seen or touched one particle

of the food, his conduct has determined that so much more of the food

existing in the country has been devoted to the use of productive labourers,

and so much less consumed in a manner wholly unproductive. Now vary the

hypothesis, and suppose that what is thus paid in wages would otherwise

have been laid out not in feeding servants or hounds, but in buying plate and

jewels; and in order to render the effect perceptible, let us suppose that the

change takes place on a considerable scale, and that a large sum is diverted

from buying plate and jewels to employing productive labourers, whom we

shall suppose to have been previously, like the Irish peasantry, only half

employed and half fed. The labourers, on receiving their increased wages,

will not lay them out in plate and jewels, but in food. There is not, however,additional food in the country; nor any unproductive labourers or animals, as

in the former case, whose food is set free for productive purposes. Food will

therefore be imported if possible; if not possible, the labourers will remain for

a season on their short allowance: but the consequences of this change in the

demand for commodities, occasioned by the change in the expenditure of

capitalists from unproductive to productive, is that next year more food will

be produced, and less plate and jewellery. So that again, without having had

anything to do with the food of the labourers directly, the conversion by

individuals of a portion of their property, no matter of what sort, from an

unproductive destination to a productive, has had the effect of causing more

food to be appropriated to the consumption of productive labourers. The

distinction, then, between Capital and Not-capital, does not lie in the kind of

commodities, but in the mind of the capitalist — in his will to employ them

for one purpose rather than another; and all property, however ill adapted in

itself for the use of labourers, is a part of capital, so soon as it, or the value to

be received from it, is set apart for productive reinvestment. The sum of all

the values so destined by their respective possessors, composes the capital of

the country. Whether all those values are in a shape directly applicable to

productive uses, makes no difference. Their shape, whatever it may be, is a

temporary accident: but once destined for production, they do not fail to find

a way of transforming themselves into things capable of being applied to it.

              2. As whatever of the produce of the country is devoted to

production is capital, so, conversely, the whole of the capital of the country is

devoted to production. This second proposition, however, must be taken with

some limitations and explanations. A fund may be seeking for productive

employment, and find none, adapted to the inclinations of its possessor: it

then is capital still, but unemployed capital. Or the stock may consist of

unsold goods, not susceptible of direct application to productive uses, and

not, at the moment, marketable: these, until sold, are in the condition of

unemployed capital. Again, artificial or accidental circumstances may render

it necessary to possess a larger stock in advance, that is, a larger capital

before entering on production, than is required by the nature of things.

Suppose that the government lays a tax on the production in one of its earlier

stages, as for instance by taxing the material. The manufacturer has to

advance the tax, before commencing the manufacture, and is therefore under

a necessity of having a larger accumulated fund than is required for, or is

actually employed in, the production which he carries on. He must have alarger capital, to maintain the same quantity of productive labour; or (what is

equivalent) with a given capital he maintains less labour. This mode of

levying taxes, therefore, limits unnecessarily the industry of the country: a

portion of the fund destined by its owners for production being diverted from

its purpose, and kept in a constant state of advance to the government.

              For another example: a farmer may enter on his farm at such a time

of the yea, that he may be required to pay one, two, or even three quarters’

rent before obtaining any return from the produce. This, therefore, must he

paid out of his capital. Now rent, when paid for the land itself, and not for

improvements made in it by labour, is not a productive expenditure. It is not

an outlay for the support of labour, or for the provision of implements or

materials the produce of labour. It is the price paid for the use of an

appropriated natural agent. This natural agent is indeed as indispensable (and

even more so) as any implement: but the having to pay a price for it, is not. In

the case of the implement (a thing produced by labour) a price of some sort is

the necessary condition of its existence: but the land exists by nature. The

payment for it, therefore, is not one of the expenses of production; and the

necessity of making the payment out of capital, makes it requisite that there

should be a greater capital, a greater antecedent accumulation of the produce

of past labour, than is naturally necessary, or than is needed where land is

occupied on a different system. This extra capital, though intended by its

owners for production, is in reality employed unproductively, and annually

replaced, not from any produce of its own, but from the produce of the labour

supported by the remainder of the farmer’s capital.

              Finally, that large portion of the productive capital of a country

which is employed in paying the wages and salaries of labourers, evidently is

not, all of it, strictly and indispensably necessary for production. As much of

it as exceeds the actual necessaries of life and health (an excess which in the

case of skilled labourers is usually considerable) is not expended in

supporting labour, but in remunerating it, and the labourers could wait for

this part of their remuneration until the production is completed; it needs not

necessarily preexist as capital: and if they unfortunately had to forego it

altogether, the same amount of production might take place. In order that the

whole remuneration of the labourers should be advanced to them in daily or

weekly payments, there must exist in advance, and be appropriated to

productive use, a greater stock, or capital, than would suffice to carry on theexisting extent of production: greater, by whatever amount of remuneration

the labourers receive, beyond what the self-interest of a prudent slave-master

would assign to his slaves. In truth, it is only after an abundant capital had

already been accumulated, that the practice of paying in advance any

remuneration of labour beyond a bare subsistence, could possibly have

arisen: since whatever is so paid, is not really applied to production, but to

the unproductive consumption of productive labourers, indicating a fund for

production sufficiently ample to admit of habitually diverting a part of it to a

mere convenience.

              It will be observed that I have assumed, that the labourers are always

subsisted from capital: and this is obviously the fact, though the capital needs

not necessarily be furnished by a person called a capitalist. When the labourer

maintains himself by funds of his own, as when a peasant-farmer or

proprietor lives on the produce of his land, or an artisan works on his own

account, they are still supported by capital, that is, by funds provided in

advance. The peasant does not subsist this year on the produce of this year’s

harvest, but on that of the last. The artisan is not living on the proceeds of the

work he has in hand, but on those of work previously executed and disposed

of. Each is supported by a small capital of his own, which he periodically

replaces from the produce of his labour. The large capitalist is, in like

manner, maintained from funds provided in advance. If he personally

conducts his operations, as much of his personal or household expenditure as

does not exceed a fair remuneration of his labour at the market price, must be

considered a part of his capital, expended, like any other capital, for

production: and his personal consumption, so far as it consists of necessaries,

is productive consumption.

              3. At the risk of being tedious, I must add a few more illustrations, to

bring out into a still clearer and stronger light the idea of Capital. As M. Say

truly remarks, it is on the very elements of our subject that illustration is most

usefully bestowed, since the greatest errors which prevail in it may be traced

to the want of a thorough mastery over the elementary ideas. Nor is this

surprising: a branch may be diseased and all the rest healthy, but unsoundness

at the root diffuses unhealthiness through the whole tree.

              Let us therefore consider whether, and in what cases, the property of

those who live on the interest of what they possess, without being personally

engaged in production, can be regarded as capital. It is so called in commonlanguage, and, with reference to the individual, not improperly. All funds

from which the possessor derives an income, which income he can use

without sinking and dissipating the fund itself, are to him equivalent to

capital. But to transfer hastily and inconsiderately to the general point of

view, propositions which are true of the individual, has been a source of

innumerable errors in political economy. In the present instance, that which is

virtually capital to the individual, is or is not capital to the nation, according

as the fund which by the supposition he has not dissipated, has or has not

been dissipated by somebody else.

              For example, let property of the value of ten thousand pounds

belonging to A, be lent to B, a farmer or manufacturer, and employed

profitably in B’s occupation. It is as much capital as if it belonged to B. A is

really a farmer or manufacturer, not personally, but in respect of his property.

Capital worth ten thousand pounds is employed in production — in

maintaining labourers and providing tools and materials; which capital

belongs to A, while B takes the trouble of employing it, and receives for his

remuneration the difference between the profit which it yields and the interest

he pays to A. This is the simplest case.

              Suppose next that A’s ten thousand pounds, instead of being lent to

B, are lent on mortgage to C, a landed proprietor, by whom they are

employed in improving the productive powers of his estate, by fencing,

draining, road-making, or permanent manures. This is productive

employment. The ten thousand pounds are sunk, but not dissipated. They

yield a permanent return; the land now affords an increase of produce,

sufficient, in a few years, if the outlay has been judicious, to replace the

amount, and in time to multiply it manifold. Here, then, is a value of ten

thousand pounds, employed in increasing the produce of the country. This

constitutes a capital, for which C, if he lets his land, receives the returns in

the nominal form of increased rent; and the mortgage entitles A to receive

from these returns, in the shape of interest, such annual sum as has been

agreed on. We will now vary the circumstances, and suppose that C does not

employ the loan in improving his land, but in paying off a former mortgage

or in making a provision for children. Whether the ten thousand pounds thus

employed are capital or not, will depend on what is done with the amount by

the ultimate receiver. If the children invest their fortunes in a productive

employment, or the mortgagee on being paid off lends the amount to anotherlandholder to improve his land, or to a manufacturer to extend his business, it

is still capital, because productively employed.

              Suppose, however, that C, the borrowing landlord, is a spendthrift,

who burdens his land not to increase his fortune but to squander it, expending

the amount in equipages and entertainments. In a year or two it is dissipated,

and without return. A is as rich as before; he has no longer his ten thousand

pounds, but he has a lien on the land, which he could still sell for that

amount. C, however, is 10,000 l. poorer than formerly; and nobody is richer.

It may be said that those are richer who have made profit out of the money

while it was being spent. No doubt if C lost it by gaming, or was cheated of it

by his servants, that is a mere transfer, not a destruction, and those who have

gained the amount may employ it productively. But if C has received the fair

value for his expenditure in articles of subsistence or luxury, which he has

consumed on himself, or by means of his servants or guests, these articles

have ceased to exist, and nothing has been produced to replace them: while if

the same sum had been employed in farming or manufacturing, the

consumption which would have taken place would have been more than

balanced at the end of the year by new products, created by the labour of

those who would in that case have been the consumers. By C’s prodigality,

that which would have been consumed with a return, is consumed without

return. C’s tradesmen may have made a profit during the process; but if the

capital had been expended productively, an equivalent profit would have

been made by builders, fencers, tool-makers, and the tradespeople who

supply the consumption of the labouring classes; while at the expiration of

the time (to say nothing of any increase), C would have had the ten thousand

pounds or its value replaced to him, which now he has not. There is,

therefore, on the general result, a difference to the disadvantage of the

community, of at least ten thousand pounds, being the amount of C’s

unproductive expenditure. To A, the difference is not material, since his

income is secured to him, and while the security is good, and the market rate

of interest the same, he can always sell the mortgage at its original value. To

A, therefore, the lien of ten thousand pounds on C’s estate, is virtually a

capital of that amount; but is it so in reference to the community? It is not. A

had a capital of ten thousand pounds, but this has been extinguished —

dissipated and destroyed by C’s prodigality. A now receives his income, not

from the produce of his capital, but from some other source of income

belonging to C, probably from the rent of his land, that is, from paymentsmade to him by farmers out of the produce of their capital. The national

capital is diminished by ten thousand pounds, and the national income by all

which those ten thousand pounds, employed as capital, would have produced.

The loss does not fall on the owner of the destroyed capital, since the

destroyer has agreed to indemnify him for it. But his loss is only a small

portion of that sustained by the community, since what was devoted to the

use and consumption of the proprietor was only the interest; the capital itself

was, or would have been, employed in the perpetual maintenance of an

equivalent number of labourers, regularly reproducing what they consumed:

and of this maintenance they are deprived without compensation.

              Let us now vary the hypothesis still further, and suppose that the

money is borrowed, not by a landlord, but by the State. A lends his capital to

Government to carry on a war: he buys from the State what are called

government securities; that is, obligations on the government to pay a certain

annual income. If the government employed the money in making a railroad,

this might be a productive employment, and A’s property would still be used

as capital; but since it is employed in war, that is, in the pay of officers and

soldiers who produce nothing, and in destroying a quantity of gunpowder and

bullets without return, the government is in the situation of C, the spendthrift

landlord, and A’s ten thousand pounds are so much national capital which

once existed, but exists no longer: virtually thrown into the sea, as far as

wealth or production is concerned; though for other reasons the employment

of it may have been justifiable. A’s subsequent income is derived, not from

the produce of his own capital, but from taxes drawn from the produce of the

remaining capital of the community; to whom his capital is not yielding any

return, to indemnity them for the payment; it is lost and gone, and what he

now possesses is a claim on the returns to other people’s capital and industry.

This claim he can sell, and get back the equivalent of his capital, which he

may afterwards employ productively. True; but he does not get back his own

capital, or anything which it has produced; that, and all its possible returns,

are extinguished: what he gets is the capital of some other person, which that

person is willing to exchange for his lien on the taxes. Another capitalist

substitutes himself for A as a mortgagee of the public, and A substitutes

himself for the other capitalist as the possessor of a fund employed in

production, or available for it. By this exchange the productive powers of the

community are neither increased nor diminished. The breach in the capital of

the country was made when the government spent A’s money: whereby avalue of ten thousand pounds was withdrawn or withheld from productive

employment, placed in the fund for unproductive consumption, and destroyed

without equivalent.

 

 

         Chapter 5 – Fundamental Propositions Respecting Capital

 

 

              1. If the preceding explanations have answered their purpose, they

have given not only a sufficiently complete possession of the idea of Capital

according to its definition, but a sufficient familiarity with it in the concrete,

and amidst the obscurity with which the complication of individual

circumstances surrounds it, to have prepared even the unpractised reader for

certain elementary propositions or theorems respecting capital, the full

comprehension of which is already a considerable step out of darkness into

light.

              The first of these propositions is, That industry is limited by capital.

This is so obvious as to be taken for granted in many common forms of

speech; but to see a truth occasionally is one thing, to recognise it habitually,

and admit no propositions inconsistent with it, is another. The axiom was

until lately almost universally disregarded by legislators and political writers;

and doctrines irreconcileable with it are still very commonly professed and

inculcated.

              The following are common expressions, implying its truth. The act

of directing industry to a particular employment is described by the phrase

“applying capital” to the employment. To employ industry on the land is to

apply capital to the land. To employ labour in a manufacture is to invest

capital in the manufacture. This implies that industry cannot be employed to

any greater extent than there is capital to invest. The proposition, indeed,

must be assented to as soon as it is distinctly apprehended. The expression

“applying capital” is of course metaphorical: what is really applied is labour;

capital being an indispensable condition. Again, we often speak of the

“productive powers of capital.” This expression is not literally correct. The

only productive powers are those of labour and natural agents; or if any

portion of capital can by a stretch of language be said to have a productive

power of its own, it is only tools and machinery, which, like wind or water,

may be said to co-operate with labour. The food of labourers and the

materials of production have no productive power; but labour cannot exert its

productive power unless provided with them. There can be no more industry

than is supplied with materials to work up and food to eat. Self-evident as thething is, it is often forgotten that the people of a country are maintained and

have their wants supplied, not by the produce of present labour, but of past.

They consume what has been produced, not what is about to be produced.

Now, of what has been produced, a part only is allotted to the support of

productive labour; and there will not and cannot be more of that labour than

the portion so allotted (which is the capital of the country) can feed, and

provide with the materials and instruments of production.

              Yet, in disregard of a fact so evident, it long continued to be believed

that laws and governments, without creating capital, could create industry.

Not by making the people more laborious, or increasing the efficiency of

their labour; these are objects to which the government can, in some degree,

indirectly contribute. But without any increase in the skill or energy of the

labourers. and without causing any persons to labour who had previously

been maintained in idleness, it was still thought that the government, without

providing additional funds, could create additional employment. A

government would, by prohibitory laws, put a stop to the importation of some

commodity; and when by this it had caused the commodity to be produced at

home, it would plume itself upon having enriched the country with a new

branch of industry, would parade in statistical tables the amount of produce

yielded and labour employed in the production, and take credit for the whole

of this as a gain to the country, obtained through the prohibitory law.

although this sort of political arithmetic has fallen a little into discredit in

England, it still flourishes in the nations of Continental Europe. Had

legislators been aware that industry is limited by capital, they would have

seen that, the aggregate capital of the country not having been increased, any

portion of it which they by their laws had caused to be embarked in the

newly-acquired branch of industry must have been withdrawn or withheld

from some other; in which it gave, or would have given, employment to

probably about the same quantity of labour which it employs in its new
            5
occupation.

              2. Because industry is limited by capital, we are not however to infer

that it always reaches that limit. Capital may be temporarily unemployed, as

in the case of unsold goods, or funds that have not yet found an investment:

during this interval it does not set in motion any industry. Or there may not

be as many labourers obtainable, as the capital would maintain and employ.

This has been known to occur in new colonies, where capital has sometimesperished uselessly for want of labour: the Swan River settlement (now called

Western Australia), in the first years after its foundation, was an instance.

There are many persons maintained from existing capital, who produce

nothing, or who might produce much more than they do. If the labourers were

reduced to lower wages, or induced to work more hours for the same wages,

or if their families, who are already maintained from capital, were employed

to a greater extent than they now are in adding to the produce, a given capital

would afford employment to more industry. The unproductive consumption

of productive labourers, the whole of which is now supplied by capital, might

cease, or be postponed until the produce came in; and additional productive

labourers might be maintained with the amount. By such means society might

obtain from its existing resources a greater quantity of produce: and to such

means it has been driven, when the sudden destruction of some large portion

of its capital rendered the employment of the reminder with the greatest

possible effect, a matter of paramount consideration for the time.

              When industry has not come up to the limit imposed by capital,

governments may, in various ways, for example by importing additional

labourers, bring it nearer to that limit: as by the importation of Coolies and

free Negroes into the West Indies. There is another way in which

governments can create additional industry. They can create capital. They

may lay on taxes, and employ the amount productively. They may do what is

nearly equivalent; they may lay taxes on income or expenditure, and apply

the proceeds towards paying off the public debts. The fundholder, when paid

off, would still desire to draw an income from his property, most of which

therefore would find its way into productive employment, while a great part

of it would have been drawn from the fund for unproductive expenditure,

since people do not wholly pay their taxes from what they would have saved,

but partly, if not chiefly, from what they would have spent. It may be added,

that any increase in the productive power of capital (or, more properly

speaking, of labour) by improvement in the arts of life, or otherwise, tends to

increase the employment for labour. since, when there is a greater produce

altogether, it is always probable that some portion of the increase will be

saved and converted into capital; especially when the increased returns to

productive industry hold out an additional temptation to the conversion of

funds from an unproductive destination to a productive.

              3. While, on the one hand, industry is limited by capital, so on theother, every increase of capital gives, or is capable of giving, additional

employment to industry., and this without assignable limit. I do not mean to

deny that the capital, or part of it, may be so employed as not to support

labourers, being fixed in machinery, buildings, improvement of land, and the

like. In any large increase of capital a considerable portion will generally be

thus employed, and will only co-operate with labourers, not maintain them.

What I do intend to assert is, that the portion which is destined to their

maintenance, may (supposing no alteration in anything else) be indefinitely

increased, without creating an impossibility of finding them employment: in

other words, that if there are human beings capable of work, and food to feed

them, they may always be employed in producing something. This

proposition requires to be somewhat dwelt upon, being one of those which it

is exceedingly easy to assent to when presented in general terms, but

somewhat difficult to keep fast hold of, in the crowd and confusion of the

actual facts of society. It is also very much opposed to common doctrines.

There is not an opinion more general among mankind than this, that the

unproductive expenditure of the rich is necessary to the employment of the

poor. Before Adam Smith, the doctrine had hardly been questioned; and even

since his time, authors of the highest name and of great merit* have

contended, that if consumers were to save and convert into capital more than

a limited portion of their income, and were not to devote to unproductive

consumption an amount of means bearing a certain ratio to the capital of the

country, the extra accumulation would be merely so much waste, since there

would be no market for the commodities which the capital so created would

produce. I conceive this to be one of the many errors arising in political

economy, from the practice of not beginning with the examination of simple

cases, but rushing at once into the complexity of concrete phenomena.

              Every one can see that if a benevolent government possessed all the

food, and all the implements and materials, of the community, it could exact

productive labour from all capable of it, to whom it allowed a share in the

food, and could be in no danger of wanting a field for the employment of this

productive labour, since as long as there was a single want unsaturated

(which material objects could supply), of any one individual, the labour of

the community could be turned to the production of something capable of

satisfying that want. Now, the individual possessors of capital, when they add

to it by fresh accumulations, are doing precisely the same thing which we

suppose to be done by a benevolent government. As it is allowable to put anycase by way of hypothesis, let us imagine the most extreme case conceivable.

Suppose that every capitalist came to be of opinion that not being more

meritorious than a well-conducted labourer, he ought not to fare better; and

accordingly laid by, from conscientious motives, the surplus of his profits; or

suppose this abstinence not spontaneous, but imposed by law or opinion upon

all capitalists, and upon landowners likewise. Unproductive expenditure is

now reduced to its lowest limit: and it is asked, how is the increased capital to

find employment? Who is to buy the goods which it will produce? There are

no longer customers even for those which were produced before. The goods,

therefore, (it is said) will remain unsold; they will perish in the warehouses;

until capital is brought down to what it was originally, or rather to as much

less, as the demand of the consumers has lessened. But this is seeing only

one-half of the matter. In the case supposed, there would no longer be any

demand for luxuries, on the part of capitalists and landowners. But when

these classes turn their income into capital, they do not thereby annihilate

their power of consumption; they do but transfer it from themselves to the

labourers to whom they give employment. Now, there are two possible

suppositions in regard to the labourers; either there is, or there is not, an

increase of their numbers, proportional to the increase of capital. If there is,

the case offers no difficulty. The production of necessaries for the new

population, takes the place of the production of luxuries for a portion of the

old, and supplies exactly the amount of employment which has been lost. But

suppose that there is no increase of population. The whole of what was

previously expended in luxuries, by capitalists and landlords, is distributed

among the existing labourers, in the form of additional wages. We will

assume them to be already sufficiently supplied with necessaries. What

follows? That the labourers become consumers of luxuries; and the capital

previously employed in the production of luxuries, is still able to employ

itself in the same manner: the difference being, that the luxuries are shared

among the community generally, instead of being confined to a few. The

increased accumulation and increased production, might, rigorously

speaking, continue, until every labourer had every indulgence of wealth,

consistent with continuing to work; supposing that the power of their labour

were physically sufficient to produce all this amount of indulgences for their

whole number. Thus the limit of wealth is never deficiency of consumers, but

of producers and productive power. Every addition to capital gives to labour

either additional employment, or additional remuneration; enriches either thecountry, or the labouring class. If it finds additional hands to set to work, it

increases the aggregate produce: if only the same hands, it gives them a larger

share of it; and perhaps even in this case, by stimulating them to greater

exertion, augments the produce itself.

              4. A second fundamental theorem respecting Capital, relates to the

source from which it is derived. It is the result of saving. The evidence of this

lies abundantly in what has been already said on the subject. But the

proposition needs some further illustration.

              If all persons were to expend in personal indulgences all that they

produce, and all the income they receive from what is produced by others,

capital could not increase. All capital, with a trifling exception, was originally

the result of saving. I say, with a trifling exception; because a person who

labours on his own account, may spend on his own account all he produces,

without becoming destitute; and the provision of necessaries on which he

subsists until he has reaped his harvest, or sold his commodity, though a real

capital, cannot be said to have been saved, since it is all used for the supply

of his own wants, and perhaps as speedily as if it had been consumed in

idleness. We may imagine a number of individuals or families settled on as

many separate pieces of land, each living on what their own labour produces,

and consuming the whole produce. But even these must save (that is, spare

from their personal consumption) as much as is necessary for seed. Some

saving, therefore, there must have been, even in this simplest of all states of

economical relations; people must have produced more than they used, or

used less than they produced. Still more must they do so before they can

employ other labourers, or increase their production beyond what can be

accomplished by the work of their own hands. All that any one employs in

supporting and carrying on any other labour than his own, must have been

originally brought together by saving; somebody must have produced it and

forborne to consume it. We may say, therefore, without material inaccuracy,

that all capital, and especially all addition to capital, are the result of saving.

              In a rude and violent state of society, it continually happens that the

person who has capital is not the very person who has saved it, but some one

who, being stronger, or belonging to a more powerful community, has

possessed himself of it by plunder. And even in a state of things in which

property was protected, the increase of capital has usually been, for a long

time, mainly derived from privations which, though essentially the same withsaving, are not generally called by that name, because not voluntary. The

actual producers have been slaves, compelled to produce as much as force

could extort from them, and to consume as little as the self-interest or the

usually very slender humanity of their taskmasters would permit. This kind of

compulsory saving, however, would not have caused any increase of capital,

unless a part of the amount had been saved over again, voluntarily, by the

master. If all that he made his slaves produce and forbear to consume, had

been consumed by him on personal indulgences, he would not have increased

his capital, nor been enabled to maintain an increasing number of slaves. To

maintain any slaves at all, implied a previous saving; a stock, at least of food,

provided in advance. This saving may not, however, have been made by any

self-imposed privation of the master; but more probably by that of the slaves

themselves while free; the rapine or war, which deprived them of their

personal liberty, having transferred also their accumulations to the conqueror.

              There are other cases in which the term saving, with the associations

usually belonging to it, does not exactly fit the operation by which capital is

increased. If it were said, for instance, that the only way to accelerate the

increase of capital is by increase of saving, the idea would probably be

suggested of greater abstinence, and increased privation. But it is obvious that

whatever increases the productive power of labour, creates an additional fund

to make savings from, and enables capital to be enlarged not only without

additional privation, but concurrently with an increase of personal

consumption. Nevertheless, there is here an increase of saving, in the

scientific sense. Though there is more consumed, there is also more spared.

There is a greater excess of production over consumption. It is consistent

with correctness to call this a greater saving. Though the term is not

unobjectionable, there is no other which is not liable to as great objections.

To consume less than is produced, is saving; and that is the process by which

capital is increased; not necessarily by consuming less, absolutely. We must

not allow ourselves to be so much the slaves of words, as to be unable to use

the word saving in this sense, without being in danger of forgetting that to

increase capital there is another way besides consuming less, namely, to

produce more.

              5. A third fundamental theorem respecting Capital, closely

connected with the one last discussed, is, that although saved, and the result

of saving, it is nevertheless consumed. The word saving does not imply thatwhat is saved is not consumed, nor even necessarily that its consumption is

deferred; but only that, if consumed immediately, it is not consumed by the

person who saves it. If merely laid by for future use, it is said to be hoarded;

and while hoarded, is not consumed at all. But if employed as capital, it is all

consumed; though not by the capitalist. Part is exchanged for tools or

machinery, which are worn out by use; part for seed or materials, which are

destroyed as such by being sown or wrought up, and destroyed altogether by

the consumption of the ultimate product. The remainder is paid in wages to

productive labourers, who consume it for their daily wants; or if they in their

turn save any part, this also is not, generally speaking, hoarded, but (through

savings banks, benefit clubs, or some other channel) re-employed as capital,

and consumed.

              The principle now stated is a strong example of the necessity of

attention to the most elementary truths of our subject: for it is one of the most

elementary of them all, and yet no one who has not bestowed some thought

on the matter is habitually aware of it, and most are not even willing to admit

it when first stated. To the vulgar, it is not at all apparent that what is saved is

consumed. To them, every one who saves, appears in the light of a person

who hoards : they may think such conduct permissible, or even laudable,

when it is to provide for a family, and the like ; but they have no conception

of it as doing good to other people: saving is to them another word for

keeping a thing to oneself; while spending appears to them to be distributing

it among others. The person who expends his fortune in unproductive

consumption, is looked upon as diffusing benefits all around; and is an object

of so much favour, that some portion of the same popularity attaches even to

him who spends what does not belong to him; who not only destroys his own

capital, if he ever had any, but under pretence of borrowing, and on promise

of repayment, possesses himself of capital belonging to others, and destroys

that likewise.

              This popular error comes from attending to a small portion only of

the consequences that flow from the saving or the spending; all the effects of

either which are out of sight, being out of mind. The eye follows what is

saved, into an imaginary strong-box, and there loses sight of it; what is spent,

it follows into the hands of tradespeople and dependents; but without

reaching the ultimate destination in either case. Saving (for productive

investment), and spending, coincide very closely in the first stage of theiroperations. The effects of both begin with consumption; with the destruction

of a certain portion of wealth; only the things consumed, and the persons

consuming, are different. There is, in the one case, a wearing out of tools, a

destruction of material, and a quantity of food and clothing supplied to

labourers, which they destroy by use: in the other case, there is a

consumption, that is to say, a destruction, of wines, equipages, and furniture.

Thus far, the consequence to the national wealth has been much the same; an

equivalent quantity of it has been destroyed in both cases. But in the

spending, this first stage is also the final stage; that particular amount of the

produce of labour has disappeared, and there is nothing left; while, on the

contrary, the saving person, during the whole time that the destruction was

going on, has had labourers at work repairing it; who are ultimately found to

have replaced, with an increase, the equivalent of what has been consumed.

And as this operation admits of being repeated indefinitely without any fresh

act of saving, a saving once made becomes a fund to maintain a

corresponding number of labourers in perpetuity, reproducing annually their

own maintenance with a profit.

              It is the intervention of money which obscures, to an unpractised

apprehension, the true character of these phenomena. Almost all expenditure

being caRed on by means of money, the money comes to be looked upon as

the main feature in the transaction; and since that does not perish, but only

changes hands, people overlook the destruction which takes place in the case

of unproductive expenditure. The money being merely transferred, they think

the wealth also has only been handed over from the spendthrift to other

people. But this is simply confounding money with wealth. The wealth which

has been destroyed was not the money, but the wines, equipages, and

furniture which the money purchased; and these having been destroyed

without return, society collectively is poorer by the amount. It may be said,

perhaps, that wines, equipages, and furniture, are not subsistence, tools, and

materials, and could not in any case have been applied to the support of

labour; that they are adapted for no other than unproductive consumption,

and that the detriment to the wealth of the community was when they were

produced, not when they were consumed. I am willing to allow this, as far as

is necessary for the argument, and the remark would be very pertinent if these

expensive luxuries were drawn from an existing stock, never to be

replenished. But since, on the contrary, they continue to be produced as long

as there are consumers for them, and are produced in increased quantity tomeet an increased demand; the choice made by a consumer to expend five

thousand a year in luxuries, keeps a corresponding number of labourers

employed from year to year in producing things which can be of no use to

production; their services being lost so far as regards the increase of the

national wealth, and the tools, materials, and food which they annually

consume being so much subtracted from the general stock of the community

applicable to productive purposes. In proportion as any class is improvident

or luxurious, the industry of the country takes the direction of producing

luxuries for their use; while not only the employment for productive

labourers is diminished, but the subsistence and instruments which are the

means of such employment do actually exist in smaller quantity.

              Saving, in short, enriches, and spending impoverishes, the

community along with the individual; which is but saying in other words, that

society at large is richer by what it expends in maintaining and aiding
                                                                                5
productive labour, but poorer by what it consumes in its enjoyments.

              6. To return to our fundamental theorem. Everything which is

produced is consumed both what is saved and what is said to be spent; and

the former quite as rapidly as the latter. All the ordinary forms of language

tend to disguise this. When people talk of the ancient wealth of a count, of

riches inherited from ancestors, and similar expressions, the idea suggested

is, that the riches so transmitted were produced long ago, at the time when

they are said to have been first acquired, and that no portion of the capital of

the country was produced this year, except as much as may have been this

year added to the total amount. The fact is far otherwise. The greater part, in

value, of the wealth now existing in England has been produced by human

hands within the last twelve months. A very small proportion indeed of that

large aggregate was in existence ten years ago; — of the present productive

capital of the country scarcely any part, except farm-houses and

manufactories, and a few ships and machines; and even these would not in

most cases have survived so long, if fresh labour had not been employed

within that period in putting them into repair. The land subsists, and the land

is almost the only thing that subsists. Everything which is produced perishes,

and most things very quickly. Most kinds of capital are not fitted by their

nature to be long preserved. There are a few, and but a few productions,

capable of a very prolonged existence. Westminster Abbey has lasted many

centuries, with occasional repairs; some Grecian sculptures have existedabove two thousand years; the Pyramids perhaps double or treble that time.

But these were objects devoted to unproductive use. If we except bridges and

aqueducts (to which may in some countries be added tanks and

embankments), there are few instances of any edifice applied to industrial

purposes which has been of great duration; such buildings do not hold out

against wear and tear, nor is it good economy to construct them of the solidity

necessary for permanency. Capital is kept in existence from age to age not by

preservation, but by perpetual reproduction: every part of it is used and

destroyed, generally very soon after it is produced, but those who consume it

are employed meanwhile in producing more. The growth of capital is similar

to the growth of population. Every individual who is born, dies, but in each

year the number born exceeds the number who die: the population, therefore,

always increases, though not one person of those composing it was alive until

a very recent date.

              7. This perpetual consumption and reproduction of capital affords

the explanation of what has so often excited wonder, the great rapidity with

which countries recover from a state of devastation; the disappearance, in a

short time, of all traces of the mischiefs done by earthquakes, floods,

hurricanes, and the ravages of war. An enemy lays waste a country by fire

and sword, and destroys or carries away nearly all the moveable wealth

existing in it: all the inhabitants are ruined, and yet in a few years after,

everything is much as it was before. This vis medicatrix naturae has been a

subject of sterile astonishment, or has been cited to exemplify the wonderful

strength of the principle of saving, which can repair such enormous losses in

so brief an interval. There is nothing at all wonderful in the matter. What the

enemy have destroyed, would have been destroyed in a little time by the

inhabitants themselves: the wealth which they so rapidly reproduce, would

have needed to be reproduced and would have been reproduced in any case,

and probably in as short a time. Nothing is changed, except that during the

reproduction they have not now the advantage of consuming what had been

produced previously. The possibility of a rapid repair of their disasters,

mainly depends on whether the country has been depopulated. If its effective

population have not been extirpated at the time, and are not starved

afterwards; then, with the same skill and knowledge which they had before,

with their land and its permanent improvements undestroyed, and the more

durable buildings probably unimpaired, or only partially injured, they have

nearly all the requisites for their former amount of production. If there is asmuch of food left to them, or of valuables to buy food, as enables them by

any amount of privation to remain alive and in working condition, they will

in a short time have raised as great a produce, and acquired collectively as

great wealth and as great a capital, as before; by the mere continuance of that

ordinary amount of exertion which they are accustomed to employ in their

occupations. Nor does this evince any strength in the principle of saving, in

the popular sense of the term, since what takes place is not intentional

abstinence, but involuntary privation.

              Yet so fatal is the habit of thinking though the medium of only one

set of technical phrases, and so little reason have studious men to value

themselves on being exempt from the very same mental infirmities which

beset the vulgar, that this simple explanation was never given (so far as I am

aware) by any political economist before Dr. Chalmers; a writer many of

whose opinions I think erroneous, but who has always the merit of studying

phenomena at first hand, and expressing them in a language of his own,

which often uncovers aspects of the truth that the received phraseologies only

tend to hide.

              8. The same author carries out this train of thought to some

important conclusions on another closely connected subject, that of

government loans for war purposes or other unproductive expenditure. These

loans, being drawn from capital (in lieu of taxes, which would generally have

been paid from income, and made up in part or altogether by increased

economy) must, according to the principles we have laid down, tend to

impoverish the country: yet the years in which expenditure of this sort has

been on the greatest scale, have often been years of great apparent

prosperity.. the wealth and resources of the country, instead of diminishing,

have given every sign of rapid increase during the process, and of greatly

expanded dimensions after its close. This was confessedly the case with

Great Britain during the last long Continental war; and it would take some

space to enumerate all the unfounded theories in political economy, to which

that fact gave rise, and to which it secured temporary credence; almost all

tending to exalt unproductive expenditure, at the expense of productive.

Without entering into all the causes which operated, and which commonly do

operate, to prevent these extraordinary drafts on the productive resources of a

country from being so much felt as it might seem reasonable to expect, we

will suppose the most unfavourable case possible: that the whole amountborrowed and destroyed by the government, was abstracted by the lender

from a productive employment in which it had actually been invested. The

capital, therefore, of the country, is this year diminished by so much. But

unless the amount abstracted is something enormous, there is no reason in the

nature of the case why next year the national capital should not be as great as

ever. The loan cannot have been taken from that portion of the capital of the

country which consists of tools, machinery, and buildings. It must have been

wholly drawn from the portion employed in paying labourers: and the

labourers will suffer accordingly. But if none of them are stared; if their

wages can bear such an amount of reduction, or if charity interposes between

them and absolute destitution, there is no reason that their labour should

produce less in the next year than in the year before. If they produce as much

as usual, having been paid less by so many millions sterling, these millions

are gained by their employers. The breach made in the capital of the country

is thus instantly repaired, but repaired by the privations and often the real

misery of the labouring class. Here is ample reason why such periods, even in

the most unfavourable circumstances, may easily be times of great gain to

those whose prosperity usually passes, in the estimation of society, for
                    6
national prosperity.

              This leads to the vexed question to which Dr. Chalmers has very

particularly adverted; whether the funds required by a government for

extraordinary unproductive expenditure, are best raised by loans, the interest

only being provided by taxes, Or whether taxes should be at once laid on to

the whole amount; which is called in the financial vocabulary, raising the

whole of the supplies within the year. Dr. Chalmers is strongly for the latter

method. He says, the common notion is that in calling for the whole amount

in one year, you require what is either impossible, or very inconvenient; that

the people cannot, without great hardship, pay the whole at once out of their

yearly income; and that it is much better to require of them a small payment

every year in the shape of interest, than so great a sacrifice once for all. To

which his answer is, that the sacrifice is made equally in either case.

Whatever is spent, cannot but be drawn from yearly income. The whole and

every part of the wealth produced in the country, forms, or helps to form, the

yearly income of somebody. The privation which it is supposed must result

from taking the amount in the shape of taxes is not avoided by taking it in a

loan. The suffering is not averted, but only thrown upon the labouring

classes, the least able, and who least ought, to bear it: while all theinconveniences, physical, moral, and political, produced by maintaining taxes

for the perpetual payment of the interest, are incurred in pure loss. Whenever

capital is withdrawn from production, or from the fund destined for

production, to be lent to the State, and expended unproductively, that whole

sum is withheld from the labouring classes: the loan, therefore, is in truth

paid off the same year; the whole of the sacrifice necessary for paying it off is

actually made: only it is paid to the wrong persons, and therefore does not

extinguish the claim; and paid by the very worst of taxes, a tax exclusively on

the labouring class. And after having, in this most painful and unjust way,

gone through the whole effort necessary for extinguishing the debt, the

country remains charged with it, and with the payment of its interest in

perpetuity.

              These views appear to me strictly just, in so far as the value

absorbed in loans would otherwise have been employed in productive

industry within the country. The practical state of the case, however, seldom

exactly corresponds with this supposition. The loans of the less wealthy

countries are made chiefly with foreign capital, which would not, perhaps,

have been brought in to be invested on any less security than that of the

government: while those of rich and prosperous countries are generally made,

not with funds withdrawn from productive employment, but with the new

accumulations constantly making from income, and often with a part of them

which, if not so taken, would have migrated to colonies, or sought other

investments abroad. In these cases (which will be more particularly examined

hereafter*), the sum wanted may be obtained by loan without detriment to the

labourers, or derangement of the national industry, and even perhaps with

advantage to both, in comparison with raising the amount by taxation, since

taxes, especially when heavy, are almost always partly paid at the expense of

what would otherwise have been saved and added to capital. Besides, in a

country which makes so great yearly additions to its wealth that a part can be

taken and expended unproductively without diminishing capital, or even

preventing a considerable increase, it is evident that even if the whole of what

is so taken would have become capital, and obtained employment in the

country, the effect on the labouring classes is far less prejudicial, and the case

against the loan system much less strong, than in the case first supposed. This

brief anticipation of a discussion which will find its proper place elsewhere,

appeared necessary to prevent false inferences from the premises previously

laid down.              9. We now pass to a fourth fundamental theorem respecting Capital,

which is, perhaps, oftener overlooked or misconceived than even any of the

foregoing. What supports and employs productive labour, is the capital

expended in setting it to work, and not the demand of purchasers for the

produce of the labour when completed. Demand for commodities is not

demand for labour. The demand for commodities determines in what

particular branch of production the labour and capital shall be employed; it

determines the direction of the labour; but not the more or less of the labour

itself, or of the maintenance or payment of the labour. These depend on the

amount of the capital, or other funds directly devoted to the sustenance and

remuneration of labour.

              Suppose, for instance, that there is a demand for velvet; a fund ready

to be laid out in buying velvet, but no capital to establish the manufacture. It

is of no consequence how great the demand may be; unless capital is attracted

into the occupation, there will be no velvet made, and consequently none

bought; unless, indeed, the desire of the intending purchaser for it is so

strong, that he employs part of the price he would have paid for it, in making

advances to work-people, that they may employ themselves in making velvet;

that is, unless he converts part of his income into capital, and invests that

capital in the manufacture. Let us now reverse the hypothesis, and suppose

that there is plenty of capital ready for making velvet, but no demand. Velvet

will not be made; but there is no particular preference on the part of capital

for making velvet. Manufacturers and their labourers do not produce for the

pleasure of their customers, but for the supply of their own wants, and having

still the capital and the labour which are the essentials of production, they can

either produce something else which is in demand, or if there be no other

demand, they themselves have one, and can produce the things which they

want for their own consumption. So that the employment afforded to labour

does not depend on the purchasers, but on the capital. I am, of course, not

taking into consideration the effects of a sudden change. If the demand ceases

unexpectedly, after the commodity to supply it is already produced, this

introduces a different element into the question: the capital has actually been

consumed in producing something which nobody wants or uses, and it has

therefore perished, and the employment which it gave to labour is at an end,

not because there is no longer a demand, but because there is no longer a

capital. This case therefore does not test the principle. The proper test is, to

suppose that the change is gradual and foreseen, and is attended with nowaste of capital, the manufacture being discontinued by merely not replacing

the machinery as it wears out, and not reinvesting the money as it comes in

from the sale of the produce. The capital is thus ready for a new employment,

in which it will maintain as much labour as before. The manufacturer and his

work-people lose the benefit of the skill and knowledge which they had

acquired in the particular business, and which can only be partially of use to

them in any other; and that is the amount of loss to the community by the

change. But the labourers can still work, and the capital which previously

employed them will, either in the same hands, or by being lent to others,

employ either those labourers or an equivalent number in some other

occupation.

              This theorem, that to purchase produce is not to employs labour; that

the demand for labour is constituted by the wages which precede the

production, and not by the demand which may exist for the commodities

resulting from the production; is a proposition which greatly needs all the

illustration it can receive. It is, to common apprehension, a paradox; and even

among political economists of reputation, I can hardly point to any, except

Mr. Ricardo and M. Say, who have kept it constantly and steadily in view.

Almost all others occasionally express themselves as if a person who buys

commodities, the produce of labour, was an employer of labour, and created a

demand for it as really, and in the same sense, as if he bought the labour itself

directly, by the payment of wages. It is no wonder that political economy

advances slowly, when such a question as this still remains open at its very

threshold. I apprehend, that if by demand for labour be meant the demand by

which wages are raised, or the number of labourers in employment increased,

demand for commodities does not constitute demand for labour. I conceive

that a person who buys commodities and consumes them himself, does no

good to the labouring classes; and that it is only by what he abstains from

consuming, and expends in direct payments to labourers in exchange for

labour, that he benefits the labouring classes, or adds anything to the amount

of their employment.

              For the better illustration of the principle, let us put the following

case. A consumer may expend his income either in buying services, or

commodities. He may employ part of it in hiring journeymen bricklayers to

build a house, or excavators to dig artificial lakes, or labourers to make

plantations and lay out pleasure grounds; or, instead of this, he may expendthe same value in buying velvet and lace. The question is, whether the

difference between these two modes of expending his income affects the

interest of the labouring classes. It is plain that in the first of the two cases he

employs labourers, who will be out of employment, or at least out of that

employment, in the opposite case. But those from whom I differ say that this

is of no consequence, because in buying velvet and lace he equally employs

labourers, namely, those who make the velvet and lace. I contend, however,

that in this last case he does not employ labourers; but merely decides in what

kind of work some other person shall employ them. The consumer does not

with his own funds pay to the weavers and lacemakers their day’s wages. He

buys the finished commodity, which has been produced by labour and capital,

the labour not being paid nor the capital furnished by him, but by the

manufacturer. Suppose that he had been in the habit of expending this portion

of his income in hiring journeymen bricklayers, who laid out the amount of

their wages in food and clothing, which were also produced by labour and

capital. He, however, determines to prefer velvet, for which he thus creates an

extra demand. This demand cannot be satisfied without an extra supply, nor

can the supply be produced without an extra capital: where, then, is the

capital to come from? There is nothing in the consumer’s change of purpose

which makes the capital of the country greater than it otherwise was. It

appears, then, that the increased demand for velvet could not for the present

be supplied, were it not that the very circumstance which gave rise to it has

set at liberty a capital of the exact amount required. The very sum which the

consumer now employs in buying velvet, formerly passed into the hands of

journeymen bricklayers, who expended it in food and necessaries, which they

now either go without, or squeeze by their competition, from the shares of

other labourers. The labour and capital, therefore, which formerly produced

necessaries for the use of these bricklayers, are deprived of their market, and

must look out for other employment; and they find it in making velvet for the

new demand. I do not mean that the very same labour and capital which

produced the necessaries turn themselves to producing the velvet; but, in

some one or other of a hundred modes, they take the place of that which does.

There was capital in existence to do one of two things to make the velvet, or

to produce necessaries for the journeymen bricklayers; but not to do both. It

was at the option of the consumer which of the two should happen; and if he

chooses the velvet, they go without the necessaries.

              For further illustration, let us suppose the same case reversed. Theconsumer has been accustomed to buy velvet, but resolves to discontinue that

expense, and to employ the same annual sum in hiring bricklayers. If the

common opinion be correct, this change in the mode of his expenditure gives

no additional employment to labour, but only transfers employment from

velvet-makers to bricklayers. On closer inspection, however, it will be seen

that there is an increase of the total sum applied to the remuneration of

labour. The velvet manufacturer, supposing him aware of the diminished

demand for his commodity, diminishes the production, and sets at liberty a

corresponding portion of the capital employed in the manufacture. This

capital, thus withdrawn from the maintenance of velvet-makers, is not the

same fund with that which the customer employs in maintaining bricklayers;

it is a second fund. There are, therefore, two funds to be employed in the

maintenance and remuneration of labour, where before there was only one.

There is not a transfer of employment from velvet-makers to bricklayers;

there is a new employment created for bricklayers, and a transfer of

employment from velvet-makers to some other labourers, most probably

those who produce the food and other things which the bricklayers consume.

              In answer to this it is said, that though money laid out in buying

velvet is not capital, it replaces a capital; that though it does not create a new

demand for labour, it is the necessary means of enabling the existing demand

to be kept up. The funds (it may be said) of the manufacturer, while locked

up in velvet, cannot be directly applied to the maintenance of labour; they do

not begin to constitute a demand for labour until the velvet is sold, and the

capital which made it replaced from the outlay of the purchaser; and thus, it

may be said, the velvet-maker and the velvet-buyer have not two capitals, but

only one capital between them, which by the act of purchase the buyer

transfers to the manufacturer, and if instead of buying velvet he buys labour,

he simply transfers this capital elsewhere, extinguishing as much demand for

labour in one quarter as he creates in another.

              The premises of this argument are not denied. To set free a capital

which would otherwise be locked up in a form useless for the support of

labour, is, no doubt, the same thing to the interests of labourers as the

creation of a new capital. It is perfectly true that if I expend 1000l. in buying

velvet, I enable the manufacturer to employ 1000l. in the maintenance of

labour, which could not have been so employed while the velvet remained

unsold: and if it would have remained unsold for ever unless I bought it, thenby changing my purpose, and hiring bricklayers instead, I undoubtedly create

no new demand for labour: for while I employ 1 000l. in hiring labour on the

one hand, I annihilate for ever 1000l. of the velvet-maker’s capital on the

other. But this is confounding the effects arising from the mere suddenness of

a change with the effects of the change itself. If when the buyer ceased to

purchase, the capital employed in making velvet for his use necessarily

perished, then his expending the same amount in hiring bricklayers would be

no creation, but merely a transfer, of employment. The increased employment

which I contend is given to labour, would not be given unless the capital of

the velvet-maker could be liberated, and would not be given until it was

liberated. But every one knows that the capital invested in an employment

can be withdrawn from it, if sufficient time be allowed. If the velvet-maker

had previous notice, by not receiving the usual order, he will have produced

1000l. less velvet, and an equivalent portion of his capital will have been

already set free. If he had no previous notice, and the article consequently

remains on his hands, the increase of his stock will induce him next year to

suspend or diminish his production until the surplus is caRed off. When this

process is complete, the manufacturer will find himself as rich as before, with

undiminished power of employing labour in general, though a portion of his

capital will now be employed in maintaining some other kind of it. Until this

adjustment has taken place, the demand for labour will be merely changed,

not increased: but as soon as it has taken place, the demand for labour is

increased. Where there was formerly only one capital employed in

maintaining weavers to make 1000l. worth of velvet, there is now that same

capital employed in making something else, and 1000l. distributed among

bricklayers besides. There are now two capitals employed in remunerating

two sets of labourers; while before, one of those capitals, that of the

customer, only served as a wheel in the machinery by which the other capital,

that of the manufacturer, carried on its employment of labour from year to

year.

              The proposition for which I am contending is in reality equivalent to

the following, which to some minds will appear a truism, though to others it

is a paradox: that a person does good to labourers, not by what he consumes

on himself, but solely by what he does not so consume. If instead of laying

out 100l. in wine or silk, I expend it in wages, the demand for commodities is

precisely equal in both cases: in the one, it is a demand for 100l. worth of

wine or silk, in the other, for the same value of bread, beer, labourers’clothing, fuel, and indulgences: but the labourers of the community have in

the latter case the value of 100l. more of the produce of the community

distributed among them. I have consumed that much less, and made over my

consuming power to them. If it were not so, my having consumed less would

not leave more to be consumed by others; which is a manifest contradiction.

When less is not produced, what one person forbears to consume is

necessarily added to the share of those to whom he transfers his power of

purchase. In the case supposed I do not necessarily consume less ultimately,

since the labourers whom I pay may build a house for me, or make something

else for my future consumption. But I have at all events postponed my

consumption, and have turned over part of my share of the present produce of

the community to the labourers. If after an interval I am indemnified, it is not

from the existing produce, but from a subsequent addition made to it. I have

therefore left more of the existing produce to be consumed by others; and

have put into the possession of labourers the power to consume it.

              There cannot be a better reductio ad absurdum of the opposite

doctrine than that afforded by the Poor Law. If it be equally for the benefit of

the labouring classes whether I consume my means in the form of things

purchased for my own use, or set aside a portion in the shape of wages or

alms for their direct consumption, on what ground can the policy be justified

of taking my money from me to support paupers? since my unproductive

expenditure would have equally benefited them, while I should have enjoyed

it too. If society can both eat its cake and have it, why should it not be

allowed the double indulgence? But common sense tells every one in his own

case (though he does not see it on the larger scale), that the poor rate which

he pays is really subtracted from his own consumption, and that no shifting of

payment backwards and forwards will enable two persons to eat the same

food. If he had not been required to pay the rate, and had consequently laid

out the amount on himself, the poor would have had as much less for their

share of the total produce of the country, as he himself would have consumed
    7
more.

              It appears, then, that a demand delayed until the work is completed,

and furnishing no advances, but only reimbursing advances made by others,

contributes nothing to the demand for labour; and that what is so expended,

is, in all its effects, so far as regards the employment of the labouring class, a

mere nullity; it does not and cannot create any employment except at theexpense of other employment which existed before.

              But though a demand for velvet does nothing more in regard to the

employment for labour and capital, than to determine so much of the

employment which already existed, into that particular channel instead of any

other; still, to the producers already engaged in the velvet manufacture, and

not intending to quit it, this is of the utmost importance. To them, a falling off

in the demand is a real loss, and one which, even if none of their goods

finally perish unsold, may mount to any height, up to that which would make

them choose, as the smaller evil, to retire from the business. On the contrary,

an increased demand enables them to extend their transactions — to make a

profit on a larger capital, if they have it, or can borrow it; and, turning over

their capital more rapidly, they will employ their labourers more constantly,

or employ a greater number than before. So that an increased demand for a

commodity does really, in the particular department, often cause a greater

employment to be given to labour by the same capital. The mistake lies in not

perceiving that in the cases supposed, this advantage is given to labour and

capital in one department, only by being withdrawn from another; and that

when the change has produced its natural effect of attracting into the

employment additional capital proportional to the increased demand, the

advantage itself ceases.

              The grounds of a proposition, when well understood, usually give a

tolerable indication of the limitations of it. The general principle, now stated,

is that demand for commodities Determines merely the direction of labour,

and the kind of wealth produced, but not the quantity or efficiency of the

labour, or the aggregate of wealth. But to this there are two exceptions. First,

when labour is supported, but not fully occupied, a new demand for

something which it can produce, may stimulate the labour thus supported to

increased exertions, of which the result may be an increase of wealth, to the

advantage of the labourers themselves and of others. Work which can be

done in the spare hours of persons subsisted from some other source, can (as

before remarked) be undertaken without withdrawing capital from other

occupations, beyond the amount (often very small) required to cover the

expense of tools and materials, and even this will often be provided by

savings made expressly for the purpose. The reason of our theorem thus

failing, the theorem itself fails, and employment of this kind may, by the

springing up of a demand for the commodity, be called into existence withoutdepriving labour of an equivalent amount of employment in any other

quarter. The demand does not, even in this case, operate on labour any

otherwise than through the medium of an existing capital, but it affords an

inducement which causes that capital to set in motion a greater amount of

labour than it did before.

              The second exception, of which I shall speak at length in a

subsequent chapter, consists in the known effect of an extension of the

market for a commodity, in rendering possible an increased development of

the division of labour, and hence a more effective distribution of the

productive forces of society. This, like the former, is more an exception. in

appearance than it is in reality. It is not the money paid by the purchaser,

which remunerates the labour; it is the capital of the producer: the demand

only determines in what manner that capital shall be employed, and what

kind of labour it shall remunerate; but if it determines that the commodity

shall be produced on a large scale, it enables the same capital to produce

more of the commodity, and may by an indirect effect in causing an increase

of capital, produce an eventual increase of the remuneration of the labourer.

              The demand for commodities is a consideration of importance rather

in the theory of exchange, than in that of production. Looking at things in the

aggregate, and permanently, the remuneration of the producer is derived from

the productive power of his own capital. The sale of the produce for money,

and the subsequent expenditure of the money in buying other commodities,

are a mere exchange of equivalent values for mutual accommodation. It is

true that, the division of employments being one of the principal means of

increasing the productive power of labour, the power of exchanging gives

rise to a great increase of the produce; but even then it is production, not

exchange, which remunerates labour and capital. We cannot too strictly

represent to ourselves the operation of exchange, whether conducted by

barter or through the medium of money, as the mere mechanism by which

each person transforms the remuneration of his labour or of his capital into

the particular shape in which it is most convenient to him to possess it; but in

no wise the source of the remuneration itself.

              10. The preceding principles demonstrate the fallacy of many

popular arguments and doctrines, which are continually reproducing

themselves in new forms. For example, it has been contended, and by some

from whom better things might have been expected, that the argument for theincome-tax, grounded on its falling on the higher and middle classes only,

and sparing the poor, is an error; some have gone so far as to say, an

imposture; because in taking from the rich what they would have expended

among the poor, the tax injures the poor as much as if it had been directly

levied from them. Of this doctrine we now know what to think. So far,

indeed, as what is taken from the rich in taxes, would, if not so taken, have

been saved and converted into capital, or even expended in the maintenance

and wages of servants or of any class of unproductive labourers, to that extent

the demand for labour is no doubt diminished, and the poor injuriously

affected, by the tax on the rich; and as these effects are almost always

produced in a greater or less degree, it is impossible so to tax the rich as that

no portion whatever of the tax can fall on the poor. But even here the

question arises, whether the government, after receiving the amount, will not

lay out as great a portion of it in the direct purchase of labour, as the

taxpayers would have done. In regard to all that portion of the tax, which, if

not paid to the government, would have been consumed in the form of

commodities (or even expended in services if the payment has been advanced

by a capitalist), this, according to the principles we have investigated, falls

definitively on the rich, and not at all on the poor. There is exactly the same

demand for labour, so far as this portion is concerned, after the tax, as before

it. The capital which hitherto employed the labourers of the country, remains,

and is still capable of employing the same number. There is the same amount

of produce paid in wages, or allotted to defray the feeding and clothing of

labourers.

              If those against whom I am now contending were in the right, it

would be impossible to tax anybody except the poor. If it is taxing the

labourers, to tax what is laid out in the produce of labour, the labouring

classes pay all the taxes. The same argument, however, equally proves, that it

is impossible to tax the labourers at all; since the tax, being laid out either in

labour or in commodities, comes all back to them; so that taxation has the

singular proper of falling on nobody. On the same showing, it would do the

labourers no harm to take from them all they have, and distribute it among

the other members of the community. It would all be “spent among them,”

which on this theory comes to the same thing. The error is produced by not

looking directly at the realities of the phenomena, but attending only to the

outward mechanism of paying and spending. If we look at the effects

produced not on the money, which merely changes hands, but on thecommodities which are used and consumed, we see that, in consequence of

the income-tax, the classes who pay it do really diminish their consumption.

Exactly so far as they do this, they are the persons on whom the tax falls. It is

defrayed out of what they would otherwise have used and enjoyed. So far, on

the other hand, as the burthen falls, not on what they would have consumed,

but on what they would have saved to maintain production, or spent in

maintaining or paying unproductive labourers, to that extent the tax forms a

deduction from what would have been used and enjoyed by the labouring

classes. But if the government, as is probably the fact, expends fully as much

of the amount as the tax-payers would have done in the direct employment of

labour, as in hiring sailors, soldiers, and policemen, or in paying off debt, by

which last operation it even increases capital; the labouring classes not only

do not lose any employment by the tax, but may possibly gain some, and the

whole of the tax falls exclusively where it was intended.

              All that portion of the produce of the country which any one, not a

labourer, actually and literally consumes for his own use, does not contribute

in the smallest degree to the maintenance of labour. No one is benefited by

mere consumption, except the person who consumes. And a person cannot

both consume his income himself, and make it over to be consumed by

others. Taking away a certain portion by taxation cannot deprive both him

and them of it, but only him or them. To know which is the sufferer, we must

understand whose consumption will have to be retrenched in consequence:

this, whoever it be, is the person on whom the tax really falls.

        5
               An exception must be admitted when the industry created or upheld

by the restrictive law belongs to the class of what are called domestic

manufactures. These being carried on by persons already fed — by labouring

families, inthe intervals of other employment — no transfer of capital tothe

occupation is necessary to its being undertaken, beyond the value of the

materials and tools, which is often inconsiderable. If, therefore, a protecting

duty causes this occupation to be carried on, when it otherwise would not,

there is in this case a real increase of the production of the country.

              In order to render our theoretical proposition invulnerable, this

peculiar case must be allowed for; but it does not touch the practical doctrine

of free trade. Domestic manufactures cannot, from the very nature of things,

require protection, since the substance of the labourers being provided from

other sources, the price of the product, however much it may be reduced, isnearly all clear gain. If, therefore, the domestic producers retire from the

competition, it is never from necessity, but because the product is not worth

the labour it costs, in the opinion of the best judges, those who enjoy the one

and undergo the other. They prefer the sacrifice of buying their clothing to

the labour of making it. They will not continue their labour unless society

will give them more for it, than in thier own opinion its product is worth.

        6
               It is worth while to direct attention to several circumstances which

to a certain extent diminish the detriment caused to the general wealth by the

prodigality of individuals, or raise up a compensation, more or less ample, as

a consequence of the detriment itself. One of these is, that spendthrifts do not

usually succeed in consuming all they spend. Their habitual carelessness as to

expenditure causes them to be cheated and robbed on all quarters, often by

persons of frugal habits. Large accumulations are continually made by

agents, stewards, and even domestic servants, of improvident persons of

fortune; and they pay much higher prices for all purchases than people of

careful habits, which accounts for their being popular as customers. They are,

therefore, acutally not able to get into their possession and destroy a quantity

of wealth by any means equivalent to the fortune which they dissipate. Much

of it is merely transferred to others, by whom a part may be saved. Another

thing to be observed is, that the prodigality of some may reduce others to a

forced economy. Suppose a sudden demand for some article of luxury,

caused by the caprice of a prodigal, which not having been calculated on

beforehand, there has been no increase of the usual supply. The price will

rise; and may rise beyond the means or the inclinations of some of the

habitual consumers, who may in consequence forego their accustomed

indulgence,and save the amount. If they do not, but continue to expend as

great a value as before on the commodity, the dealers in it obtain, for only the

same quantity of the article, a return increased by the whole of what the

spendthrift has paid; and thus the amount which he loses is transferred bodily

to them, and may be added to their capital; his increased personal

consumption being made up by the privations of the other purchasers, who

have obtained less than usual of their accustomed gratification for the same

equivalent. On the other hand, a counter-process must be going on

somewhere, since the prodigal must have diminished his purchases in some

other quarter to balance the augmentation in this; he has perhaps called in

funds employed in sustaining productive labour, and the dealers in

subsistence and in the instruments of production have had commodities lefton their hands, or have received, for the usual amount of commodities, a less

than usual return. But such losses of income or capital, by industrious

persons, except when of extraordinary amount, are generally made up by

increasing pinching and privation; so that the capital of the community may

not be, on the whole, impaired, and the prodigal may have had his self-

indulgence at the expense not of the permanent resources, but of the

temporary pleasures and comforts of others. For in every case the community

are poorer by what any one spends, unless others are in consequence led to

curtail their spending. There are yet other and more recondite ways in which

the profusion of some may bring about its compensation in the extra savings

of others; but these can only be considered in that part of the Fourth Book,

which treats of the limiting principle to the accumulation of capital.

        7
               On the other hand,it must be remembered that war abstracts from

productive employment not only capital, but likewise labourers; that the

funds withdrawn from the renumeration of productive labourers are partly

employed in paying the same or other individuals for unproductive labour;

and that by this portion of its effects, war expenditure acts in precisely the

opposite manner to that which Dr. Chalmers points out, and, so far as it goes,

directly counteracts the effects described in the text. So far as labourers are

taken from production, to man the army and navy, the labouring classes are

not damaged, the capitalists are not benefited, and the general produce of the

country is diminished, by war expenditure. Accordingly, Dr. Chalmers’s

doctrine, though true of this country, is wholly inapplicable to countries

differently circumstanced; to France, for example, during the Napoleon wars.

At that period the draught on the labouring population of France, for a long

series of years, was enormous, while the funds which supported the war were

mostly supplied by contributions levied on the countries overrun by the

French arms, a very small proportion alone consisting of French capital. In

France, accordingly, the wages of labour did not fall, but rose; the employers

of labour were not benefited, but injured; while the wealth of the country was

impaired by the suspension or total loss of so vast an amount of its productive

labour. In England all this was reversed. England employed comparatively

few additional soldiers and sailors of her own, while she diverted hundreds of

millions of capital from productive employment, to supply munitions of war

and support armies for her Continental allies. Consequently, as shown in the

text, her labourers suffered, her capitalists prospered, and her permanent

productive resources did not fall off.        8
               The following case, which presents the argument in a somewhat

different shape, may serve for still further illustration.

              Suppose that a rich individual, A, expends a certain amount daily in

wages or alms, which, as soon as received, is expended and consumed, in the

form of coarse food, by the receivers. A dies, leaving his property to B, who

discontinues this item of expenditure, and expends in lieu of it the same sum

each day in delicacies for his own table, I have chosen this supposition, in

order tht the two cases may be similar in all their circumstances, except that

which is the subject of comparison. In order not to obscure the essential facts

of the case by exhibiting them through the hazy medium of a money

transaction, let us further suppose that A, and B after him, are landlords of the

estate on which both the food consumed by the recipients of A’s

disbursements, and the articles of luxury supplied for B’s table, are produced;

and that their rent is paid to them in kind, they giving previous notice what

description of produce they shall require. The question is, whether B’s

expenditure gives as much employment or as much food to his poorer

neighbours as A’s gave.

              From the case as stated, it seems to follow that while A lived, that

portion of his income which he expended in wages or alms, would be drawn

by him from the farm in the shape of food for labourers, and would be used

as such; while B, who came after him, would require, instead of this, an

equivalent value in expensive articles of food, to be consumed in his own

household: that the farmer, therefore, would, under B’s regime, produce that

much less of ordinary food, and more of expensive delicacies, for each day of

the year,than was produced in A’s time, and that there would be that amount

less of food shared, throughout the year, among the labouring and poorer

classes. This is what would be conformable to the principles laid down in the

text. Those who think differently, must, on the other hand, suppose that the

luxuries required by B would be produced, not instead of, but in addition to,

the food previously supplied to A’s labourers, and that the aggregate produce

of the country would be increased in amount. But when it is asked, how this

double production would be effected, would be enabled to supply the new

wants of B, without producing less of other things; the only mode which

presents itself is, that he should first produce the food, and then, giving that

food to the labourers whom A formerly fed, should by means of their labour,

produce the luxuries wanted by B. This accordingly, when the objectors arehard pressed, appears to be really their meaning. But it is an obvious answer,

that on this supposition, B must wait for his luxuries till the second year, and

they are wanted this year. By the original hypothesis, he consumes his

luxurious dinner day by day, pari passu with the rations of bread and potatoes

formerly served out by A to his labourers. There is not time to feed the

labourers first, and supply B afterwards: he and they cannot both have their

wants ministered to: he can only satisfy his own demand for commodities, by

leaving as much of theirs, as was formerly supplied from that fund,

unsatisfied.

              It may, indeed, be rejoined by an objector, that since, on the present

showing, time is the only thing wanting to render the expenditure of B

consistent with as large an employment to labour as was given by A, why

may we not suppose that B postpones his increased consumption of personal

luxuries until they can be furnished to him by the labour of the persons whom

A employed? In that case, it may be said, he would employ and feed as much

labour as his predecessors. Undoubtedly he would; but why? Because his

income would be expended in exactly the same manner as his predecessor’s;

it would be expended in wages. A reserved from his personal consumption a

fund which he paid away directly to labourers; B does the same, only instead

of paying it to them himself, he leaves in the hands of the farmer, who pays it

to them for him. On this supposition, B, in the first year, neither expending

the amount, as far as he is personally concerned, in A’s manner nor in his

own, really saves that portion of his income, and lends it to the farmer. And

if, in subsequent years, confining himself within the year’s income, he leaves

the farmer in arrears to that amount, it becomes an additional capital, with

which the farmer may permanently employ and feed A’s labourers. Nobody

pretends that such a change as this, a change from spending an income in

wages of labour, to saving it for investment, deprives any labourers of

employment. What is affirmed to have that effect is, the change from hiring

labourers to buying commodities for personal use; as represented by our

original hypothesis.

              In our illustration we have supposed no buying and selling, or use of

money. But the case as we have put it, corresponds with actual fact in

everything except the details of the mechanism. The whole of any country is

virtually a single farm and manufactory, from which every member of the

community draws his appointed share of the produce, having a certainnumber of counters, called pounds sterling, put into his hands, which, at his

convenience, he brings back and exchanges for such goods as he prefers, up

to the limit of the amount. He does not, as in our imaginary case, give notice

beforehand what things he shall require; but the dealers and producers are

quite capable of finding it out by observation, and any change in the demand

is promptly followed by an adaptation of the supply to it. If a consumer

changes from paying away a part of his income in wages, to spending it that

same day (not some subsequent and distant day) in things for his own

consumption, and perseveres in this altered practice until production has had

time to adapt itself to the alteration of demand, there will from that time be

less food and other articles for the use of labourers, produced in the country,

by exactly the value of the extra luxuries now demanded; and the labourers,

as a class, will be worse off by the precise amount.

 

 

                 Chapter 6 – On Circulating and Fixed Capital

 

 

              1. To complete our explanations on the subject of capital, it is

necessary to say something of the two species into which it is usually

divided. The distinction is very obvious, and though not named, has been

often adverted to, in the two preceding chapters: but it is now proper to define

it accurately, and to point out a few of its consequences.

              Of the capital engaged in the production of any commodity, there is

a part which, after being once used, exists no longer as capital; is no longer

capable of rendering service to production, or at least not the same service,

nor to the same sort of production. Such, for example, is the portion of capital

which consists of materials. The tallow and alkali of which soap is made,

once used in the manufacture, are destroyed as alkali and tallow; and cannot

be employed any further in the soap manufacture, though in their altered

condition, as soap, they are capable of being used as a material or an

instrument in other branches of manufacture. In the same division must be

placed the portion of capital which is paid as the wages, or consumed as the

subsistence, of labourers. The part of the capital of a cottonspinner which he

pays away to his work-people, once so paid, exists no longer as his capital, or

as a cotton-spinner’s capital: such portion of it as the workmen consume, no

longer exists as capital at all: even if they save any part, it may now be more

properly regarded as a fresh capital, the result of a second act of

accumulation. Capital which in this manner fulfils the whole of its office in

the production in which it is engaged, by a single use, is called Circulating

Capital. The term, which is not very appropriate, is derived from the

circumstance, that this portion of capital requires to be constantly renewed by

the sale of the finished product, and when renewed is perpetually parted with

in buying materials and paying wages; so that it does its work, not by being

kept, but by changing hands.

              Another large portion of capital, however, consists in instruments of

production, of a more or less permanent character; which produce their effect

not by being parted with, but by being kept; and the efficacy of which is not

exhausted by a single use. To this class belong buildings, machinery, and all

or most things known by the name of implements or tools. The durability ofsome of these is considerable, and their function as productive instruments is

prolonged through many repetitions of the productive operation. In this class

must likewise be included capital sunk (as the expression is) in permanent

improvements of land. So also the capital expended once for all, in the

commencement of an undertaking, to prepare the way for subsequent

operations: the expense of opening a mine, for example: of cutting canals, of

making roads or docks. Other examples might be added, but these are

sufficient. Capital which exists in any of these durable shapes, and the return

to which is spread over a period of corresponding duration, is called Fixed

Capital.

              Of fixed capital, some kinds require to be occasionally or

periodically renewed. Such are all implements and buildings: they require, at

intervals, partial renewal by means of repairs, and are at last entirely worn

out, and cannot be of any further service as buildings and implements, but fall

back into the class of materials. In other cases, the capital does not, unless as

a consequence of some unusual accident, require entire renewal: but there is

always some outlay needed, either regularly or at least occasionally, to keep it

up. A dock or a canal, once made, does not require, like a machine, to be

made again, unless purposely destroyed, or unless an earthquake or some

similar catastrophe has filled it up: but regular and frequent outlays are

necessary to keep it in repair. The cost of opening a mine needs not be

incurred a second time; but unless some one goes to the expense of keeping

the mine clear of water, it is soon rendered useless. The most permanent of all

kinds of fixed capital is that employed in giving increased productiveness to a

natural agent, such as land. The draining of marshy or inundated tracts like

the Bedford Level, the reclaiming of land from the sea, or its protection by

embankments, are improvements calculated for perpetuity; but drains and

dykes require frequent repairs. The same character of perpetuity belongs to

the improvement of land by subsoil draining, which adds so much to the

productiveness of the clay soils; or by permanent manures, that is, by the

addition to the soil, not of the substances which enter into the composition of

vegetables, and which are therefore consumed by vegetation, but of those

which merely alter the relation of the soil to air and water; as sand and lime

on the heavy soils, clay and marl on the light. Even such works, however,

require some, though it may be very little, occasional outlay to maintain their

full effect.              These improvements, however, by the very fact of their deserving

that title, produce an increase of return, which, after defraying all expenditure

necessary for keeping them up, still leaves a surplus. This surplus forms the

return to the capital sunk in the first instance, and that return does not, as in

the case of machinery, terminate by the wearing out of the machine, but

continues for ever. The land, thus increased in productiveness, bears a value

in the market, proportional to the increase: and hence it is usual to consider

the capital which was invested, or sunk, in making the improvement, as still

existing in the increased value of the land. There must be no mistake,

however. The capital, like all other capital, has been consumed. It was

consumed in maintaining the labourers who executed the improvement, and

in the wear and tear of the tools by which they were assisted. But it was

consumed productively, and has left a permanent result in the improved

productiveness of an appropriated natural agent, the land. We may call the

increased produce the joint result of the land and of a capital fixed in the land.

But as the capital, having in reality been consumed, cannot be withdrawn, its

productiveness is thenceforth indissolubly blended with that arising from the

original qualities of the soil; and the remuneration for the use of it thenceforth

depends, not upon the laws which govern the returns to labour and capital,

but upon those which govern the recompense for natural agents. What these
                              8
are, we shall see hereafter.

              2. There is a great difference between the effects of circulating and

those of fixed capital, on the amount of the gross produce of the country.

Circulating capital being destroyed as such, or at any rate finally lost to the

owner, by a single use; and the product resulting from that one use being the

only source from which the owner can replace the capital, or obtain any

remuneration for its productive employment; the product must of course be

sufficient for those purposes, or in other words, the result of a single use must

be a reproduction equal to the whole amount of the circulating capital used,

and a profit besides. This, however, is by no means necessary in the case of

fixed capital. Since machinery, for example, is not wholly consumed by one

use, it is not necessary that it should be wholly replaced from the product of

that use. The machine answers the purpose of its owner if it brings in, during

each interval of time, enough to cover the expense of repairs, and the

deterioration in value which the machine has sustained during the same time,

with a surplus sufficient to yield the ordinary profit on the entire value of the

machine.              From this it follows that all increase of fixed capital, when taking

place at the expense of circulating, must be, at least temporarily, prejudicial

to the interests of the labourers. This is true, not of machinery alone, but of

all improvements by which capital is sunk; that is, rendered permanently

incapable of being applied to the maintenance and remuneration of labour.

Suppose that a person farms his own land, with a capital of two thousand

quarters of corn, employed in maintaining labourers during one year (for

simplicity we omit the consideration of seed and tools), whose labour

produces him annually two thousand four hundred quarters, being a profit of

twenty per cent. This profit we shall suppose that he annually consumes,

carrying on his operations from year to year on the original capital of two

thousand quarters. Let us now suppose that by the expenditure of half his

capital he effects a permanent improvement of his land, which is executed by

half his labourers, and occupies them for a year, after which he will only

require, for the effectual cultivation of his land, half as many labourers as

before. The remainder of his capital he employs as usual. In the first year

there is no difference in the condition of the labourers, except that part of

them have received the same pay for an operation on the land, which they

previously obtained for ploughing, sowing, and reaping. At the end of the

year, however, the improver has not, as before, a capital of two thousand

quarters of corn. Only one thousand quarters of his capital have been

reproduced in the usual way: he has now only those thousand quarters and his

improvement. He will employ, in the next and in each following year, only

half the number of labourers, and will divide among them only half the

former quantity of subsistence. The loss will soon be made up to them if the

improved land, with the diminished quantity of labour, produces two

thousand four hundred quarters as before, because so enormous an accession

of gain will probably induce the improver to save a part, add it to his capital,

and become a larger employer of labour. But it is conceivable that this may

not be the case; for (supposing, as we may do, that the improvement will last

indefinitely, without any outlay worth mentioning to keep it up) the improver

will have gained largely by his improvement if the land now yields, not two

thousand four hundred, but one thousand five hundred quarters; since this

will replace the one thousand quarters forming his present circulating capital,

with a profit of twenty-five per cent (instead of twenty as before) on the

whole capital, fixed and circulating together. The improvement, therefore,

may be a very profitable one to him, and yet very injurious to the labourers.              The supposition, in the terms in which it has been stated, is purely

ideal; or at most applicable only to such a case as that of the conversion of

arable land into pasture, which, though formerly a frequent practice, is
                                                                                9
regarded by modern agriculturists as the reverse of an improvement. But this

does not affect the substance of the argument. Suppose that the improvement

does not operate in the manner supposed — does not enable a part of the

labour previously employed on the land to be dispensed with — but only

enables the same labour to raise a greater produce. Suppose, too, that the

greater produce, which by means of the improvement can be raised from the

soil with the same labour, is all wanted, and will find purchasers. The

improver will in that case require the same number of labourers as before, at

the same wages. But where will he find the means of paying them? He has no

longer his original capital of two thousand quarters disposable for the

purpose. One thousand of them are lost and gone — consumed in making the

improvement. If he is to employ as many labourers as before, and pay them

as highly, he must borrow, or obtain from some other source, a thousand

quarters to supply the deficit. But these thousand quarters already maintained,

or were destined to maintain, an equivalent quantity of labour. They are not a

fresh creation; their destination is only changed from one productive

employment to another; and though the agriculturist has made up the

deficiency in his own circulating capital, the breach in the circulating capital

of the community remains unrepaired.

              The argument relied on by most of those who contend that

machinery can never be injurious to the labouring class, is, that by

cheapening production it creates such an increased demand for the

commodity, as enables, ere long, a greater number of persons than ever to

find employment in producing it. This argument does not seem to me to have

the weight commonly ascribed to it. The fact, though too broadly stated, is,

no doubt, often true. The copyists who were thrown out of employment by

the invention of printing, were doubtless soon outnumbered by the

compositors and pressmen who took their place; and the number of labouring

persons now occupied in the cotton manufacture is many times greater than

were so occupied previously to the inventions of Hargreaves and Arkwright,

which shows that besides the enormous fixed capital now embarked in the

manufacture, it also employs a far larger circulating capital than at any

former time. But if this capital was drawn from other employments; if the

funds which took the place of the capital sunk in costly machinery, weresupplied not by any additional saving consequent on the improvements, but

by drafts on the general capital of the community. what better were the

labouring classes for the mere transfer? In what manner was the loss they

sustained by the conversion of circulating into fixed capital made up to them

by a mere shifting of part of the remainder of the circulating capital from its

old employments to a new one?

              All attempts to make out that the labouring classes as a collective

body cannot suffer temporarily by the introduction of machinery, or by the

sinking of capital in permanent improvements, are, I conceive, necessarily

fallacious. That they would suffer in the particular department of industry to

which the change applies, is generally admitted, and obvious to common

sense; but it is often said, that though employment is withdrawn from labour

in one department, an exactly equivalent employment is opened for it in

others, because what the consumers save in the increased cheapness of one

particular article enables them to augment their consumption of others,

thereby increasing the demand for other kinds of labour. This is plausible,

but, as was shown in the last chapter, involves a fallacy; demand for

commodities being a totally different thing from demand for labour. It is true,

the consumers have now additional means of buying other things; but this

will not create the other things, unless there is capital to produce them, and

the improvement has not set at liberty any capital, if even it has not absorbed

some from other employments. The supposed increase of production and of

employment for labour in other departments therefore will not take place; and

the increased demand for commodities by some consumers, will be balanced

by a cessation of demand on the part of others, namely, the labourers who

were superseded by the improvement, and who will now be maintained, if at

all, by sharing, either in the way of competition or of charity, in what was

previously consumed by other people.

              3. Nevertheless, I do not believe that as things are actually

transacted, improvements in production are often, if ever, injurious, even

temporarily, to the labouring classes in the aggregate. They would be so if

they took place suddenly to a great amount, because much of the capital sunk

must necessarily in that case be provided from funds already employed as

circulating capital. But improvements are always introduced very gradually,

and are seldom or never made by withdrawing circulating capital from actual

production, but are made by the employment of the annual increase. Thereare few if any examples of a great increase of fixed capital, at a time and

place where circulating capital was not rapidly increasing likewise. It is not in

poor or backward countries that great and costly improvements in production

are made. To sink capital in land for a permanent return — to introduce

expensive machinery — are acts involving immediate sacrifice for distant

objects; and indicate, in the first place, tolerably complete security of

property; in the second, considerable activity of industrial enterprise; and in

the third, a high standard of what has been called the “effective desire of

accumulation:” which three things are the elements of a society rapidly

progressive in its amount of capital. Although, therefore, the labouring

classes must suffer, not only if the increase of fixed capital takes place at the

expense of circulating, but even if it is so large and rapid as to retard that

ordinary increase to which the growth of population has habitually adapted

itself; yet, in point of fact, this is very unlikely to happen, since there is

probably no country whose fixed capital increases in a ratio more than

proportional to its circulating. If the whole of the railways which, during the

speculative madness of 1845, obtained the sanction of Parliament, had been

constructed in the times fixed for the completion of each, this improbable

contingency would, most likely, have been realized; but this very case has

afforded a striking example of the difficulties which oppose the diversion into

new channels, of any considerable portion of the capital that supplies the old:

difficulties generally much more than sufficient to prevent enterprises that

involve the sinking of capital, from extending themselves with such rapidity

as to impair the sources of the existing employment for labour.

              To these considerations must be added, that even if improvements

did for a time decrease the aggregate produce and the circulating capital of

the community, they would not the less tend in the long run to augment both.

They increase the return to capital; and of this increase the benefit must

necessarily accrue either to the capitalist in greater profits, or to the customer

in diminished prices; affording, in either case, an augmented fund from which

accumulation may be made, while enlarged profits also hold out an increased

inducement to accumulation. In the case we before selected, in which the

immediate result of the improvement was to diminish the gross produce from

two thousand four hundred quarters to one thousand five hundred, yet the

profit of the capitalist being now five hundred quarters instead of four

hundred, the extra one hundred quarters, if regularly saved, would in a few

years replace the one thousand quarters subtracted from his circulatingcapital. Now the extension of business which almost certainly follows in any

department in which an improvement has been made, affords a strong

inducement to those engaged in it to add to their capital; and hence, at the

slow pace at which improvements are usually introduced, a great part of the

capital which the improvement ultimately absorbs, is drawn from the

increased profits and increased savings which it has itself called forth.

              This tendency of improvements in production to cause increased

accumulation, and thereby ultimately to increase the gross produce, even if

temporarily diminishing it, will assume a still more decided character if it,

should appear that there are assignable limits both to the accumulation of

capital, and to the increase of production from the land, which limits once

attained, all further increase of produce must stop; but that improvements in

production, whatever may be their other effects, tend to throw one or both of

these limits farther off. Now, these are truths which will appear in the clearest

light in a subsequent stage of our investigation. It will be seen, that the

quantity of capital which will, or even which can, be accumulated in any

country, and the amount of gross produce which will, or even which can, be

raised, bear a proportion to the state of the arts of production there existing;

and that every improvement, even if for the time it diminish the circulating

capital and the gross produce, ultimately makes room for a larger amount of

both, than could possibly have existed otherwise. It is this which is the

conclusive answer to the objections against machinery; and the proof thence

arising of the ultimate benefit to labourers of mechanical inventions even in
                                                                              10
the existing state of society, will hereafter be seen to be conclusive. But this

does not discharge governments from the obligation of alleviating, and if

possible preventing, the evils of which this source of ultimate benefit is or

may be productive to an existing generation. If the sinking or fixing of capital

in machinery or useful works were ever to proceed at such a pace as to impair

materially the funds for the maintenance of labour, it would be incumbent on

legislators to take measures for moderating its rapidity: and since

improvements which do not diminish employment on the whole, almost

always throw some particular class of labourers out of it, there cannot be a

more legitimate object of the legislator’s care than the interests of those who

are thus sacrificed to the gains of their fellow-citizens and of posterity.

              To return to the theoretical distinction between fixed and circulating

capital. Since all wealth which is destined to be employed for reproductioncomes within the designation of capital, there are parts of capital which do

not agree with the definition of either species of it; for instance, the stock of

finished goods which a manufacturer or dealer at any time possesses unsold

in his warehouses. But this, though capital as to its destination, is not yet

capital in actual exercise. it is not engaged in production, but has first to he

sold or exchanged, that is, converted into an equivalent value of some other

commodities; and therefore is not yet either fixed or circulating capital; but

will become either one or the other, or be eventually divided between them.

With the proceeds of his finished goods, a manufacturer will partly pay his

work-people, partly replenish his stock of the materials of his manufacture,

and partly provide new buildings and machinery, or repair the old; but how

much will be devoted to one purpose, and how much to another, depends on

the nature of the manufacture, and the requirements of the particular moment.

              It should be observed further, that the portion of capital consumed in

the form of seed or material, though, unlike fixed capital, it requires to be at

once replaced from the gross produce, stands yet in the same relation to the

employment of labour, as fixed capital does. What is expended in materials is

as much withdrawn from the maintenance and remuneration of labourers, as

what is fixed in machinery; and if capital now expended in wages were

diverted to the providing of materials, the effect on the labourers would be as

prejudicial as if it were converted into fixed capital. This, however, is a kind

of change which seldom, if ever, takes place. The tendency of improvements

in production is always to economize, never to increase, the expenditure of

seed or material for a given produce; and the interest of the labourers has no

detriment to apprehend from this source.

        9
               Infra, book ii. chap. xvi. On Rent.

        10
               The clearing away of the small farmers in the North of Scotland,

within the present century, was, however, a case of it; and Ireland, since the

potato famine and the repeal of the corn laws, is another. The remarkable

decrease which has lately attracted notice in the gross produce of Irish

agriculture, is, to all appearance, partly attributable to the diversion of land

from maintaining human labourers to feeding cattle; and it could not have

taken place without the removal of a large part of the Irish population by

emigration or death. We have thus two recent instances, in which what was

regarded as an agricultural improvement, has diminished the power of the

country to support its population. The effect, however, of all theimprovements due to modern science is to increase, or at all events, not to

diminish, the gross produce.

        11
               Infra, book iv. chap. v.

 

 

       Chapter 7 – On What Depends the Degree of Productiveness of

                                  Productive Agents

 

 

              1. We have concluded our general survey of the requisites of

production. We have found that they may be reduced to three: labour, capital,

and the materials and motive forces afforded by nature. Of these, labour and

the raw material of the globe are primary and indispensable. Natural motive

powers may be called in to the assistance of labour, and are a help, but not an

essential, of production. The remaining requisite, capital, is itself the product

of labour: its instrumentality in production is therefore, in reality, that of

labour in an shape. It does not the less require to be specified separately. A

previous application of labour to produce the capital required for

consumption during the work, is no less essential than the application of

labour to the work itself. Of capital, again, one, and by far the largest,

portion, conduces to production only by sustaining in existence the labour

which produces: the remainder, namely the instruments and materials,

contribute to it directly, in the same manner with natural agents, and the

materials supplied by nature.

              We now advance to the second great question in political economy;

on what the degree of productiveness of these agents depends. For it is

evident that their productive efficacy varies greatly at various times and

places. With the same population and extent of territory, some countries have

a much lager amount of production than others, and the same country at one

time a greater amount than itself at another. Compare England either with a

similar extent of territory in Russia, or with an equal population of Russians.

Compare England now with England in the Middle Ages; Sicily, Northern

Africa, or Syria at present, with the same countries at the time of their

greatest prosperity, before the Roman Conquest. Some of the causes which

contribute to this difference of productiveness are obvious; others not so

much so. We proceed to specify several of them.

              2. The most evident cause of superior productiveness is what are

called natural advantages. These are various. Fertility of soil is one of the

principal. In this there are great varieties, from the deserts of Arabia to thealluvial plains of the Ganges, the Niger, and the Mississippi. A favourable

climate is even more important than a rich soil. There are countries capable of

being inhabited, but too cold to be compatible with agriculture. Their

inhabitants cannot pass beyond the nomadic state; they must live, like the

Laplanders, by the domestication of the rein-deer, if not by hunting or

fishing, like the miserable Esquimaux. There are countries where oats will

ripen, but not wheat, such as the North of Scotland; others where wheat can

be grown, but from excess of moisture and want of sunshine, affords but a

precious crop; as in parts of Ireland. With each advance towards the south, or,

in the European temperate region, towards the east, some new branch of

agriculture becomes first possible, then advantageous; the vine, maize, silk,

figs, olives, rice, dates, successively present themselves, until we come to the

sugar, coffee, cotton, spices, &c. of climates which also afford, of the more

common agricultural products, and with only a slight degree of cultivation,

two or even three harvests in a year. Nor is it in agriculture alone that

differences of climate ae important. Their influence is felt in many other

branches of production: in the durability of all work which is exposed to the

air; of buildings, for example. If the temples of Karnac and Luxor had not

been injured by men, they might have subsisted in their original perfection

almost for ever, for the inscriptions on some of them, though anterior to all

authentic history, are fresher than is in our climate an inscription fifty years

old: while at St. Petersburg, the most massive works, solidly executed in

granite hardly a generation ago, are already, as travellers tell us, almost in a

state to require reconstruction, from alternate exposure to summer heat and

intense frost. The superiority of the woven fabrics of Southern Europe over

those of England in the richness and clearness of many of their colours, is

ascribed to the superior quality of the atmosphere, for which neither the

knowledge of chemists nor the skill of dyers has been able to provide, in our

hazy and damp climate, a complete equivalent.

              Another part of the influence of climate consists in lessening the

physical requirements of the producers. In hot regions, mankind can exist in

comfort with less perfect housing, less clothing; fuel, that absolute necessary

of life in cold climates, they can almost dispense with, except for industrial

uses. They also require less aliment; as experience had proved, long before

theory had accounted for it by ascertaining that most of what we consume as

food is not required for the actual nutrition of the organs, but for keeping up

the animal heat, and for supplying the necessary stimulus to the vitalfunctions, which in hot climates is almost sufficiently supplied by air and

sunshine. Much, therefore, of the labour elsewhere expended to procure the

mere necessaries of life, not being required, more remains disposable for its

higher uses and its enjoyments; if the character of the inhabitants does not

rather induce them to use up these advantages in over-population, or in the

indulgence of repose.

              Among natural advantages, besides soil and climate, must be

mentioned abundance of mineral productions, in convenient situations, and

capable of being worked with moderate labour. Such are the coal-fields of

Great Britain, which do so much to compensate its inhabitants for the

disadvantages of climate; and the scarcely inferior resource possessed by this

country and the United States, in a copious supply of an easily reduced iron

ore, at no great depth below the earth’s surface, and in close proximity to coal

deposits available for working it. In mountain and hill districts, the

abundance of natural water-power makes considerable amends for the usually

inferior fertility of those regions. But perhaps a greater advantage than all

these is a maritime situation, especially when accompanied with good natural

harbours; and, next to it, great navigable rivers. These advantages consist

indeed wholly in saving of cost of carriage. But few who have not considered

the subject, have any adequate notion how great an extent of economical

advantage this comprises; nor, without having considered the influence

exercised on production by exchanges, and by what is called the division of

labour, can it be fully estimated. So important is it, that it often does more

than counterbalance sterility of soil, and almost every other natural

inferiority; especially in that early stage of industry in which labour and

science have not yet provided artificial means of communication capable of

rivalling the natural. In the ancient world, and in the Middle ages, the most

prosperous communities were not those which had the largest territory, or the

most fertile soil, but rather those which had been forced by natural sterility to

make the utmost use of a convenient maritime situation; as athens, Tyre,

Marseilles, Venice, the free cities on the Baltic, and the like.

              3. So much for natural advantages; the value of which, caeteris

paribus, is too obvious to be ever underrated. But experience testifies that

natural advantages scarcely ever do for a community, no more than fortune

and station do for an individual, anything like what it lies in their nature, or in

their capacity, to do. Neither now nor in former ages have the nationspossessing the best climate and soil, been either the richest or the most

powerful; but (in so far as regards the mass of the people) generally among

the poorest, though, in the midst of poverty, probably on the whole the most

enjoying. Human life in those countries can be supported on so little, that the

poor seldom suffer from anxiety, and in climates in which mere existence is a

pleasure, the luxury which they prefer is that of repose. Energy, at the call of

passion, they possess in abundance, but not that which is manifested in

sustained and persevering labour: and as they seldom concern themselves

enough about remote objects to establish good political institutions, the

incentives to industry are further weakened by imperfect protection of its

fruits. Successful production, like most other kinds of success, depends more

on the qualities of the human agents, than on the circumstances in which they

work: and it is difficulties, not facilities, that nourish bodily and mental

energy. accordingly the tribes of mankind who have overrun and conquered

others, and compelled them to labour for their benefit, have been mostly

reared amidst hardship. They have either been bred in the forests of northern

climates, or the deficiency of natural hardships has been supplied, as among

the Greeks and Romans, by the artificial ones of a rigid military discipline.

From the time when the circumstances of modern society permitted the

discontinuance of that discipline, the South has no longer produced

conquering nations; military vigour, as well as speculative thought and

industrial energy, have all had their principal seats in the less favoured North.

              As the second, therefore, of the causes of superior productiveness,

we may rank the greater energy of labour. By this is not to be understood

occasional, but regular and habitual energy. No one undergoes, without

murmuring, a greater amount of occasional fatigue and hardship, or has his

bodily powers, and such faculties of mind as he possesses, kept longer at at

their utmost stretch, than the North American; yet his indolence proverbial,

whenever he has a brief respite from the pressure of present wants.

Individuals, or nations, do not differ so much in the efforts they are able and

willing to make under strong immediate incentives, as in their capacity of

present exertion for a distant object; and in the thoroughness of their

application to work on ordinary occasions. Some amount of these qualities is

a necessary condition of any great improvement among mankind. To civilize

a savage, he must be inspired with new wants and desires, even if not of a

very elevated kind, provided that their gratification can be a motive to steady

and regular bodily and mental exertion. If the negroes of Jamaica andDemerara, after their emancipation, had contented themselves, as it was

predicted they would do, with the necessaries of life, and abandoned all

labour beyond the little which in a tropical climate, with a thin population

and abundance of the richest land, is sufficient to support existence, they

would have sunk into a condition more barbarous, though less unhappy, than

their previous state of slavery. The motive which was most relied on for

inducing them to work was their love of fine clothes and personal ornaments.

No one will stand up for this taste as worthy of being cultivated, and in most

societies its indulgence tends to impoverish rather than to enrich; but in the

state of mind of the negroes it might have been the only incentive that could

make them voluntarily undergo systematic labour, and so acquire or maintain

habits of voluntary industry which may be converted to more valuable ends.

In England, it is not the desire of wealth that needs to be taught, but the use of

wealth, and appreciation of the objects of desire which wealth cannot

purchase, or for attaining which it is not required. Every real improvement in

the character of the English, whether it consist in giving them higher

aspirations, or only a juster estimate of the value of their present objects of

desire, must necessarily moderate the ardour of their devotion to the pursuit

of wealth. There is no need, however, that it should diminish the strenuous

and businesslike application to the matter at hand, which is found in the best

English workmen, and is their most valuable quality.

              The desirable medium is one which mankind have not often known

how to hit: when they labour, to do it with all their might, and especially with

all their mind; but to devote to labour, for mere pecuniary gain, fewer hours

in the day, fewer days in the year, and fewer years of life.

              4. The third element which determines the productiveness of the

labour of a community, is the skill and knowledge therein existing; whether it

be the skill and knowledge of the labourers themselves, or of those who

direct their labour. No illustration is requisite to show how the efficacy of

industry is promoted by the manual dexterity of those who perform mere

routine processes; by the intelligence of those engaged in operations in which

the mind has a considerable part; and by the amount of knowledge of natural

powers and of the properties of objects, which is turned to the purposes of

industry. That the productiveness of the labour of a people is limited by their

knowledge of the arts of life, is self-evident; and that any progress in those

arts, any improved application of the objects or powers of nature to industrialuses, enables the same quantity and intensity of labour to raise a greater

produce.

              One principal department of these improvements consists in the

invention and use of tools and machinery. The manner in which these serve

to increase production and to economize labour, needs not be specially

detailed in a work like the present: it will be found explained and

exemplified, in a manner at once scientific and popular, in Mr. Babbage’s

well-known “Economy of Machinery and Manufactures.” An entire chapter

of Mr. Babbage’s book is composed of instances of the efficacy of machinery

in “exerting forces too great for human power, and executing operations too

delicate for human touch.” But to find examples of work which could not be

performed at all by unassisted labour, we need not go so far. Without pumps,

worked by steam-engines or otherwise, the water which collects in mines

could not in many situations be got rid of at all, and the mines, after being

worked to a little depth, must be abandoned: without ships or boats the sea

could never have been crossed; without tools of some sort, trees could not be

cut down, nor rocks excavated; a plough, or at least a hoe, is necessary to any

tillage of the ground. Very simple and rude instruments, however, are

sufficient to render literally possible most works hitherto executed by

mankind. and subsequent inventions have chiefly served to enable the work

to be performed in greater perfection, and, above all, with a greatly

diminished quantity of labour: the labour thus saved becoming disposable for

other employments.

              The use of machinery is far from being the only mode in which the

effects of knowledge in aiding production are exemplified. In agriculture and

horticulture, machinery is only now beginning to show that it can do anything

of importance, beyond the invention and progressive improvement of the

plough and a few other simple instruments. The greatest agricultural

inventions have consisted in the direct application of more judicious

processes to the land itself, and to the plants growing on it; such as rotation of

crops, to avoid the necessity of leaving the land for one season in every two

or three; improved manures, to renovate its fertility when exhausted by

cropping; ploughing and draining the subsoil as well as the surface;

conversion of bogs and marshes into cultivable land; such modes of pruning,

and of training and propping up plants and trees, as experience has shown to

deserve the preference; in the case of the more expensive cultures, plantingthe roots or seeds further apart, and more completely pulverizing the soil in

which they are placed, &c. In manufactures and commerce, some of the most

important improvements consist in economizing time; in making the return

follow more speedily upon the labour and outlay. There are others of which

the advantage consists in economy of material.

              5. But the effects of the increased knowledge of a community in

increasing its wealth, need the less illustration as they have become familiar

to the most uneducated, from such conspicuous instances as railways and

steam-ships. A thing not yet so well understood and recognised, is the

economical value of the general diffusion of intelligence among the people.

The number of persons fitted to direct and superintend any industrial

enterprise, or even to execute any process which cannot be reduced almost to

an affair of memory and routine, is always far short of the demand; as is

evident from the enormous difference between the salaries paid to such

persons, and the wages of ordinary labour. The deficiency of practical good

sense, which renders the majority of the labouring class such bad calculators

— which makes, for instance, their domestic economy so improvident, lax,

and irregular — must disqualify them for any but a low grade of intelligent

labour, and render their industry far less productive than with equal energy it

otherwise might be. The importance, even in this limited aspect, of popular

education, is well worthy of the attention of politicians, especially in

England; since competent observers, accustomed to employ labourers of

various nations, testify that in the workmen of other countries they often find

great intelligence wholly apart from instruction, but that if an English

labourer is anything but a hewer of wood and a drawer of water, he is

indebted for it to education, which in his case is almost always self-

education. Mr. Escher, of Zurich (an engineer and cotton manufacturer

employing nearly two thousand working men of many different nations), in

his evidence annexed to the Report of the Poor Law Commissioners, in 1840,

on the training of pauper children, gives a character of English as contrasted

with Continental workmen, which all persons of similar experience will, I

believe, confirm.

              “The Italians’ quickness of perception is shown in rapidly

comprehending any new descriptions of labour put into their hands, in a

power of quickly comprehending the meaning of their employer, of adapting

themselves to new circumstances, much beyond what any other classes have.The French workmen have the like natural characteristics, only in a

somewhat lower degree. The English, Swiss, German, and Dutch workmen,

we find, have all much slower natural comprehension. As workmen only, the

preference is undoubtedly due to the English; because, as we find them, they

are all trained to special branches, on which they have had comparatively

superior training, and have concentrated all their thoughts. As men of

business or of general usefulness, and as men with whom an employer would

best like to be surrounded, I should, however, decidedly prefer the Saxons

and the Swiss, but more especially the Saxons, because they have had a very

careful general education, which has extended their capacities beyond any

special employment, and rendered them fit to take up, after a short

preparation, any employment to which they may be called. If I have an

English workman engaged in the erection of a steam-engine, he will

understand that, and nothing else; and for other circumstances or other

branches of mechanics, however closely allied, he will be comparatively

helpless to adapt himself to all the circumstances that may arise, to make

arrangements for them, and give sound advice or write clear statements and

letters on his work in the various related branches of mechanics.”

              On the connexion between mental cultivation and moral

trustworthiness in the labouring class, the same witness says, “The better

educated workmen, we find, are distinguished by superior moral habits in

every respect. In the first place, they are entirely sober; they are discreet in

their enjoyments, which are of a more rational and refined kind; they have a

taste for much better society, which they approach respectfully, and

consequently find much readier admittance to it; they cultivate music; they

read; they enjoy the pleasures of scenery, and make parties for excursions

into the count; they are economical, and their economy extends beyond their

own purse to the stock of their master; they are, consequently, honest and

trustworthy.” And in answer to a question respecting the English workmen,

“Whilst in respect to the work to which they have been specially trained they

are the most skilful, they are in conduct the most disorderly, debauched, and

unruly, and least respectable and trustworthy of any nation whatsoever whom

we have employed; and in saying this, I express the experience of every

manufacturer on the Continent to whom I have spoken, and especially of the

English manufacturers, who make the loudest complaints. These

characteristics of depravity do not apply to the English workmen who have

received an education, but attach to the others in the degree in which they arein want of it. When the uneducated English workmen are released from the

bonds of iron discipline in which they have been restrained by their

employers in England, and are treated with the urbanity and friendly feeling

which the more educated workmen on the Continent expect and receive from

their employers, they, the English workmen, completely lose their balance:

they do not understand their position, and after a certain time become totally

unmanageable and useless.”* This result of observation is borne out by

experience in England itself. As soon as any idea of equality enters the mind

of an uneducated English working man, his head is turned by it. When he

ceases to be servile, he becomes insolent.

              The moral qualities of the labourers are fully as important to the

efficiency and worth of their labour, as the intellectual. Independently of the

effects of intemperance upon their bodily and mental faculties, and of flighty,

unsteady habits upon the energy and continuity of their work (points so easily

understood as not to require being insisted upon), it is well worthy of

meditation, how much of the aggregate effect of their labour depends on their

trustworthiness. All the labour now expended in watching that they fulfil

their engagement, or in verifying that they have fulfilled it, is so much

withdrawn from the real business of production, to be devoted to a subsidiary

function rendered needful not by the necessity of things, but by the

dishonesty of men. Nor are the greatest outward precautions more than very

imperfectly efficacious, where, as is now almost invariably the case with

hired labourers, the slightest relaxation of vigilance is an opportunity eagerly

seized for eluding performance of their contract. The advantage to mankind

of being able to trust one another, penetrates into every crevice and cranny of

human life: the economical is perhaps the smallest part of it, yet even this iS

incalculable. To consider only the most obvious part of the waste of wealth

occasioned to society by human improbity; there is in all rich communities a

predatory population, who live by pillaging or overreaching other people;

their numbers cannot be authentically ascertained, but on the lowest estimate,

in a country like England, it is very large. The support of these persons is a

direct burthen on the national industry. The police, and the whole apparatus

of punishment, and of criminal and partly of civil justice, are a second

burthen rendered necessity by the first. The exorbitantly-paid profession of

lawyers, so far as their work is not created by defects in the law, of their own

contriving, are required and supported principally by the dishonesty of

mankind. As the standard of integrity in a community rises higher, all theseexpenses become less. But this positive saving would be far outweighed by

the immense increase in the produce of aU kinds of labour, and saving of

time and expenditure, which would be obtained if the labourers honestly

performed what they undertake; and by the increased spirit, the feeing of

power and confidence, with which works of all sorts would be planned and

carried on by those who felt that all whose aid was required would do their

part faithfully according to their contracts. Conjoint action is possible just in

proportion as human beings can rely on each other. There are countries in

Europe, of first-rate industrial capabilities, where the most serious

impediment to conducting business concerns on a large scale, is the rarity of

persons who are supposed fit to be trusted with the receipt and expenditure of

large sums of money. There are nations whose commodities are looked shily

upon by merchants, because they cannot depend on finding the quality of the

article conformable to that of the sample. Such short-sighted frauds are far

from unexampled in English exports. Every one has heard of “devil’s dust:”

and among other instances given by Mr. Babbage, is one in which a branch of

export trade was for a long time actually stopped by the forgeries and frauds

which had occurred in it. On the other hand, the substantial advantage

derived in business transactions from proved trustworthiness, is not less

remarkably exemplified in the same work. “At one of our largest towns, sales

and purchases on a very extensive scale are made daily in the course of

business without any of the parties ever exchanging a written document.”*

Spread over a year’s transactions, how great a return, in saving of time,

trouble, and expense, is brought in to the producers and dealers of such a

town from their own integrity. “The influence of established character in

producing confidence operated in a very remarkable manner at the time of the

exclusion of British manufactures from the Continent during the last war.

One of our largest establishments had been in the habit of doing extensive

business with a house in the centre of Germany; but on the closing of the

Continental ports against our manufactures, heavy penalties were inflicted on

all those who contravened the Berlin and Milan decrees. The English

manufacturer continued, nevertheless, to receive orders, with directions how

to consign them, and appointments for the time and mode of payment, in

letters, the handwriting of which was known to him, but which were never

signed except by the Christian name of one of the firm, and even in some

instances they were without any signature at all. These orders were executed,
                                                                              11
and in no instance was there the least irregularity in the payments.”              6. Among the secondary causes which determine the productiveness

of productive agents, the most important is Security. By security I mean the

completeness of the protection which society affords to its members. This

consists of protection by the government, and protection against the

government. The latter is the more important. Where a person known to

possess anything worth taking away, can expect nothing but to have it torn

from him, with every circumstance of tyrannical violence, by the agents of a

rapacious government, it is not likely that many will exert themselves to

produce much more than necessaries. This is the acknowledged explanation

of the poverty of many fertile tracts of Asia, which were once prosperous and

populous. From this to the degree of security enjoyed in the best governed

parts of Europe, there are numerous gradations. In many provinces of France,

before the Revolution, a vicious system of taxation on the land, and still more

the absence of redress against the arbitrary exactions which were made under

colour of the taxes, rendered it the interest of every cultivator to appear poor,

and therefore to cultivate badly. The only insecurity which is altogether

paralysing to the active energies of producers, is that arising from the

government, or from persons invested with its authority. Against all other

depredators there is a hope of defending oneself. Greece and the Greek

colonies in the ancient world. Flanders and Italy in the Middle Ages, by no

means enjoyed what any one with modern ideas would call security: the state

of society was most unsettled and turbulent; person and property were

exposed to a thousand dangers. But they were free countries; they were in

general neither arbitrarily oppressed, nor systematically plundered by their

governments. Against other enemies the individual energy which their

institutions called forth, enabled them to make successful resistance: their

labour, therefore, was eminently productive, and their riches, while they

remained free, were constantly on the increase. The Roman despotism,

putting an end to wars and internal conflicts throughout the empire, relieved

the subject population from much of the former insecurity. but because it left

them under the grinding yoke of its own rapacity, they became enervated and

impoverished, until they were an easy prey to barbarous but free invaders.

They would neither fight nor labour, because they were no longer suffered to

enjoy that for which they fought and laboured.

              Much of the security of person and property in modern nations is the

effect of manners and opinion rather than of law. There are, or lately were,

countries in Europe where the monarch was nominally absolute, but where,from the restraints imposed by established usage, no subject felt practically in

the smallest danger of having his possessions arbitrarily seized or a

contribution levied on them by the government. There must, however, be in

such governments much petty plunder and other tyranny by subordinate

agents, for which redress is not obtained, owing to the want of publicity

which is the ordinary character of absolute governments. In England the

people are tolerably well protected, both by institutions and manners, against

the agents of government; but, for the security they enjoy against other evil-

doers, they are very little indebted to their institutions. The laws cannot be

said to afford protection to property, when they afford it only at such a cost as

renders submission to injury in general the better calculation. The security of

property in England is owing (except as regards open violence) to opinion,

and the fear of exposure, much more than to the direct operation of the law

and the courts of justice.

              Independently of all imperfection in the bulwarks which society

purposely throws round what it recognises as property, there are various other

modes in which defective institutions impede the employment of the

productive resources of a country to the best advantage. We shall have

occasion for noticing many of these in the progress of our subject. It is

sufficient here to remark, that the efficiency of industry may be expected to

be great, in proportion as the fruits of industry are insured to the person

exerting it: and that all social arrangements are conducive to useful exertion,

according as they provide that the reward of every one for his labour shall be

proportioned as much as possible to the benefit which it produces. All laws or

usages which favour one class or sort of persons to the disadvantage of

others; which chain up the efforts of any part of the community in pursuit of

their own good, or stand between those efforts and their natural fruits are

(independently of all other grounds of condemnation) violations of the

fundamental principles of economical policy; tending to make the aggregate

productive powers of the community productive in a less degree than they

would otherwise be.

        12
               Some minor instances noticed by Mr. Babbage may be cited in

further illustration of the waste occasioned to society through the inability of

its members to trust one another.

              “The cost to the purchaser is the price he pays for any article, added

to the cost of verifying the fact of its having that degree of goodness forwhich he contracts. In some cases, the goodness of the article is evident on

mere inspection; and in those cases there is not much difference of price at

different shops. The goodness of loaf sugar,for instance, can be discerned

almost at a glance; and the consequence is, that the price is so uniform, and

the profit upon it so small, that no grocer is at all anxious to sell it; whilst on

the other hand, tea, of which it is exceedingly difficult to judge, and which

can be adulterated by mixture so as to deceive the skill even of a practised

eye, has a great variety of different prices, and is that article which every

grocer is most anxious to sell to his customers. The difficulty and expense of

verificaton are in some intances so great, as to justify the deviation from well-

established principles. Thus it is a general maxim that Government can

purchase any article at a cheaper rate than that at which they can manufacture

it themselves. But it has, nevertheless, been considered more economical to

build extensive flour-mills (such as those at Deptford), and to grind their own

corn, than to verify each sack of purchased flour, and to employ persons in

devising methods of detecting the new modes of adulteration which might

deprive a nation, such as the United States, of a large export trade in flour.

              Again: “Some years since, a mode of preparing old clover and trefoil

seeds by a process called doctoring became so prevalent as to excite the

attention of the House of Commons. It appeared in evidence before a

Committee, that the old seed of the white clover was doctored by first wetting

it slightly, and then drying itby the fumes of burning sulphur; and that the red

clover seed had its colour improved by shaking it in a sack with a small

quantity of indigo; but this being detected after a time, the doctors then used a

preparation of logwood, fined by a little copperas, and sometimes by

verdigris; thus at once improving the appearance of the old seed,and

diminishing, if not destroying, its vegetative power, already enfeebled by age.

Supposing no injury had resulted to good seed so prepared, it was proved

that, from the improved appearance, the market price would be enhanced by

this process from five to twenty-five shillings a hundred-weight. But the

greatest evil arose from the circumstance of these processes rendering old and

worthless seed equal in appearance to the best. One witness had tried some

doctored seed, and found that not above one grain in a hundred grew, and that

those which did vegetate died away afterwards; whilst about eighty or ninety

per cent of good seed usually grows. The seed so treated was sold to retail

dealers in the country, who of course endeavoured to purchase at the cheapest

rate, and from them it got into the hands of farmers, neither of these classesbeing capable of distinguishing the fraudulent from the genuine seed. Many

cultivators in consequence diminished their consumption of the articles, and

others were obliged to pay a higher price tothose who had skill to distinguish

the mixed seed, and who had integrity and character to prevent them from

dealing it.”

              The same writer states that Irish flax, though in natural quality

inferior to none, sells, or did lately sell, in the market ata penny to twopence

per pound less than foreign or British flax; part of the difference arising from

negligence in its preparation, but part from the cause mentioned in the

evidence of Mr. Corry, many years Secretary to the Irish Linen Board: “The

owners of the flax, who are almost always people in the lower classes of life,

believe that they can best advance their own interests by imposing on the

buyers. Flax being sold by weight, various expedients are used to increase it;

and every expedient is injurious, particularly the damping of it; a very

common practice, which makes the flax afterwards heat. The inside of every

bundle (and the bundles all vary in bulk) is often full of peebles, or dirt of

various kinds, to increase the weight. In this state it is purchased and exported

to Great Britain.”

              It was given in evidence before a Committee of the House of

Commons that the lace trade at Nottingham had greatly fallen off, from the

making of fraudulent and bad articles: that “a kind of lace called single-press

was manufatured,” (I still quote Mr. Babbage,) “which although good to the

eye, became nearly spoiled in washing by the slipping of the threads; that not

one person in a thousand could distinguish the difference between single-

press and double-press lace; that even workmen and manufacturers were

obliged to employ a magnifying-glass for that purpose; and that in another

similar article, called warp-lace, such aid was essential.”

 

 

       Chapter 8 – Of Co-operation, or the Combination of Labour

 

 

              1. In the enumeration of the circumstances which promote the

productiveness of labour, we have left one untouched, which, because of its

importance, and of the many topics of discussion which it involves, requires

to be treated apart. This is, co-operation, or the combined action of numbers.

Of this great aid to production, a single department, known by the name of

Division of Labour, has engaged a large share of the attention of political

economists; most deservedly indeed, but to the exclusion of other cases and

exemplifications of the same comprehensive law. Mr. Wakefield was, I

believe, the first to point out, that a part of the subject had, with injurious

effect, been mistaken for the whole; that a more fundamental principle lies

beneath that of the division of labour, and comprehends it.

                                        12
              Co-operation, he observes, is “of two distinct kinds: first, such co-

operation as takes place when several persons help each other in the same

employment; secondly, such co-operation as takes place when several

persons help each other in different employments. These may be termed

Simple Co-operation and Complex Co-operation.

              “The advantage of simple co-operation is illustrated by the case of

two greyhounds running together, which, it is said, will kill more hares than

four greyhounds running separately. In a vast number of simple operations

performed by human exertion, it is quite obvious that two men working

together will do more than four, or four times four men, each of whom should

work alone. In the lifting of heavy weights, for example, in the felling of

trees, in the sawing of timber, in the gathering of much hay or corn during a

short period of fine weather, in draining a large extent of land during the

short season when such a work may be properly conducted, in the pulling of

ropes on board ship, in the rowing of large boats, in some mining operations,

in the erection of a scaffolding for building, and in the breaking of stones for

the repair of a road, so that the whole of the road shall always be kept in good

order: in all these simple operations, and thousands more, it is absolutely

necessary that many persons should work together, at the same time, in the

same place, and in the same way. The savages of New Holland never help

each other, even in the most simple operations; and their condition is hardlysuperior, in some respects it is inferior, to that of the wild animals which they

now and then catch. Let any one imagine that the labourers of England

should suddenly desist from helping each other in simple employments, and

he will see at once the prodigious advantages of simple co-operation. In a

countless number of employments, the produce of labour is, up to a certain

point, in proportion to such mutual assistance amongst the workmen. This is

the first step in social improvement.” The second is, when “one body of men

having combined their labour to raise more food than they require, another

body of men are induced to combine their labour for the purpose of

producing more clothes than they require, and with those surplus clothes

buying the surplus food of the other body of labourers; while, if both bodies

together have produced more food and clothes than they both require, both

bodies obtain, by means of exchange, a proper capital for setting more

labourers to work in their respective occupations.” To simple co-operation is

thus superadded what Mr. Wakefield terms Complex Co-operation. The one

is the combination of several labourers to help each other in the same set of

operations; the other is the combination of several labourers to help one

another by a division of operations.

              There is “an important distinction between simple and complex

cooperation. Of the former, one is always conscious at the time of practising

it: it is obvious to the most ignorant and vulgar eye. Of the latter, but a very

few of the vast numbers who practise it are in any degree conscious. The

cause of this distinction is easily seen. When several men are employed in

lifting the same weight, or pulling the same rope, at the same time, and in the

same place, there can be no sort of doubt that they co-operate with each

other; the fact is impressed on the mind by the mere sense of sight; but when

several men, or bodies of men, are employed at different times and places,

and in different pursuits, their co-operation with each other, though it may be

quite as certain, is not so readily perceived as in the other case: in order to
                                                                  13
perceive it, a complex operation of the mind is required.”

              In the present state of society the breeding and feeding of sheep is

the occupation of one set of people, dressing the wool to prepare it for the

spinner is that of another, spinning it into thread of a third, weaving the

thread into broadcloth of a fourth, dyeing the cloth of a fifth, making it into a

coat of a sixth, without counting the multitude of carriers, merchants, factors,

and retailers, put in requisition at the successive stages of this progress. Allthese persons, without knowledge of one another or previous understanding,

co-operate in the production of the ultimate result, a coat. But these are far

from being all who co-operate in it; for each of these persons requires food,

and many other articles of consumption, and unless he could have relied that

other people would produce these for him, he could not have devoted his

whole time to one step in the succession of operations which produces one

single commodity, a coat. Every person who took part in producing food or

erecting houses for this series of producers, has, however unconsciously on

his part, combined his labour with theirs. It is by a real, though unexpressed,

concert, “that the body who raise more food than they want, can exchange

with the body who raise more clothes than they want; and if the two bodies

were separated, either by distance or disinclination — unless the two bodies

should virtually form themselves into one, for the common object of raising

enough food and clothes for the whole — they could not divide into two

distinct parts the whole operation of producing a sufficient quantity of food
              14
and clothes.”

              2. The influence exercised on production by the separation of

employments, is more fundamental than, from the mode in which the subject

is usually treated, a reader might be induced to suppose. It is not merely that

when the production of different things becomes the sole or principal

occupation of different persons, a much greater quantity of each kind of

article is produced. The truth is much beyond this. Without some separation

of employments, very few things would be produced at all.

              Suppose a set of persons, or a number of families, all employed

precisely in the same manner; each family settled on a piece of its own land,

on which it grows by its labour the food required for its own sustenance, and

as there are no persons to buy any surplus produce where all are producers,

each family has to produce within itself whatever other articles it consumes.

In such circumstances, if the soil was tolerably fertile, and population did not

tread too closely on the heels of subsistence, there would be, no doubt, some

kind of domestic manufactures; clothing for the family might perhaps be spun

and woven within it, by the labour probably of the women (a first step in the

separation of employments); and a dwelling of some sort would be erected

and kept in repair by their united labour. But beyond simple food (precarious,

too, from the variations of the seasons), coarse clothing, and very imperfect

lodging, it would be scarcely possible that the family should produceanything more. They would, in general, require their utmost exertions to

accomplish so much. Their power even of extracting food from the soil

would be kept within narrow limits by the quality of their tools, which would

necessarily be of the most wretched description. To do almost anything in the

way of producing for themselves articles of convenience or luxury, would

require too much time, and, in many cases, their presence in a different place.

Very few kinds of industry, therefore, would exist; and that which did exist,

namely the production of necessaries, would be extremely inefficient, not

solely from imperfect implements, but because, when the ground and the

domestic industry fed by it had been made to supply the necessaries of a

single family in tolerable abundance, there would be little motive, while the

numbers of the family remained the same, to make either the land or the

labour produce more.

              But suppose an event to occur, which would amount to a revolution

in the circumstances of this little settlement. Suppose that a company of

artificers, provided with tools, and with food sufficient to maintain them for a

year, arrive in the country and establish themselves in the midst of the

population. These new settlers occupy themselves in producing articles of use

or ornament adapted to the taste of a simple people; and before their food is

exhausted they have produced these in considerable quantity, and are ready to

exchange them for more food. The economical position of the landed

population is now most materially altered. They have an opportunity given

them of acquiring comforts and luxuries. Things which, while they depended

solely on their own labour, they never could have obtained, because they

could not have produced, are now accessible to them if they can succeed in

producing an additional quantity of food and necessaries. They are thus

incited to increase the productiveness of their industry. Among the

conveniences for the first time made accessible to them, better tools are

probably one: and apart from this, they have a motive to labour more

assiduously, and to adopt contrivances for making their labour more

effectual. By these means they will generally succeed in compelling their

land to produce, not only food for themselves, but a surplus for the new

comers, wherewith to buy from them the products of their industry. The new

settlers constitute what is called a market for surplus agricultural produce:

and their arrival has enriched the settlement not only by the manufactured

article which they produce, but by the food which would not have been

produced unless they had been there to consume it.              There is no inconsistency between this doctrine, and the proposition

we before maintained, that a market for commodities does not constitute
                          15
employment for labour. The labour of the agriculturists was already

provided with employment; they are not indebted to the demand of the new

comers for being able to maintain themselves. What that demand does for

them is, to call their labour into increased vigour and efficiency; to stimulate

them, by new motives, to new exertions. Neither do the new comers owe

their maintenance and employment to the demand of the agriculturists: with a

year’s subsistence in store, they could have settled side by side with the

former inhabitants, and produced a similar scanty stock of food and

necessaries. Nevertheless we see of what supreme importance to the

productiveness of the labour of producers, is the existence of other producers

within reach, employed in a different kind of industry. The power of

exchanging the products of one kind of labour for those of another, is a

condition, but for which, there would almost always be a smaller quantity of

labour altogether. When a new market is opened for any product of industry,

and a greater quantity of the article is consequently produced, the increased

production is not always obtained at the expense of some other product; it is

often a new creation, the result of labour which would otherwise have

remained unexerted; or of assistance rendered to labour by improvements or

by modes of co-operation to which recourse would not have been had if an

inducement had not been offered for raising a larger produce.

              3. From these considerations it appears that a country will seldom

have a productive agriculture, unless it has a large town population, or the

only available substitute, a large export trade in agricultural produce to

supply a population elsewhere. I use the phrase town population for

shortness, to imply a population non-agricultural; which will generally be

collected in towns or large villages, for the sake of combination of labour.

The application of this truth by Mr. Wakefield to the theory of colonization,

has excited much attention, and is doubtless destined to excite much more. It

is one of those great practical discoveries, which, once made, appears so

obvious that the merit of making them seems less than it is. Mr. Wakefield

was the first to point out that the mode of planting new settlements, then

commonly practised — setting down a number of families side by side, each

on its piece of land, all employing themselves in exactly the same manner, —

though in favourable circumstances it may assure to those families a rude

abundance of mere necessaries, can never be other than unfavourable to greatproduction or rapid growth: and his system consists of arrangements for

securing that every colony shall have from the first a town population bearing

due proportion to its agricultural, and that the cultivators of the soil shall not

be so widely scattered as to be deprived by distance, of the benefit of that

town population as a market for their produce. The principle On which the

scheme is founded, does not depend on any theory respecting the superior

productiveness of land held in large portions, and cultivated by hired labour.

Supposing it true that land yields the greatest produce when divided into

small properties and cultivated by peasant proprietors, a town population will

be just as necessary to induce those proprietors to raise that larger produce:

and if they were too far from the nearest seat of nonagricultural industry to

use it as a market for disposing of their surplus, and thereby supplying their

other wants, neither that surplus nor any equivalent for it would, generally

speaking, be produced.

              It is, above all, the deficiency of town population which limits the

productiveness of the industry of a country like India. The agriculture of

India is conducted entirely on the system of small holdings. There is,

however, a considerable amount of combination of labour. The village

institutions and customs, which are the real framework of Indian society,

make provision for joint action in the cases in which it is seen to be

necessary; or where they fail to do so, the government (when tolerably well

administered) steps in, and by an outlay from the revenue, executes by

combined labour the tanks, embankments, and works of irrigation, which are

indispensable. The implements and processes of agriculture are however so

wretched, that the produce of the soil, in spite of great natural fertility and a

climate highly favourable to vegetation, is miserably small: and the land

might be made to yield food in abundance for many more than the present

number of inhabitants, without departing from the system of small holdings.

But to this the stimulus is wanting, which a large town population, connected

with the rural districts by easy and unexpensive means of communication,

would afford. That town population, again, does not grow up, because the

few wants and unaspiring spirit of the cultivators (joined until lately with

great insecurity of property, from military and fiscal rapacity) prevent them

from attempting to become consumers of town produce. In these

circumstances the best chance of an early development of the productive

resources of India, consists in the rapid growth of its export of agricultural

produce (cotton, indigo, sugar, coffee, &c.) to the markets of Europe. Theproducers of these articles are consumers of food supplied by their fellow —

agriculturists in India; and the market thus opened for surplus food will, if

accompanied by good government, raise up by degrees more extended wants

and desires, directed either towards European commodities, or towards things

which will require for their production in India a larger manufacturing

population.

              4. Thus far of the separation of employments, a form of the

combination of labour without which there cannot be the first rudiments of

industrial civilization. But when this separation is thoroughly established;

when it has become the general practice for each producer to supply many

others with one commodity, and to be supplied by others with most of the

things which he consumes; reasons not less real, though less imperative,

invite to a further extension of the same principle. It is found that the

productive power of labour is increased by carrying the separation further and

further; by breaking down more and more every process of industry into

parts, so that each labourer shall confine himself to an ever smaller number of

simple operations. And thus, in time, arise those remarkable cases of what is

called the division of labour, with which all readers on subjects of this nature

are familiar. Adam Smith’s illustration from pin-making, though so well

known, is so much to the point, that I will venture once more to transcribe it.

“The business of making a pin is divided into about eighteen distinct

operations. One man draws out the wire, another straights it, a third cuts it, a

fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head; to make the

head requires two or three distinct operations; to put it on, is a peculiar

business; to whiten the pins is another; it is even a trade by itself to put them

into the paper..... I have seen a small manufactory where ten men only were

employed, and where some of them, consequently, performed two or three

distinct operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore but

indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could, when

they exerted themselves, make among them about twelve pounds of pins in a

day. There are in a pound upwards of four thousand pins of a middling size.

Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of forty-eight

thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth part of forty-

eight thousand pins, might be considered as making four thousand eight

hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought separately and

independently, and without any of them having been educated to this peculiar

business, they certainly could not each of them have made twenty, perhaps                        16
not one pin in a day.”

              M. Say furnishes a still stronger example of the effects of division of

labour — from a not very important branch of industry certainly, the

manufacture of playing cards. “It is said by those engaged in the business,

that each card, that is, a piece of pasteboard of the size of the hand, before
                                                                                  17
being ready for sale, does not undergo fewer than seventy operations, every

one of which might be the occupation of a distinct class of workmen. And if

there are not seventy classes of work-people in each card manufactory, it is

because the division of labour is not carried so far as it might be; because the

same workman is charged with two, three, or four distinct operations. The

influence of this distribution of employment is immense. I have seen a card

manufactory where thirty workmen produced daily fifteen thousand five

hundred cards, being above five hundred cards for each labourer; and it may

be presumed that if each of these workmen were obliged to perform all the

operations himself, even supposing him a practised hand, he would not

perhaps complete two cards in a day. and the thirty workmen, instead of
                                                                        18
fifteen thousand five hundred cards, would make only sixty.”

              In watchmaking, as Mr. Babbage observes, “it was stated in

evidence before a Committee of the House of Commons, that there are a

hundred and two distinct branches of this art, to each of which a boy may be

put apprentice; and that he only learns his master’s department, and is unable,

after his apprenticeship has expired, without subsequent instruction, to work

at any other branch. The watch-finisher, whose business it is to put together

the scattered parts, is the only one, out of the hundred and two persons, who
                                                        19
can work in any other department than his own.”

              5. The causes of the increased efficiency given to labour by the

division of employments are some of them too familiar to require

specification; but it is worth while to attempt a complete enumeration of

them. By Adam Smith they are reduced to three. “First, the increase of

dexterity in every particular workman; secondly, the saving of the time which

is commonly lost in passing from one species of work to another. and lastly,

the invention of a great number of machines which facilitate and abridge
                                                              20
labour, and enable one man to do the work of many.”

              Of these, the increase of dexterity of the individual workman is the

most obvious and universal. It does not follow that because a thing has beendone oftener it will be done better. That depends on the intelligence of the

workman, and on the degree in which his mind works along with his hands.

But it will be done more easily. The organs themselves acquire greater

power: the muscles employed grow stronger by frequent exercise, the sinews

more pliant, and the mental powers more efficient, and less sensible of

fatigue. What can be done easily has at least a better chance of being done

well, and is sure to be done more expeditiously. What was at first done

slowly comes to be done quickly; what was at first done slowly with accuracy

is at last done quickly with equal accuracy. This is as true of mental

operations as of bodily. Even a child, after much practice, sums up a column

of figures with a rapidity which resembles intuition. The act of speaking any

language, of reading fluently, of playing music at sight, are cases as

remarkable as they are familiar. Among bodily acts, dancing, gymnastic

exercises, ease and brilliancy of execution on a musical instrument, are

examples of the rapidity and facility acquired by repetition. In simpler

manual operations the effect is of course still sooner produced. “The

rapidity,” Adam Smith observes, “with which some of the operations of

certain manufactures are performed, exceeds what the human hand could, by
                                                                              21
those who had never seen them, be supposed capable of acquiring.” This

skill is, naturally, attained after shorter practice, in proportion as the division

of labour is more minute; and will not be attained in the same degree at all, if

the workman has a greater variety of operations to execute than allows of a

sufficiently frequent repetition of each. The advantage is not confined to the

greater efficiency ultimately attained, but includes also the diminished loss of

time, and waste of material, in learning the art. “A certain quantity of
                                22
material,” says Mr. Babbage, “will in all cases be consumed unprofitably, or

spoiled, by every person who learns an art; and as he applies himself to each

new process, he will waste some of the raw material, or of the partly

manufactured commodity. But if each man commit this waste in acquiring

successively every process, the quantity of waste will be much greater than if

each person confine his attention to one process.” And in general each will be

much sooner qualified to execute his one process, if he be not distracted

while learning it, by the necessity of learning others.

              The second advantage enumerated by Adam Smith as arising from

the division of labour, is one on which I cannot help thinking that more stress

is laid by him and others than it deserves. To do full justice to his opinion, I

will quote his own exposition of it. “The advantage which is gained by savingthe time commonly lost in passing from one sort of work to another, is much

greater than we should at first view be apt to imagine it. It is impossible to

pass very quickly from one kind of work to another, that is carried on in a

different place, and with quite different tools. A country weaver, who

cultivates a small farm, must lose a good deal of time in passing from his

loom to the field, and from the field to his loom. When the two trades can be

carried on in the same workhouse, the loss of time is no doubt much less. It is

even in this case, however, very considerable. A man commonly saunters a

little in turning his hand from one sort of employment to another. When he

first begins the new work, he is seldom very keen and hearty; his mind, as

they say, does not go to it, and for some time he rather trifles than applies to

good purpose. The habit of sauntering and of indolent careless application,

which is naturally, or rather necessarily acquired by every country workman

who is obliged to change his work and his tools every half hour, and to apply

his hand in twenty different ways almost every day of his life, renders him

almost always slothful and lazy, and incapable of any vigorous application
                                            23
even on the most pressing occasions.” This is surely a most exaggerated

description of the inefficiency of country labour, where it has any adequate

motive to exertion. Few workmen change their work and their tools oftener

than a gardener; is he usually incapable of vigorous application? Many of the

higher description of artisans have to perform a great multiplicity of

operations with a variety of tools. They do not execute each of these with the

rapidity with which a factory workman performs his single operation; but

they are, except in a merely manual sense, more skilful labourers, and in all

senses whatever more energetic.

              Mr. Babbage, following in the track of Adam Smith, says, “When

the human hand, or the human head, has been for some time occupied in any

kind of work, it cannot instantly change its employment with full effect. The

muscles of the limbs employed have acquired a flexibility during their

exertion, and those not in action a stiffness during rest, which renders every

change slow and unequal in the commencement. Long habit also produces in

the muscles exercised a capacity for enduring fatigue to a much greater

degree than they could support under other circumstances. A similar result

seems to take place in any change of mental exertion; the attention bestowed

on the new subject not being so perfect at first as it becomes after some

exercise. The employment of different tools in the successive processes, is

another cause of the loss of time in changing from one operation to another.If these tools are simple, and the change is not frequent, the loss of time is not

considerable; but in many processes of the arts, the tools are of great

delicacy, requiring accurate adjustment every time they are used; and in many

cases, the time employed in adjusting bears a large proportion to that

employed in using the tool. The sliding-rest, the dividing and the drilling

engine are of this kind: and hence, in manufactories of sufficient extent, it is

found to be good economy to keep one machine constantly employed in one

kind of work: one lathe, for example, having a screw motion to its sliding-rest

along the whole length of its bed, is kept constantly making cylinders;

another, having a motion for equalizing the velocity of the work at the point

at which it passes the tool, is kept for facing surfaces; whilst a third is

constantly employed in cutting wheels.”

              I am very far from implying that these different considerations are of

no weight; but I think there are counter-considerations which are overlooked.

If one kind of muscular or mental labour is different from another, for that

very reason it is to some extent a rest from that other. and if the greatest

vigour is not at once obtained in the second occupation, neither could the first

have been indefinitely prolonged without some relaxation of energy. It is a

matter of common experience that a change of occupation will often afford

relief where complete repose would otherwise be necessary, and that a person

can work many more hours without fatigue at a succession of occupations,

than if confined during the whole time to one. Different occupations employ

different muscles, or different energies of the mind, some of which rest and

are refreshed while others work. Bodily labour itself rests from mental, and

conversely. The variety itself has an invigorating effect on what, for want of a

more philosophical appellation, we must term the animal spirits; so important

to the efficiency of all work not mechanical, and not unimportant even to

that. The comparative weight due to these considerations is different with

different individuals; some are more fitted than others for persistency in one

occupation, and less fit for change; they require longer to get the steam up (to

use a metaphor now common); the irksomeness of setting to work lasts

longer, and it requires more time to bring their faculties into full play, and

therefore when this is once done, they do not like to leave off, but go on long

without intermission, even to the injury of their health. Temperament has

something to do with these differences. There are people whose faculties

seem by nature to come slowly into action, and to accomplish little until they

have been a long time employed. Others, again, get into action rapidly, butcannot, without exhaustion, continue long. In this, however, as in most other

things, though natural differences are something, habit is much more. The

habit of passing rapidly from one occupation to another may be acquired, like

other habits, by early cultivation; and when it is acquired, there is none of the

sauntering which Adam Smith speaks of, after each change; no want of

energy and interest, but the workman comes to each part of his occupation

with a freshness and a spirit which he does not retain if he persists in any one

part (unless in case of unusual excitement) beyond the length of time to

which he is accustomed. Women are usually (at least in their present social

circumstances) of far greater versatility than men; and the present topic is an

instance among multitudes, how little the ideas and experience of women

have yet counted for, in forming the opinions of mankind. There are few

women who would not reject the idea that work is made vigorous by being

protracted, and is inefficient for some time after changing to a new thing.

Even in this case, habit, I believe, much more than nature, is the cause of the

difference. The occupations of nine out of every ten men are special, those of

nine out of every ten women general, embracing a multitude of details, each

of which requires very little time. Women are in the constant practice of

passing quickly from one manual, and still more from one mental operation

to another, which therefore rarely costs them either effort or loss of time,

while a man’s occupation generally consists in working steadily for a long

time at one thing, or one very limited class of things. But the situations are

sometimes reversed, and with them the characters. Women are not found less

efficient than men for the uniformity of factory work, or they would not so

generally be employed for it; and a man who has cultivated the habit of

turning his hand to many things, far from being the slothful and lazy person

described by Adam Smith, is usually remarkably lively and active. It is true,

however, that change of occupation may be too frequent even for the most

versatile. Incessant variety is even more fatiguing than perpetual sameness.

              The third advantage attributed by Adam Smith to the division of

labour, is, to a certain extent, real. Inventions tending to save labour in a

particular operation, are more likely to occur to any one in proportion as his

thoughts are intensely directed to that occupation, and continually employed

upon it. A person is not so likely to make practical improvements in one

department of things, whose attention is very much diverted to others. But, in

this, much more depends on general intelligence and habitual activity of

mind, than on exclusiveness of occupation; and if that exclusiveness iscarried to a degree unfavourable to the cultivation of intelligence, there will

be more lost in this kind of advantage, than gained. We may add, that

whatever may be the cause of making inventions, when they are once made,

the increased efficiency of labour is owing to the invention itself, and not to

the division of labour.

              The greatest advantage (next to the dexterity of the workmen)

derived from the minute division of labour which takes place in modern

manufacturing industry, is one not mentioned by Adam Smith, but to which

attention has been drawn by Mr. Babbage; the more economical distribution

of labour, by classing the work-people according to their capacity. Different

parts of the same series of operations require unequal degrees of skill and

bodily strength; and those who have skill enough for the most difficult, or

strength enough for the hardest parts of the labour, are made much more

useful by being employed solely in them; the operations which everybody is

capable of, being left to those who are fit for no others. Production is most

efficient when the precise quantity of skill and strength, which is required for

each part of the process, is employed in it, and no more. The operation of pin-

making requires, it seems, in its different parts, such different degrees of

skill, that the wages earned by the persons employed vary from fourpence

halfpenny a day to six shillings; and if the workman who is paid at that

highest rate had to perform the whole process, he would be working a part of

his time with a waste per day equivalent to the difference between six

shillings and fourpence halfpenny. Without reference to the loss sustained in

quantity of work done, and supposing even that he could make a pound of

pins in the same time in which ten workmen combining their labour can make

ten pounds, Mr. Babbage computes that they would cost, in making, three

times and three-quarters as much as they now do by means of the division of

labour. In needlemaking, he adds, the difference would be still greater, for in

that, the scale of remuneration for different parts of the process varies from

sixpence to twenty shillings a day.

              To the advantage which consists in extracting the greatest possible

amount of utility from skill, may be added the analogous one, of extracting
                                                                                    24
the utmost possible utility from tools. “If any man,” says an able writer,

“had all the tools which many different occupations require, at least three-

fourths of them would constantly be idle and useless. It were clearly then

better, were any society to exist where each man had all these tools, andalternately carried on each of these occupations, that the members of it

should, if possible, divide them amongst them, each restricting himself to

some particular employment. The advantages of the change to the whole

community, and therefore to every individual in it, are great. In the first

place, the various implements being in constant employment, yield a better

return for what has been laid out in procuring them. In consequence their

owners can afford to have them of better quality and more complete

construction. The result of both events is, that a larger provision is made for

the future wants of the whole society.”

              6. The division of labour, as all writers on the subject have

remarked, is limited by the extent of the market. If, by the separation of pin-

making into ten distinct employments, forty-eight thousand pins can be made

in a day, this separation will only be advisable if the number of accessible

consumers is such as to require, every day, something like forty-eight

thousand pins. If there is only a demand for twenty-four thousand, the

division of labour can only be advantageously carried to the extent which will

every day produce that smaller number. This, therefore, is a further mode in

which an accession of demand for a commodity tends to increase the

efficiency of the labour employed in its production. The extent of the market

may be limited by several causes: too small a population; the population too

scattered and distant to be easily accessible; deficiency of roads and water

carriage; or, finally, the population too poor, that is, their collective labour

too little effective, to admit of their being large consumers. Indolence, want

of skill, and want of combination of labour, among those who would

otherwise be buyers of a commodity, limit, therefore, the practical amount of

combination of labour among its producers. In an early stage of civilization,

when the demand of any particular locality was necessarily small, industry

only flourished among those who by their command of the sea-coast or of a

navigable river, could have the whole world, or all that part of it which lay on

coasts or navigable rivers, as a market for their productions. The increase of

the general riches of the world, when accompanied with freedom of

commercial intercourse, improvements in navigation, and inland

communication by roads, canals, or railways, tends to give increased

productiveness to the labour of every nation in particular, by enabling each

locality to supply with its special products so much larger a market, that a

great extension of the division of labour in their production is an ordinary

consequence.              The division of labour is also limited, in many cases, by the nature of

the employment. Agriculture, for example, is not susceptible of so great a

division of occupations as many branches of manufactures, because its

different operations cannot possibly be simultaneous. One man cannot be

always ploughing, another sowing, and another reaping. A workman who

only practised one agricultural operation would he idle eleven months of the

year. The same person may perform them all in succession, and have, in most

climates, a considerable amount of unoccupied time. To execute a great

agricultural improvement, it is often necessary that many labourers should

work together; but in general, except the few whose business is

superintendence, they all work in the same manner. A canal or a railway

embankment cannot he made without a combination of many labourers; but

they are all excavators, except the engineers and a few clerks.

        13
               Note to Wakefield’s edition of Adam Smith, vol. i. p. 26.

        14
               Wealth of Nations, ed. Wakefield, I, 30.

        15
               Wealth of Nations, ed. Wakefield, I, 29.

        16
               Supra, pp. 78–88.

        17
               Wealth of Nations, ed. Wakefield, I, 8.

        18
               “Ce ne sont point les memes ouvriers qui preparent le papier dont

on fait les cartes, ni les couleurs dont on les empreint; et en ne fesant

attention qu’au seul emploi de ces matieres, nous trouverons qu’un jeu de

cartes est le resultat de plusiers operations dont chacune occupe une serie

distincte d’ouvriers et d’ouvrieres qui s’appliquent toujours a la meme

opeation. Ce sont des personnes differentes, et toujours les memes, qui

epluchent les bouchons et grosseurs qui se trouvent dans le papier et nuiraient

a l’egalite d’epaisseur; les memes qui collent ensemble les trois feuilles de

papier dont se compose le carton et qui le mettent en presse; les memes qui

impriment en noir le dessin des figures; d’autres ouvriers impriment les

couleurs des memes figures; d’autres font secher au rechaud les cartons une

fois qu’ils sont imprimes; d’autres s’occupent de les lisser dessus et dessous.

C’est une occupation particuliere que de les couper d’egale dimension; c’en

est une autre de les assembler pour en former des jeux; une autre encore

d’imprimer les enveloppes des jeux, et une autre encore de les envelopper;

sans compter les fonctions des personnes chargees des ventes et des achats,de payer les ouvriers et de tenir les ecritures.” — Say, Cours d’Economie

Politique, vol. i, p. 340.

              It is remarkable proof of the economy of labour occasioned by this

minute division of occupations, that an article, the production of which is the

result of such a multitude of manual operations, can be sold for a trifling sum.

        19
               Ibid, I, p. 341.

        20
               Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, 3rd Edition, p. 201.

        21
               Wealth of Nations, ed. Wakefield, I, 12–13.

        22
               “In astronomical observations, the senses of the operator are

rendered so acute by habit, that he can estimate differences of time to the

tenth of a second; and adjust his measuring instrument to graduations of

which five thousand occupy only an inch. It is the same throughout the

commonest processes of manufacture. A child who fastens on the heads of

pins will repeat an operation requiring several distinct motions of the muscles

one hundred times a minute for several successive hours. In a recent

Manchester paper it was stated tahat a peculiar sort of twist or ‘gimp’, which

cost three shillings making when first introduced, was now manufactured for

one penny; and this not, as usually, by the invention of a new machine, but

solely through the increased dexterity of the workman.” Edinburgh Review

for January 1840, p. 81.

        23
               Page 171.

        24
               Wealth of Nations, ed. Wakefield, I, 14–15.

        25
               Statement of some New Principles on the subject of Political

Economy, by John Rae, p. 164.

 

 

 Chapter 9 – Of Production on a Large, and Production on a Small Scale

 

 

              1. From the importance of combination of labour, it is an obvious

conclusion, that there are many cases in which production is made much

more effective by being conducted on a large scale. Whenever it is essential

to the greatest efficiency of labour that many labourers should combine, even

though only in the way of Simple Co-operation, the scale of the enterprise

must be such as to bring many labourers together, and the capital must be

large enough to maintain them. Still more needful is this when the nature of

the employment allows, and the extent of the possible market encourages, a

considerable division of labour. The larger the enterprise, the farther the

division of labour may be carried. This is one of the principal causes of large

manufactories. Even when no additional subdivision of the work would

follow an enlargement of the operations, there will be good economy in

enlarging them to the point at which every person to whom it is convenient to

assign a special occupation, will have full employment in that occupation.
                                                    25
This point is well illustrated by Mr. Babbage.

              “If machines be kept working through the twenty-four hours,”

(which is evidently the only economical mode of employing them,) “it is

necessary that some person shall attend to admit the workmen at the time

they relieve each other; and whether the porter or other person so employed

admit one person or twenty, his rest will be equally disturbed. It will also be

necessary occasionally to adjust or repair the machine; and this can be done

much better by a workman accustomed to machine-making, than by the

person who uses it. Now, since the good performance and the duration of

machines depend, to a very great extent, upon correcting every shake or

imperfection in their parts as soon as they appear, the prompt attention of a

workman resident on the spot will considerably reduce the expenditure

arising from the wear and tear of the machinery. But in the case of a single

lace-frame, or a single loom, this would be too expensive a plan. Here then

arises another circumstance which tends to enlarge the extent of a factory. It

ought to consist of such a number of machines as shall occupy the whole time

of one workman in keeping them in order: if extended beyond that number,

the same principle of economy would point out the necessity of doubling ortripling the number of machines, in order to employ the whole time of two or

three skilful workmen.

              “When one portion of the workman’s labour consists in the exertion

of mere physical force, as in weaving, and in many similar arts, it will soon

occur to the manufacturer, that if that part were executed by a steam engine,

the same man might, in the case of weaving, attend to two or more looms at

once: and, since we already suppose that one or more operative engineers

have been employed, the number of looms may be so arranged that their time

shall be fully occupied in keeping the steam-engine and the looms in order.

              “Pursuing the same principles, the manufactory becomes gradually

so enlarged, that the expense of lighting during the night amounts to a

considerable sum : and as there are already attached to the establishment

persons who are up all night, and can therefore constantly attend to it, and

also engineers to make and keep in repair any machinery, the addition of an

apparatus for making gas to light the factory leads to a new extension, at the

same time that it contributes, by diminishing the expense of lighting, and the

risk of accidents from fire, to reduce the cost of manufacturing.

              “Long before a factory has reached this extent, it will have been

found necessary to establish an accountant’s department, with clerks to pay

the workmen, and to see that they arrive at their stated times; and this

department must be in communication with the agents who purchase the raw

produce, and with those who sell the manufactured article.” It will cost these

clerks and accountants little more time and trouble to pay a large number of

workmen than a small number; to check the accounts of large transactions,

than of small. If the business doubled itself, it would probably be necessary to

increase, but certainly not to double, the number either of accountants, or of

buying and selling agents. Every increase of business would enable the whole

to be caRed on with a proportionately smaller amount of labour.

              As a general rule, the expenses of a business do not increase by any

means proportionally to the quantity of business. Let us take as an example, a

set of operations which we are accustomed to see carried on by one great

establishment, that of the Post Office. Suppose that the business, let us say

only of the London letter-post, instead of being centralized in a single

concern, were divided among five or six competing companies. Each of these

would be obliged to maintain almost as large an establishment as is nowsufficient for the whole. Since each must arrange for receiving and delivering

letters in all parts of the town, each must send letter-carriers into every street,

and almost every alley, and this too as many times in the day as is now done

by the Post Office, if the service is to be as well performed. Each must have

an office for receiving letters in every neighbourhood, with all subsidiary

arrangements for collecting the letters from the different offices and re-

distributing them. To this must be added the much greater number of superior

officers who would be required to check and control the subordinates,

implying not only a greater cost in salaries for such responsible officers, but

the necessity, perhaps, of being satisfied in many instances with an inferior

standard of qualification, and so failing in the object.

              Whether or not the advantages obtained by operating on a large scale

preponderate in any particular case over the more watchful attention, and

greater regard to minor gains and losses, usually found in small

establishments, can be ascertained, in a state of free competition, by an

unfailing test. Wherever there are large and small establishments in the same

business, that one of the two which in existing circumstances carries on the

production at greatest advantage will be able to undersell the other. The

power of permanently underselling can only, generally speaking, be derived

from increased effectiveness of labour; and this, when obtained by a more

extended division of employment, or by a classification tending to a better

economy of skill, always implies a greater produce from the same labour, and

not merely the same produce from less labour: it increases not the surplus

only, but the gross produce of industry. If an increased quantity of the

particular article is not required, and part of the labourers in consequence lose

their employment, the capital which maintained and employed them is also

set at liberty; and the general produce of the country is increased by some

other application of their labour.

              Another of the causes of large manufactories, however, is the

introduction of processes requiring expensive machinery. Expensive

machinery supposes a large capital; and is not resorted to except with the

intention of producing, and the hope of selling, as much of the article as

comes up to the full powers of the machine. For both these reasons, wherever

costly machinery is used, the large system of production is inevitable. But the

power of underselling is not in this case so unerring a test as in the former, of

the beneficial effect on the total production of the community. The power ofunderselling does not depend on the absolute increase of produce, but on its

bearing an increased proportion to the expenses; which, as was shown in a
                26
former chapter, it may do, consistently with even a diminution of the gross

annual produce. By the adoption of machinery, a circulating capital, which

was perpetually consumed and reproduced, has been converted into a fixed

capital, requiring only a small annual expense to keep it up: and a much

smaller produce will suffice for merely covering that expense, and replacing

the remaining circulating capital of the producer. The machinery therefore

might answer perfectly well to the manufacturer, and enable him to undersell

his competitors, though the effect on the production of the country might be

not an increase but a diminution. It is true, the article will be sold cheaper,

and therefore, of that single article, there will probably be not a smaller, but a

greater quantity sold; since the loss to the community collectively has fallen

upon the work-people, and they are not the principal customers, if customers

at all, of most branches of manufacture. But though that particular branch of

industry may extend itself, it will be by replenishing its diminished

circulating capital from that of the community generally; and if the labourers

employed in that department escape loss of employment, it is because the loss

will spread itself over the labouring people at large. If any of them are

reduced to the condition of unproductive labourers, supported by voluntary or

legal charity, the gross produce of the country is to that extent permanently

diminished, until the ordinary progress of accumulation makes it up; but if

the condition of the labouring classes enables them to bear a temporary

reduction of wages, and the superseded labourers become absorbed in other

employments, their labour is still productive, and the breach in the gross

produce of the COmmunity is repaired, though not the detriment to the

labourers. I have restated this exposition, which has already been made in a

former place, to impress more strongly the truth, that a mode of production

does not of necessity increase the productive effect of the collective labour of

a community, because it enables a particular commodity to be sold cheaper.

The one consequence generally accompanies the other, but not necessarily. I

will not here repeat the reasons I formerly gave, nor anticipate those which

will be given more fully hereafter, for deeming the exception to be rather a

case abstractedly possible, than one which is frequently realized in fact.

              A considerable part of the saving of labour effected by substituting

the large system of production for the small, is the saving in the labour of the

capitalists themselves. If a hundred producers with small capitals carry onseparately the same business, the superintendence of each concern will

probably require the whole attention of the person conducting it, sufficiently

at least to hinder his time or thoughts from being disposable for anything

else: while a single manufacturer possessing a capital equal to the sum of

theirs, with ten or a dozen clerks, could conduct the whole of their amount of

business, and have leisure too for other occupations. The small capitalist, it is

true, generally combines with the business of direction some portion of the

details, which the other leaves to his subordinates: the small farmer follows

his own plough, the small tradesman serves in his own shop, the small

weaver plies his own loom. But in this very union of functions there is, in a

great proportion of cases, a want of economy. The principal in the concern is

either wasting, in the routine of a business, qualities suitable for the direction

of it, or he is only fit for the former, and then the latter will be ill done. I must

observe, however, that I do not attach, to this saving of labour, the

importance often ascribed to it. There is undoubtedly much more labour

expended in the superintendence of many small capitals than in that of one

large capital. For this labour however the small producers have generally a

full compensation, in the feeling of being their own masters, and not servants

of an employer. It may be said, that if they value this independence they will

submit to pay a price for it, and to sell at the reduced rates occasioned by the

competition of the great dealer or manufacturer. But they cannot always do

this and continue to gain a living. They thus gradually disappear from

society. After having consumed their little capital in prolonging the

unsuccessful struggle, they either sink into the condition of hired labourers,

or become dependent on others for support.

              2. Production on a large scale is greatly promoted by the practice of

forming a large capital by the combination of many small contributions; or, in

other words, by the formation of joint stock companies. The advantages of

the joint stock principle are numerous and important.

              In the first place, many undertakings require an amount of capital

beyond the means of the richest individual or private partnership. No

individual could have made a railway from London to Liverpool; it is

doubtful if any individual could even work the traffic on it, now when it is

made. The government indeed could have done both; and in countries where

the practice of co-operation is only in the earlier stages of its growth, the

government can alone be looked to for any of the works for which a greatcombination of means is requisite; because it can obtain those means by

compulsory taxation, and is already accustomed to the conduct of large

operations. For reasons, however, which are tolerably well known, and of

which we shall treat fully hereafter, government agency for the conduct of

industrial operations is generally one of the least eligible of resources, when

any other is available.

              Next, there are undertakings which individuals are not absolutely

incapable of performing, but which they cannot perform on the scale and with

the continuity which are ever more and more required by the exigencies of a

society in an advancing state. Individuals are quite capable of despatching

ships from England to any or every part of the world, to carry passengers and

letters; the thing was done before joint stock companies for the purposed

were heard of. But when, from the increase of population and transactions, as

well as of means of payment, the public will no longer content themselves

with occasional opportunities, but require the certainty that packets shall start

regularly, for some places once or even twice a day, for others once a week,

for others that a steam ship of great size and expensive construction shall

depart on fixed days twice in each month, it is evident that to afford an

assurance of keeping up with punctuality such a circle of costly operations,

requires a much larger capital and a much larger staff of qualified

subordinates than can be commanded by an individual capitalist. There are

other cases, again, in which though the business might be perfectly well

transacted with small or moderate capitals, the guarantee of a great

subscribed stock is necessary or desirable as a security to the public for the

fulfilment of pecuniary engagements. This is especially the case when the

nature of the business requires that numbers of persons should be willing to

trust the concern with their money: as in the business of banking, and that of

insurance: to both of which the joint stock principle is eminently adapted. It

is an instance of the folly and jobbery of the rulers of mankind, that until a

late period the joint stock principle, as a general resort, was in this country

interdicted by law to these two modes of business; to banking altogether, and

to insurance in the department of sea risks; in order to bestow a lucrative

monopoly on particular establishments which the government was pleased

exceptionally to license, namely the Bank of England, and two insurance

companies, the London and the Royal Exchange.

              Another advantage of joint stock or associated management, is itsincident of publicity. This is not an invariable, but it is a natural consequence

of the joint stock principle, and might be, as in some important cases it

already is, compulsory. In banking, insurance, and other businesses which

depend wholly on confidence, publicity is a still more important element of

success than a large subscribed capital. A heavy loss occurring in a private

bank may be kept secret; even though it were of such magnitude as to cause

the ruin of the concern, the banker may still carry it on for years, trying to

retrieve its position, only to fall in the end with a greater crash: but this

cannot so easily happen in the case of a joint stock company, whose accounts

are published periodically. The accounts, even if cooked, still exercise some

check; and the suspicions of shareholders, breaking out at the general

meetings, put the public on their guard.

              These are some of the advantages of joint stock over individual

management. But if we look to the other side of the question, we shall find

that individual management has also very great advantages over joint stock.

The chief of these is the much keener interest of the managers in the success

of the undertaking.

              The administration of a joint stock association is, in the main,

administration by hired servants. Even the committee, or board of directors,

who are supposed to superintend the management, and who do really appoint

and remove the managers, have no pecuniary interest in the good working of

the concern beyond the shares they individually hold, which are always a

very small part of the capital of the association, and in general but a small

part of the fortunes of the directors themselves; and the part they take in the

management usually divides their time with many other occupations, of as

great or greater importance to their own interest; the business being the

principal concern of no one except those who are hired to carry it on. But

experience shows, and proverbs, the expression of popular experience, attest,

how inferior is the quality of hired servants, compared with the ministration

of those personally interested in the work, and how indispensable, when hired

service must be employed, is “the master’s eye” to watch over it.

              The successful conduct of an industrial enterprise requires two quite

distinct qualifications: fidelity, and zeal. The fidelity of the hired managers of

a concern it is possible to secure. When their work admits of being reduced to

a definite set of rules, the violation of these is a matter on which conscience

cannot easily blind itself, and on which responsibility may be enforced by theloss of employment. But to carry on a great business successfully, requires a

hundred things which, as they cannot be defined beforehand, it is impossible

to convert into distinct and positive obligations. First and principally, it

requires that the directing mind should be incessantly occupied with the

subject; should be continually laying schemes by which greater profit may be

obtained, or expense saved. This intensity of interest in the subject it is

seldom to be expected that any one should feel, who is conducting a business

as the hired servant and for the profit of another. There are experiments in

human affairs which are conclusive on the point. Look at the whole class of

rulers, and ministers of state. The work they are entrusted with, is among the

most interesting and exciting of all occupations; the personal share which

they themselves reap of the national benefits or misfortunes which befall the

state under their rule, is far from trifling, and the rewards and punishments

which they may expect from public estimation are of the plain and palpable

kind which are most keenly felt and most widely appreciated. Yet how rare a

thing is it to find a statesman in whom mental indolence is not stronger than

all these inducements. How infinitesimal is the proportion who trouble

themselves to form, or even to attend to, plans of public improvement, unless

when it is made still more troublesome to them to remain inactive; or who

have any other real desire than that of rubbing on, so as to escape general

blame. On a smaller scale, all who have ever employed hired labour have had

ample experience of the efforts made to give as little labour in exchange for

the wages, as is compatible with not being turned off. The universal neglect

by domestic servants of their employer’s interests, wherever these are not

protected by some fixed rule, is matter of common remark; unless where long

continuance in the same service, and reciprocal good offices, have produced

either personal attachment, or some feeling of a common interest.

              Another of the disadvantages of joint stock concerns, which is in

some degree common to all concerns on a large scale, is disregard of small

gains and small savings. In the management of a great capital and great

transactions, especially when the managers have not much interest in it of

their own, small sums are apt to be counted for next to nothing; they never

seem worth the care and trouble which it costs to attend to them, and the

credit of liberality and openhandedness is cheaply bought by a disregard of

such trifling considerations. But small profits and small expenses often

repeated, amount to great gains and losses: and of this a large capitalist is

often a sufficiently good calculator to be practically aware; and to arrange hisbusiness on a system, which if enforced by a sufficiently vigilant

superintendence, precludes the possibility of the habitual waste, otherwise

incident to a great business. But the managers of a joint stock concern seldom

devote themselves sufficiently to the work, to enforce unremittingly, even if

introduced, through every detail of the business, a really economical system.

              From considerations of this nature, Adam Smith was led to enunciate

as a principle, that joint stock companies could never be expected to maintain

themselves without an exclusive privilege, except in branches of business

which, like banking, insurance, and some others, admit of being, in a

considerable degree, reduced to fixed rules. This, however, is one of those

over-statements of a true principle, often met with in Adam Smith. In his

days there were few instances of joint stock companies which had been

permanently successful without a monopoly, except the class of cases which

he referred to; but since his time there have been many; and the regular

increase both of the spirit of combination and of the ability to combine, will

doubtless produce many more. Adam Smith fixed his observation too

exclusively on the superior energy and more unremitting attention brought to

a business in which the whole stake and the whole gain belong to the persons

conducting it; and he overlooked various countervailing considerations which

go a great way towards neutralizing even that great point of superiority.

              Of these one of the most important is that which relates to the

intellectual and active qualifications of the directing head. The stimulus of

individual interest is some security for exertion, but exertion is of little avail

if the intelligence exerted is of an inferior order, which it must necessity be in

the majority of concerns carried on by the persons chiefly interested in them.

Where the concern is large, and can afford a remuneration sufficient to attract

a class of candidates superior to the common average, it is possible to select

for the general management, and for all the skilled employments of a

subordinate kind, persons of a degree of acquirement and cultivated

intelligence which more than compensates for their inferior interest in the

result. Their greater perspicacity enables them, with even a part of their

minds, to see probabilities of advantage which never occur to the ordinary

run of men by the continued exertion of the whole of theirs; and their

superior knowledge, and habitual rectitude of perception and of judgment,

guard them against blunders, the fear of which would prevent the others from

hoarding their interests in any attempt out of the ordinary routine.              It must be further remarked, that it is not a necessary consequence of

joint stock management, that the persons employed, whether in superior or in

subordinate offices, should be paid wholly by fixed salaries. There are modes

of connecting more or less intimately the interest of the employees with the

pecuniary success of the concern. There is a long series of intermediate

positions, between working wholly on one’s own account, and working by

the day, week, or year for an invariable payment. Even in the case of ordinary

unskilled labour, there is such a thing as task-work, or working by the piece:

and the superior efficiency of this is so well known, that judicious employers

always resort to it when the work admits of being put out in definite portions,

without the necessity of too troublesome a surveillance to guard against

inferiority in the execution. In the case of the managers of joint stock

companies, and of the superintending and controlling officers in many private

establishments, it is a common enough practice to connect their pecuniary

interest with the interest of their employers, by giving them part of their

remuneration in the form of a percentage on the profits. The personal interest

thus given to hired servants is not comparable in intensity to that of the owner

of the capital; hut it is sufficient to be a very material stimulus to zeal and

carefulness, and, when added to the advantage of superior intelligence, often

raises the quality of the service much above that which the generality of

masters are capable of rendering to themselves. The ulterior extensions of

which this principle of remuneration is susceptible, being of great social as

well as economical importance, will be more particularly adverted to in a

subsequent stage of the present inquiry.

              As I have already remarked of large establishments generally, when

compared with small ones, whenever competition is free its results will show

whether individual or joint stock agency is hest adapted to the particular case,

since that which is most efficient and most economical will always in the end

succeed in underselling the other.

              3. The possibility of substituting the large system of production for

the small, depends of course, in the first place, on the extent of the market.

The large system can only be advantageous when a large amount of business

is to be done: it implies, therefore, either a populous and flourishing

community, or a great opening for exportation. Again, this as well as every

other change in the system of production is greatly favoured by a progressive

condition of capital. It is chiefly when the capital of a country is receiving agreat annual increase, that there is a large amount of capital seeking for

investment: and a new enterprise is much sooner and more easily entered

upon by new capital, than by withdrawing capital from existing

employments. The change is also much facilitated by the existence of large

capitals in few hands. It is true that the same amount of capital can be raised

by bringing together many small sums. But this (besides that it is not equally

well suited to all branches of industry) supposes a much greater degree of

commercial confidence and enterprise diffused through the community, and

belongs altogether to a more advanced stage of industrial progress.

              In the countries in which there are the largest markets, the widest

diffusion of commercial confidence and enterprise, the greatest annual

increase of capital, and the greatest number of large capitals owned by

individuals, there is a tendency to substitute more and more, in one branch of

industry after another, large establishments for small ones. In England, the

chief type of all these characteristics, there is a perpetual growth not only of

large manufacturing establishments, but also, wherever a sufficient number of

purchasers are assembled, of shops and warehouses for conducting retail

business on a large scale. These are almost always able to undersell the

smaller tradesmen, partly, it is understood, by means of division of labour,

and the economy occasioned by limiting the employment of skilled agency to

cases where skill is required; and partly, no doubt, by the saving of labour

arising from the great scale of the transactions; as it costs no more time, and

not much more exertion of mind, to make a large purchase, for example, than

a small one, and very much less than to make a number of small ones.

              With a view merely to production, and to the greatest efficiency of

labour, this change is wholly beneficial. In some cases it is attended with

drawbacks, rather social than economical, the nature of which has been

already hinted at. But whatever disadvantages may be supposed to attend on

the change from a small to a large system of production, they are not

applicable to the change from a large to a still larger. When, in any

employment, the régime of independent small producers has either never

been possible, or has been superseded, and the system of many work-people

under One management has become fully established, from that time any

further enlargement in the scale of production is generally an unqualified

benefit. It is obvious, for example, how great an economy of labour would be

obtained if London were supplied by a single gas or water company insteadof the existing plurality. While there are even as many as two, this implies

double establishments of all sorts, when one only, with a small increase,

could probably perform the whole operation equally well; double sets of

machinery and works, when the whole of the gas or water required could

generally be produced by one set only; even double sets of pipes, if the

companies did not prevent this needless expense by agreeing upon a division

of the territory. Were there only one establishment, it could make lower

charges, consistently with obtaining the rate of profit now realized. But

would. it do so? Even if it did not, the community in the aggregate would still

be a gainer. since the shareholders are a part of the community, and they

would obtain higher profits while the consumers paid only the same. It is,

however, an error to suppose that the prices are ever permanently kept down

by the competition of these companies. Where competitors are so few, they

always end by agreeing not to compete. They may run a race of cheapness to

ruin a new candidate, but as soon as he has established his footing they come

to terms with him. When, therefore, a business of real public importance can

only be carried on advantageously upon so large a scale as to render the

liberty of competition almost illusory, it is an unthrifty dispensation of the

public resources that several costly sets of arrangements should be kept up

for the purpose of rendering to the community this one service. It is much

better to treat it at once as a public function; and if it be not such as the

government itself could beneficially undertake, it should be made over entire

to the company or association which will perform it on the best terms for the

public. In the case of railways, for example, no one can desire to see the

enormous waste of capital and land (not to speak of increased nuisance)

involved in the construction of a second railway to connect the same places

already united by an existing one; while the two would not do the work better

than it could be done by one, and after a short time would probably be

amalgamated. Only one such line ought to be permitted, but the control over

that line never ought to be parted with by the State, unless on a temporary

concession, as in France; and the vested right which Parliament has allowed

to be acquired by the existing companies, like all other proprietary rights

which are opposed to public utility, is morally valid only as a claim to

compensation.

              4. The question between the large and the small systems of

production as applied to agriculture — between large and small farming, the

grande and the petite culture — stands, in many respects, on differentgrounds from the general question between great and small industrial

establishments. In its social aspect, and as an element in the Distribution of

Wealth, this question will occupy us hereafter: but even as a question of

production, the superiority of the large system in agriculture is by no means

so clearly established as in manufactures.

              I have already remarked, that the operations of agriculture are little

susceptible of benefit from the division of labour. There is but little

separation of employments even on the largest farm. The same persons may

not in general attend to the live stock, to the marketing, and to the cultivation

of the soil; but much beyond that primary and simple classification the

subdivision is not carried. The combination of labour of which agriculture is

susceptible, is chiefly that which Mr. Wakefield terms Simple Co-operation;

several persons helping one another in the same work, at the same time and

place. But I confess it seems to me that this able writer attributes more

importance to that kind of co-operation, in reference to agriculture properly

so called, than it deserves. None of the common farming operations require

much of it. There is no particular advantage in setting a great number of

people to work together in ploughing or digging or sowing the same field, or

even in mowing or reaping it unless time presses. A single family can

generally supply all the combination of labour necessary for these purposes.

And in the works in which an union of many efforts is really needed, there is

seldom found any impracticability in obtaining it where farms are small.

              The waste of productive power by subdivision of the land often

amounts to a great evil, but this applies chiefly to a subdivision so minute,

that the cultivators have not enough land to occupy their time. Up to that

point the same principles which recommend large manufactories are

applicable to agriculture. For the greatest productive efficiency, it is generally

desirable (though even this proposition must be received with qualifications)

that no family who have any land, should have less than they could cultivate,

or than will fully employ their cattle and tools. These, however, are not the

dimensions of large farms, but of what are reckoned in England very small

ones. The large farmer has some advantage in the article of buildings. It does

not cost so much to house a great number of cattle in one building, as to

lodge them equally well in several buildings. There is also some advantage in

implements. A small farmer is not so likely to possess expensive instruments.

But the principal agricultural implements, even when of the best construction,are not expensive. It may not answer to a small farmer to own a threshing

machine, for the small quantity of corn he has to thresh; but there is no reason

why such a machine should not in every neighbourhood be owned in

common, or provided by some person to whom the others pay a consideration

for its use; especially as, when worked by steam, they are so constructed as to
              27
be moveable. The large farmer can make some saving in cost of carriage.

There is nearly as much trouble in carrying a small portion of produce to

market, as a much greater produce; in bringing home a small, as a much

larger quantity of manures, and articles of daily consumption. There is also

the greater cheapness of buying things in large quantities. These various

advantages must count for something, but it does not seem that they ought to

count for very much. In England, for some generations, there has been little

experience of small farms; but in Ireland the experience has been ample, not

merely under the worst but under the best management; and the highest Irish

authorities may be cited in opposition to the opinion which on this subject

commonly prevails in England. Mr. Blacker, for example, one of the most

experienced agriculturists and successful improvers in the North of Ireland,

whose experience was chiefly in the best cultivated, which are also the most

minutely divided parts of the country, was of opinion, that tenants holding

farms not exceeding from five to eight or ten acres, could live comfortably

and pay as high a rent as any large farmer whatever. “I am firmly persuaded,”
        28
(he says, “that the small farmer who holds his own plough and digs his own

ground, if he follows a proper rotation of crops, and feeds his cattle in the

house, can undersell the large farmer, or in other words can pay a rent which

the other cannot afford; and in this I am confirmed by the opinion of many

practical men who have well considered the subject... The English farmer of

700 to 800 acres is a kind of man approaching to what is known by the name

of a gentleman farmer. He must have his horse to ride, and his gig, and

perhaps an overseer to attend to his labourers; he certainly cannot superintend

himself the labour going on in a farm of 800 acres.” After a few other

remarks, he adds, “Besides all these drawbacks, which the small farmer

knows little about, there is the great expense of carting out the manure from

the homestead to such a great distance, and again carting home the crop. A

single horse will consume the produce of more land than would feed a small

farmer and his wife and two children. And what is more than all, the large

farmer says to his labourers, go to your work; but when the small farmer has

occasion to hire them, he says, come; the intelligent reader will, I dare say,understand the difference.”

              One of the objections most urged against small farms is, that they do

not and cannot maintain, proportionally to their extent, so great a number of

cattle as large farms, and that this occasions such a deficiency of manure, that

a soil much subdivided must always be impoverished. It will be found,

however, that subdivision only produces this effect when it throws the land

into the hands of cultivators so poor as not to possess the amount of live stock

suitable to the size of their farms. A small farm and a badly stocked farm are

not synonymous. To make the comparison fairly, we must suppose the same

amount of capital which is possessed by the large farmers to be disseminated

among the small ones. When this condition, or even any approach to it,

exists, and when stall feeding is practised (and stall feeding now begins to be

considered good economy even on large farms), experience, far from bearing

out the assertion that small farming is unfavourable to the multiplication of

cattle, conclusively establishes the very reverse. The abundance of cattle, and

copious use of manure, on the small farms of Flanders, are the most striking

features in that Flemish agriculture which is the admiration of all competent
                                                        29
judges, whether in England or on the Continent.

              The disadvantage, when disadvantage there is, of small or rather of

peasant farming, as compared with capitalist farming, must chiefly consist in

inferiority of skill and knowledge; but it is not true, as a general fact, that

such inferiority exists. Countries of small farms and peasant farming,

Flanders and Italy, had a good agriculture many generations before England,

and theirs is still, as a whole, probably the best agriculture in the world. The

empirical skill, which is the effect of daily and close observation, peasant

farmers often possess in an eminent degree. The traditional knowledge, for

example, of the culture of the vine, possessed by the peasantry of the

countries where the best wines are produced, is extraordinary. There is no

doubt an absence of science, or at least of theory; and to some extent a

deficiency of the spirit of improvement, so far as relates to the introduction of

new processes. There is also a want of means to make experiments, which

can seldom be made with advantage except by rich proprietors or capitalists.

As for those systematic improvements which operate on a large tract of

country at once (such as great works of draining or irrigation) or which for

any other reasons do really require large numbers of workmen combining

their labour, these are not in general to be expected from small farmers, oreven small proprietors, though combination among them for such purposes is

by no means unexampled, and will become more common as their

intelligence is more developed.

              Against these disadvantages is to be placed, where the tenure of land

is of the requisite kind, an ardour of industry absolutely unexampled in any

other condition of agriculture. This is a subject on which the testimony of

competent witnesses is unanimous. The working of the petite culture cannot

be fairly judged where the small cultivator is merely a tenant, and not even a

tenant on fixed conditions, but (as until lately in Ireland) at a nominal rent

greater than can be paid, and therefore practically at a varying rent always

amounting to the utmost that can be paid. To understand the subject, it must

be studied where the cultivator is the proprietor, or at least a métayer with a

permanent tenure; where the labour he exerts to increase the produce and

value of the land avails wholly, or at least partly, to his own benefit and that

of his descendants. In another division of our subject, we shall discuss at

some length the important subject of tenures of land, and I defer till then any

citation of evidence on the marvellous industry of peasant proprietors. It may

suffice here to appeal to the immense amount of gross produce which, even

without a permanent tenure, English labourers generally obtain from their

little allotments; a produce beyond comparison greater than a large farmer

extracts, or would find it his interest to extract, from the same piece of land.

              And this I take to be the true reason why large cultivation is

generally most advantageous as a mere investment for profit. Land occupied

by a large farmer is not, in one sense of the word, farmed so highly. There is

not nearly so much labour expended on it. This is not on account of any

economy arising from combination of labour, but because, by employing less,

a greater return is obtained in proportion to the outlay. It does not answer to

any one to pay others for exerting all the labour which the peasant, or even

the allotment-holder, gladly undergoes when the fruits are to be wholly

reaped by himself. This labour, however, is not unproductive : it all adds to

the gross produce. With anything like equality of skill and knowledge, the

large farmer does not obtain nearly so much from the soil as the small

proprietor, or the small farmer with adequate motives to exertion: but though

his returns are less, the labour is less in a still greater degree, and as whatever

labour he employs must be paid for, it does not suit his purpose to employ

more.              But although the gross produce of the land is greatest, caeteris

paribus, under small cultivation, and although, therefore, a country is able on

that system to support a larger aggregate population, it is generally assumed

by English writers that what is termed the net produce, that is, the surplus

after feeding the cultivators, must be smaller; that therefore, the population

disposable for all other purposes, for manufactures, for commerce and

navigation, for national defence, for the promotion of knowledge, for the

liberal professions, for the various functions of government, for the arts and

literature, all of which are dependent on this surplus for their existence as

occupations, must be less numerous; and that the nation, therefore (waving all

question as to the condition of the actual cultivators), must be inferior in the

principal elements of national power, and in many of those of general well-

being. This, however, has been taken for granted much too readily.

Undoubtedly the non-agricultural population will bear a less ratio to the

agricultural, under small than under large cultivation. But that it will be less

numerous absolutely, is by no means a consequence. If the total population,

agricultural and non-agricultural, is greater, the nonagricultural portion may

he more numerous in itself, and may yet be a smaller proportion of the whole.

If the gross produce is larger, the net produce may may be larger, and yet

bear a smaller ratio to the gross produce. Yet even Mr. Wakefield sometimes

appears to confound these distinct ideas. In France it is computed that two-

thirds of the whole population are agricultural. In England, at most, one-third.

Hence Mr. Wakefield infers, that “as in France only three people are

supported by the labour of two cultivators, while in England the labour of

two cultivators supports six people, English agriculture is twice as productive

as French agriculture,” owing to the superior efficiency of large farming

through combination of labour. But in the first place, the facts themselves are

overstated. The labour of two persons in England does not quite support six

people, for there is not a little food imported from foreign countries, and from

Ireland. In France, too, the labour of two cultivators does much more than

supply the food of three persons. It provides the three persons, and

occasionally foreigners, with flax, hemp, and to a certain extent with silk,

oils, tobacco, and latterly sugar, which in England are wholly obtained from

abroad; nearly all the timber used in France is of home growth, nearly all

which is used in England is imported; the principal fuel of France is procured

and brought to market by persons reckoned among agriculturists, in England

by persons not so reckoned. I do not take into calculation hides and wool,these products being common to both countries, nor wine or brandy produced

for home consumption, since England has a corresponding production of beer

and spirits; but England has no material export of either article, and a great

importation of the last, while France supplies wines and spirits to the whole

world. I say nothing of fruit, eggs, and such minor particles of agricultural

produce, in which the export trade of France is enormous. But not to lay

undue stress on these abatements, we will take the statement as it stands.

Suppose that two persons, in England, do bonâ fide produce the food of six,

while in France, for the same purpose, the labour of four is requisite. Does it

follow that England must have a larger surplus for the support of a non-

agricultural population? No; but merely that she can devote two-thirds of her

whole produce to the purpose, instead of one-third. Suppose the produce to

be twice as great, and the one-third will amount to as much as the two-thirds.

The fact might be, that owing to the greater quantity of labour employed on

the French system, the same land would produce food for twelve persons

which on the English system would only produce it for six: and if this were

so, which would be quite consistent with the conditions of the hypothesis,

then although the food for twelve was produced by the labour of eight, while

the six were fed by the labour of only two, there would be the same number

of hands disposable for other employment in the one country as in the other. I

am not contending that the fact is so. I know that the gross produce per acre

in France as a whole (though not in its most improved districts) averages

much less than in England, and that, in proportion to the extent and fertility

of the two countries, England has, in the sense we are now speaking of, much

the largest disposable population. But the disproportion certainly is not to be

measured by Mr. Wakefield’s simple criterion. As well might it be said that

agricultural labour in the United States, where, by a late census, four families

in every five appeared to be engaged in agriculture, must be still more

inefficient than in France.

              The inferiority of French cultivation (which, taking the count as a

whole, must be allowed to be real, though much exaggerated) is probably

more owing to the lower general average of industrial skill and energy in that

country, than to any special cause; and even if partly the effect of minute

subdivision, it does not prove that small faring is disadvantageous, but only

(what is undoubtedly the fact) that farms in France are very frequently too

small, and, what is worse, broken up into an almost incredible number of

patches or parcelles, most inconveniently dispersed and parted from oneanother.

              As a question, not of gross, but of net produce, the comparative

merits of the grande and the petite culture, especially when the small farmer

is also the proprietor, cannot be looked upon as decided. It is a question on

which good judges at present differ. The current of English opinion is in

favour of large farms: on the Continent, the weight of authority seems to be

on the other side. Professor Rau, of Heidelberg, the author of one of the most

comprehensive and elaborate of extant treatises on political economy, and

who has that large acquaintance with facts and authorities on his own subject,

which generally characterises his countrymen, lays it down as a settled truth,

that small or moderate-sized farms yield not only a larger gross but a larger

net produce: though, he adds, it is desirable there should be some great
                                                          30
proprietors, to lead the way in new improvements. The most apparently

impartial and discriminating judgment that I have met with is that of M.

Passy, who (always speaking with reference to net produce) gives his verdict

in favour of large farms for grain and forage; but, for the kinds of culture

which require much labour and attention, places the advantage wholly on the

side of small cultivation; including in this description, not only the vine and

the olive, where a considerable amount of care and labour must be bestowed

on each individual plant, but also roots, leguminous plants, and those which

furnish the materials of manufactures. The small size, and consequent

multiplication, of farms, according to all authorities, are extremely favourable
                                                                  31
to the abundance of many minor products of agriculture.

              It is evident that every labourer who extracts from the land more

than his own food, and that of any family he may have, increases the means

of supporting a non-agricultural population. Even if his surplus is no more

than enough to buy clothes, the labourers who make the clothes are a non-

agricultural population, enabled to exist by food which he produces. Every

agricultural family, therefore, which produces its own necessaries, adds to the

net produce of agriculture; and so does every person born on the land, who by

employing himself on it, adds more to its gross produce than the mere food

which he eats. It is questionable whether, even in the most subdivided

districts of Europe which are cultivated by the proprietors, the multiplication

of hands on the soil has approached, or tends to approach, within a great

distance of this limit. In France, though the subdivision is confessedly too

great, there is proof positive that it is far from having reached the point atwhich it would begin to diminish the power of supporting a non-agricultural

population. This is demonstrated by the great increase of the towns; which
                                                                                        32
have of late increased in a much greater ratio than the population generally,

showing (unless the condition of the town labourers is becoming rapidly

deteriorated, which there is no reason to believe) that even by the unfair and

inapplicable test of proportions, the productiveness of agriculture must be on

the increase. This, too, concurrently with the amplest evidence that in the

more improved districts of France, and in some which, until lately, were

among the unimproved, there is a considerably increased consumption of

country produce by the country population itself.

              Impressed with the conviction that, of all faults which can be

committed by a scientific writer on political and social subjects, exaggeration,

and assertion beyond the evidence, most require to be guarded against, I

limited myself in the early editions of this work to the foregoing very

moderate statements. I little knew how much stronger my language might

have been without exceeding the truth, and how much the actual progress of

French agriculture surpassed anything which I had at that time sufficient

grounds to affirm. The investigations of that eminent authority on agricultural

statistics, M. Léonce de Lavergne, undertaken by desire of the Academy of

Moral and Political Sciences of the Institute of France, have led to the

conclusion that since the Revolution of 1789, the total produce of French

agriculture has doubled; profits and wages having both increased in about the

same, and rent in a still greater ratio. M. de Lavergne, whose impartiality is

one of his greatest merits, is, moreover, so far in this instance from the

suspicion of having a case to make out, that he is labouring to show, not how

much French agriculture has accomplished, but how much still remains for it

to do. “We have required” (he says) “no less than seventy years to bring into

cultivation two million hectares” (five million English acres) “of waste land,

to suppress half our fallows, double our agricultural products, increase our

population by 30 per cent, our wages by 100 per cent, our rent by 150 per

cent. At this rate we shall require three quarters of a century more to arrive at
                                                      33
the point which England has already attained.”

              After this evidence, we have surely now heard the last of the

incompatibility of small properties and small farms with agricultural

improvement. The only question which remains open is one of degree; the

comparative rapidity of agricultural improvement under the two systems; andit is the general opinion of those who are equally well acquainted with both,

that improvement is greatest under a due admixture between them.

              In the present chapter, I do not enter on the question between great

and small cultivation in any other respect than as a question of production,

and of the efficiency of labour. We shall return to it hereafter as affecting the

distribution of the produce, and the physical and social well-being of the

cultivators themselves; in which aspects it deserves, and requires, a still more

particular examination.

        26
               Page 214 et seqq.

        27
               Supra, chap. vi. p. 94.

        28
               The observation in the text may hereafter may hereafter require

some degree of modification from inventions such as the steam plough and

the reaping machine. The effect, however, of these improvements on the

relative advantages of large and small farms, will not depend on the

efficiency of the instruments, but on their costliness. I see no reason to expect

that this will be such as to make them inaccessible to small farmers, or

combinations of small farmers.

        29
               Prize Essay on the Management of Landed Property in Ireland, by

William Blacker, Esq. (1837).

        30
               “The number of beasts fed on a farm of which the whole is arable

land,” (says the elaborate and intellegent treatise on Flemish Husbandry,

from personal observation and the best sources, published in the Library of

the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge,) “is surprising to those

who are not acquainted with the mode in which the food is prepared for the

cattle. A beast for every three acres of land is a common proportion, and in

very small occupations where much spade husbandry is used, the proportion

is still greater. After comparing the accounts given in a variety of places and

situations of the average quantity of milk which a cow gives when fed in the

stall,the result is, that it greatly exceeds that of our best dairy farms, and the

quantity of butter made from a given quantity of milk is also greater. it

appears astonishing that the occupier of only ten or twelve acres of light

arable should be able to maintain four or five cows, but the fact is notorious

in the Waes country.” (pp. 59, 60)

              This subject is treated very intelligently in the work of Passy, “DesSystemes de Culture et de leur Influence sur l’Economie Sociale”, one of the

most inpartial discussions, as between the two systems, which has yet

appeared in France.

              “Sans nul doute, c’est l’Angleterre qui, a superficie egale, nourrit le

plus d’animaux; la Hollande et quelques parties de la Lombardie pourraient

seules lui disputer cet avantage; mais est-ce la un resultat des formes de

l’exploitation, et des circonstances de climat et de situation locale ne

concourent-elles pas a le produire? C’est, a notre avis, ce qui ne saurait etre

conteste. En effect, quoiqu’on en ait dit, partout ou la grande et la petite

culture se rencontrent sur les memes points, c’est celle-ci qui, bien qu’elle ne

puisse entretenir autant de moutons, possede, tout compense, le plus grand

nobre d’animaux producteurs d’engrais. Voici, par example, ce qui ressort

des informations fournies par la Belgique.

              “Les deux provinces ou regne la plus petite culture sont celles

d’Anvers et de la Flandre oriente, et elles possedent en moyenne, par 100

hectares de terres cultivees, 74 betes bovines et 14 moutons. Les deux

provinces ou se trouvent les grandes fermes sont celles de Namur et du

Hainaut, et elles n’ont en moyenne, pour 100 hectares de terres cultivees, que

30 betes bovines et 45 moutons. Or, en comptant, suivant l’usage, 10

moutons comme l’equivalent d’une tete de gros betail, nous rencontrons d’un

cote, 76 animaux servant a maintenir la fecondite du sol; de l’autre, moins de

35, difference a coup sur enorme. (D’apres les documents statistiques publies

par le Ministre de l’Interieur, 3me publication officielle.) Il est a remarquer,

au surplus, que le nombre des animaux n’est pas, dans la partie de la

Belgique dont le sol est devise en tres-petites fermes, beaucoup moindre

qu’en Angleterre. En l’evaluant dans cette derniere contree a raison

seulement du territoire en culture, il y existe, par centaine d’hectares, 65 betes

a corne et pres de 260 moutons, c-a-d. l’equivalent de 91 des premiers, ou

seulement 15 de plus que dans l’autre. Et encore est-il juste d’observer qu’en

Belgique rien n’est perdu des engrais donnes par des animaus nourris a peu

pres toute l’annee a l’etable, tandis qu’en Angleterre la pature en plein air

affaiblit considerablement les quantites qu’il devient possible de mettre

entierement a profit.

              “Dans le departement du Nord aussi, ce sont les arrondissements

dont les fermes ont la moindre contenance qui entretiennent le plus

d’animaux. Tandis que les arrondissements de Lille et de Hazebrouck, outreun plus grand nombre de chevaux, nourissent, l’un l’equivalent de 52 tetes de

gros betail, l’autre l’equivalent de 46; les arrondissement ou les exploitations

sont les plus grandes, ceux de Dunkerque et d’Avesnes, ne contiennent, le

premier, que l’equivalent de 44 betes bovines, l’autre que celui de 40.

(D’apres la Statisique de la France publiee par le Ministre du Commerce:

Agriculture, t. i.)

              “Pareilles recherces etendues sur d’autres points de la France

offriraient desresultats analogues. S’il est vrai que dans la banlieue des villes,

la petite culture s’abstienne de garderdes animaux, au produit desquels elle

supplee facilement par des achats d’engrais, il ne se peut que le genre de

travail qui exige le plus de la terre ne soit pas celui qui en entretienne le plus

activement la fertilite. Assurement il n’est pas donne aux petites fermes de

posseder de nombroux troupeaux de moutons, et c’est un inconvenient; mais,

en revanche, elles nourrissent plus de betes bovines que les grandes. C’est la

une necessite a laquelle elles ne sauraient se soustraire dans aucun pays ou les

besoins de la consommation le ont appelees a fleurir; elles periraient si elles

ne reussissaient pas a y satisfie.

              “Voici, au surplus, sur ce point des details dont l’exactitude nos

parait pleinement attestee par l’excellence du travail ou nous les avons puises.

Ces details, contenus dans la statistique de la commune de Vensat (Puy de

Dome), publiee recement par M. le docteur Jusseraud, maire de la commune,

sont d’autant plus precieux, qu’ils mettent dans tout leur la nature des

changements que le developpement de la petite culture a, dans le pays dont il

s’agit, apportes au nombre et a l’espece des animaux dont le produit en

engrais soutient et acroit la fertilite des terres. Dans la commune de Vensat,

qui comprend 1612 hectares divises en 4600 parcelles appartenant a 591

proprietaires, le territoire exploite se compose de 1466 hectares. Or, en 1790,

17 fermes en occupaient les deux tiers et 20 autres tout le reste. Depuis lors,

les cultures se sont morcelees, et maintenant leur petitesse est extreme.

Quelle a ete l’influence du changement sur la quantite des animaux? Une

augmentation considerable. En 1790, la commune ne possedait qu’environ

676 des premieres, et 533 seulement des secondes. Ainsi pour remplacer

1300 moutons elle a acquis 376 boeufs et vaches, et tout compense, la somme

des engrais s’est accrue dans la proportion de 490 a 729, ou de plus de 48

pour cent. Et encore est-il a remarquer que, plus forts et mieux nourris a

present, les animaux contribuent bien davantage a entretenir la fertilite desterres.

              “Voila ce que les faits nous apprennent sur ce point: il n’est donc pas

vrai que la petite culture ne nourrisse pas autant d’animaux que les autres;

loin de la, a condition locales pareilles, c’est elle qui en possede le plus, et il

ne devait pas etre difficile de la presumer; car, du moment ou c’est elle qui

demande le plus aux terres, il faut bien qu’elle leur donne des soins d’autant

plus reparateurs qu’elle en exige davantage. Que l’on prenne un a un les

autres reproches; qu’on les examine a la clarte de faits bien apprecies, on

s’appercevra bientot qu’ils ne sauraient etre mieux fondes, et qu’ils n’ont ete

formules que parce qu’on a compare l’etat des cultures dans des contrees ou

les causes de la prosperite agricole n’agissaient pas avec la meme energie.”

(pp. 116–120)

        31
               See pp. 352 and 353 of a French translation published at Brussels

in 1839, by M. Fred de Kemmeter, of Ghent.

        32
               “Dans le department du Nord,” says M. Passy, “une ferme de 20

hectares recueille en veaus, laitage, oeufs, et volailles, parfois pour un millier

de francs dans l’annee; et, les frais defalques, c’est l’equivalent d’une

addition au roduit net de 15 a 20 francs par hectare.” Des Systemes de

Culture, p. 114.

        33
               During the interval between the census of 1851 and that of 1856,

the increase of the population of Paris alone, exceeded the aggregate increase

of all France; while nearly all the other large towns likewise showed an

increase.

        34
               Economie Rurale de la France depuis 1789. Par M. Leonce de

Lavergne. Membre de l’Institut et de la Societe Centrale d’Agriculture de

France. 2me ed. p. 59.

 

 

             Chapter 10 – Of the Law of the Increase of Labour

 

 

              1. We have now successively considered each of the agents or

conditions of production, and of the means by which the efficacy of these

various agents is promoted. In order to come to an end of the questions which

relate exclusively to production, one more, of primary importance, remains.

              Production is not a fixed, but an increasing thing. When not kept

back by bad institutions, or a low state of the arts of life, the produce of

industry has usually tended to increase; stimulated not only by the desire of

the producers to augment their means of consumption, but by the increasing

number of the consumers. Nothing in political economy can be of more

importance than to ascertain the law of this increase of production; the

conditions to which it is subject: whether it has practically any limits, and

what these are. There is also no subject in political economy which is

popularly less understood, or on which the errors committed are of a

character to produce, and do produce, greater mischief.

              We have seen that the essential requisites of production are three —

labour, capital, and natural agents; the term capital including all external and

physical requisites which are products of labour, the term natural agents all

those which are not. But among natural agents we need not take into account

those which, existing in unlimited quantity, being incapable of appropriation,

and never altering in their qualities, are always ready to lend an equal degree

of assistance to production, whatever may be its extent; as air, and the light of

the sun. Being now about to consider the impediments to production, not the

facilities for it, we need advert to no other natural agents than those which are

liable to be deficient either in quantity or in productive power. These may be

all represented by the term land. Land, in the narrowest acceptation, as the

source of agricultural produce, is the chief of them; and if we extend the term

to mines and fisheries — to what is found in the earth itself, or in the waters

which partly cover it, as well as to what is grown or fed on its surface, it

embraces everything with which we need at present concern ourselves.

              We may say, then, without a greater stretch of language than under

the necessary explanation is permissible, that the requisites of production areLabour, Capital, and Land. The increase of production, therefore, depends on

the properties of these elements. It is a result of the increase either of the

elements themselves, or of their productiveness. The law of the increase of

production must be a consequence of the laws of these elements; the limits to

the increase of production must be the limits, whatever they are, set by those

laws. We proceed to consider the three elements successively, with reference

to this effect; or in other words, the law of the increase of production, viewed

in respect of its dependence, first on Labour, secondly on Capital, and lastly

on Land.

              2. The increase of labour is the increase of mankind; of population.

On this subject the discussions excited by the Essay of Mr. Malthus have

made the truth, though by no means universally admitted, yet so fully known,

that a briefer examination of the question than would otherwise have been

necessary will probably on the present occasion suffice.

              The power of multiplication inherent in all organic life may be

regarded as infinite. There is no one species of vegetable or animal, which, if

the earth were entirely abandoned to it, and to the things on which it feeds,

would not in a small number of years overspread every region of the globe, of

which the climate was compatible with its existence. The degree of possible

rapidity is different in different orders of beings; but in all it is sufficient, for

the earth to be very speedily filled up. There are many species of vegetables

of which a single plant will produce in one year the germs of a thousand; if

only two come to maturity, in fourteen years the two will have multiplied to

sixteen thousand and more. It is but a moderate case of fecundity in animals

to be capable of quadrupling their numbers in a single year; if they only do as

much in half a century, ten thousand will have swelled within two centuries

to upwards of two millions and a half. The capacity of increase is necessarily

in a geometrical progression: the numerical ratio alone is different.

              To this property of organized beings, the human species forms no

exception. Its power of increase is indefinite, and the actual multiplication

would he extraordinarily rapid, if the power were exercised to the utmost.

              It never is exercised to the utmost, and yet, in the most favourable

circumstances known to exist, which are those of a fertile region colonized

from an industrious and civilized community, population has continued, for

several generations, independently of fresh immication, to double itself in not                                  34
much more than twenty years. That the capacity of multiplication in the

human species exceeds even this, is evident if we consider how great is the

ordinary number of children to a family, where the climate is good and early

marriages usual; and how small a proportion of them die before the age of

maturity, in the present state of hygienic knowledge, where the locality is

healthy, and the family adequately provided with the means of living. It is a

very low estimate of the capacity of increase, if we only assume, that in a

good sanitary condition of the people, each generation may be double the

number of the generation which preceded it.

              Twenty or thirty years ago, these propositions might still have

required considerable enforcement and illustration; but the evidence of them

is so ample and incontestable, that they have made their way against all kinds

of opposition, and may now be regarded as axiomatic: though the extreme

reluctance felt to admitting them, every now and then gives birth to some

ephemeral theory, speedily forgotten, of a different law of increase in

different circumstances, through a providential adaptation of the fecundity of
                                                      35
the human species to the exigencies of society. The obstacle to a just

understanding of the subject does not arise from these theories, but from too

confused a notion of the causes which, at most times and places, keep the

actual increase of mankind so far behind the capacity.

              3. Those causes, nevertheless, are in no way mysterious. What

prevents the population of hares and rabbits from overstocking the earth? Not

want of fecundity, but causes very different: many enemies, and insufficient

subsistence; not enough to eat, and liability to be eaten. In the human race,

which is not generally subject to the latter inconvenience, the equivalents for

it are war and disease. If the multiplication of mankind proceeded only, like

that of the other animals, from a blind instinct, it would be limited in the

same manner with theirs; the births would be as numerous as the physical

constitution of the species admitted of, and the population would be kept
                  36
down by deaths. But the conduct of human creatures is more or less

influenced by foresight of consequences, and by impulses superior to mere

animal instincts: and they do not, therefore, propagate like swine, but are

capable, though in very unequal degrees, of being withheld by prudence, or

by the social affections, from giving existence to beings born only to misery

and premature death. In proportion as mankind rise above the condition of the

beasts, population is restrained by the fear of want rather than by want itself.Even where there is no question of starvation, many are similarly acted upon

by the apprehension of losing what have come to be regarded as the

decencies of their situation in life. Hitherto no other motives than these two

have been found strong enough, in the generality of mankind, to counteract

the tendency to increase. It has been the practice of a great majority of the

middle and the poorer classes, whenever free from external control, to marry

as early, and in most countries to have as many children, with maintaining

themselves in the condition of were born to, or were accustomed to consider

as theirs. Among the middle classes, in many individual instances, there is an

additional restraint exercised from the desire of doing more than maintaining

their circumstances — of improving them; but such a desire is rarely found,

or rarely has that effect, in the labouring classes. If they can bring up a family

as they were themselves brought up, even the prudent among them are

usually satisfied. Too often they do not think even of that, but rely on fortune,

or on the resources to be found in legal or voluntary charity.

              In a very backward state of society, like that of Europe in the Middle

Ages, and many parts of Asia at present, population is kept down by actual

starvation. The starvation does not take place in ordinary years, but in

seasons of scarcity, which in those states of society are much more frequent

and more extreme than Europe is now accustomed to. In these seasons actual

want, or the maladies consequent on it, carry off numbers of the population,

which in a succession of favourable years again expands, to be again cruelly

decimated. In a more improved state, few, even among the poorest of the

people, are limited to actual necessaries, and to a bare sufficiency of those:

and the increase is kept within bounds, not by excess of deaths, but by

limitation of births. The limitation is brought about in various ways. In some

countries, it is the result of prudent or conscientious self-restraint. There is a

condition to which the labouring people are habituated; they perceive that by

having too numerous families, they must sink below that condition, or fail to

transmit it to their children; and this they do not choose to submit to. The

countries in which, so far as is known, a great degree of voluntary prudence

has been longest practised on this subject, are Norway and parts of

Switzerland. Concerning both, there happens to be unusually authentic

information; many facts were carefully brought together by Mr. Malthus, and

much additional evidence has been obtained since his time. In both these

countries the increase of population is very slow; and what checks it is not

multitude of deaths, but fewness of births. Both the births and the deaths areremarkably few in proportion to the population; the average duration of life is

the longest in Europe; the population contains fewer children, and a greater

proportional number of persons in the vigour of life, than is known to be the

case in any other part of the world. The paucity of births tends directly to

prolong life, by keeping the people in comfortable circumstances; and the

same prudence is doubtless exercised in avoiding causes of disease, as in

keeping clear of the principal cause of poverty. It is worthy of remark that the

two counties thus honourably distinguished, are countries of small landed

proprietors.

              There are other cases in which the prudence and forethought, which

perhaps might not be exercised by the people themselves, are exercised by

the state for their benefit; marriage not being permitted until the contracting

parties can show that they have the prospect of a comfortable support. Under

these laws, of which I shall speak more fully hereafter, the condition of the

people is reported to be good, and the illegitimate births not so numerous as

might be expected. There are places, again, in which the restraining cause

seems to be not so much individual prudence, as some general and perhaps

even accidental habit of the country. In the rural districts of England, during

the last century, the growth of population was very effectually repressed by

the difficulty of obtaining a cottage to live in. It was the custom for

unmarried labourers to lodge and board with their employers; it was the

custom for married labourers to have a cottage: and the rule of the English

poor laws by which a parish was charged with the support of its unemployed

poor, rendered landowners averse to promote marriage. About the end of the

century, the great demand for men in war and manufactures, made it be

thought a patriotic thing to encourage population: and about the same time

the growing inclination of farmers to live like rich people, favoured as it was

by a long period of high prices, made them desirous of keeping inferiors at a

greater distance, and, pecuniary motives arising from abuses of the poor laws

being superadded, they gradually drove their labourers into cottages, which

the landlords now no longer refused permission to build. In some countries an

old standing custom that a girl should not marry until she had spun and

woven for herself an ample trousseau (destined for the supply of her whole

subsequent life,) is said to have acted as a substantial check to population. In

England, at present, the influence of prudence in keeping down multiplication

is seen by the diminished number of marriages in the manufacturing districts

in years when trade is bad.              But whatever be the causes by which population is anywhere limited

to a comparatively slow rate of increase, an acceleration of the rate very

speedily follows any diminution of the motives to restraint. It is but rarely

that improvements in the condition of the labouring classes do anything more

than give a temporary margin, speedy filled up by an increase of their

numbers. The use they commonly choose to make of any advantageous

change in their circumstances, is to take it out in the form which, by

augmenting the population, deprives the succeeding generation of the benefit.

Unless, either by their general improvement in intellectual and moral culture,

or at least by raising their habitual standard of comfortable living, they can be

taught to make a better use of favourable circumstances, nothing permanent

can be done for them; the most promising schemes end only in having a more

numerous, but not a happier people. By their habitual standard, I mean that

(when any such there is) down to which they will multiply, but not lower.

Every advance they make in education, civilization, and social improvement,

tends to raise this standard; and there is no doubt that it is gradually, though

slowly, rising in the more advanced countries of Western Europe.

Subsistence and employment in England have never increased more rapidly

than in the last forty years, but every census since 1821 showed a smaller

proportional increase of population than that of the period preceding; and the

produce of French agriculture and industry is increasing in a progressive

ratio, while the population exhibits in every quinquennial census, a smaller

proportion of births to the population.

              The subject, however, of population, in its connexion with the

condition of the labouring classes, will be considered in another place; in the

present we have to do with it solely as one of the elements of Production; and

in that character we could not dispense with pointing out the unlimited extent

of its natural powers of increase, and the causes owing to which so small a

portion of that unlimited power is for the most part actually exercised. After

this brief indication, we shall proceed to the other elements.

        35
               This has been disputed; but the highest estimate I have seen of the

term which population requires for doubling itself in the United States,

independently of immigrants and of their progeny — that of Mr. Carey —

does not exceed thirty years.

        36
               One of these theories, that of Mr. Doubleday, may be thought to

require a passing notice, because it has of late obtained some followers, andbecause it derives a semblance of support from the general analogies of

organic life. this theory maintains that the fecundity of the human animal, and

of all other living beings, is in inverse proportion to the quantity of nutriment;

that an underfed populations multiplies rapidly, but that all classes in

comfortable circumstances are, by a physiological law, so unprolific, as

seldom to keep up their numbers without being recruited from a poorer class.

There is no doubt that a positive excess of nutriment, in animals as well as in

fruit trees, is unfavourable to reproduction; and it is quite possible, though by

no means proved, that the physiological conditions of fecundity may exist in

the greatest degree when the supply of food is somewhat stinted. But any one

who might be inclined to draw from this, even if admitted, conclusions at

variance with the principles of Mr Malthus, needs only be invited to look

through a volume of the Peerage, and observe the enormous families, almost

universal in that class; or call to mind the large families of the English clergy,

and generally of the middle classes of England.

              It is, besides, well remarked by Mr Carey, that, to be consistent with

Mr Doubleday’s theory, the increase of the population of the United States,

apart from immigrants, ought to be one of the slowest on record.

              Mr Carey has a theory of his own, also grounded on a physiological

truth, that the total sum of nutriment received by an organized body directs

itself in largest proportion tothe parts of the system which are most used;

from which he anticipates a diminution in the fecundity of human beings, not

through more abundant feeding, but through the greater use of their brains

incidient to an advanced civilization. There is considerable plausibility in this

speculation, and experience may hereafter confirm it. But the change in the

human constitution which it supposes, if ever realized, will conduce to the

expected effect rather by rendering physical self-restraint easier, than by

dispensing with its necessity; since the most rapid know rate of multiplicaton

is quite compatible with a very sparing employment of the multiplying

power.

        37
               Mr Carey expatiates on the absurdity of supposing that matter

tends to assume the highest form of organization, the human, at a more rapid

rate than it assumes the lower forms, which compose human food; that

human beings multiply faster than turnips and cabbages. But the limit to the

increase of mankind, according to the doctrine of Mr Malthus, does not

depende on the power of increase of turnips and cabbages, but on the limitedquantity of the land on which they can be grown. So long as the quantity of

land is practically unlimited, which it is in the United States, and food,

consequently, can be increased at the highest rate which is natural to it,

mankind also may, without augmented difficulty in obtaining subsistence,

increase at their highest rate. When Mr Carey can show, not that turnips and

cabbages, but that the soil itself, or the nutritive elements containing in it,

tend naturally to multiply, and that too at a rate exceeding the most rapid

possible increase of mankind, he will have said something to the purpose. Till

then, this part at least of his argument may be considered as non-existent.

 

 

             Chapter 11 – Of the Law of the Increase of Capital

 

 

              1. The requisites of production being labour, capital, and land, it has

been seen from the preceding chapter that the impediments to the increase of

production do not arise from the first of these elements. On the side of labour

there is no obstacle to an increase of production, indefinite in extent and of

unslackening rapidity. Population has the power of increasing in an uniform

and rapid geometrical ratio. If the only essential condition of production were

labour, the produce might, and naturally would, increase in the same ratio;

and there would be no limit, until the numbers of mankind were brought to a

stand from actual want of space.

              But production has other requisites, and of these, the one which we

shall next consider is Capital. There cannot be more people in any country, or

in the world, than can be supported from the produce of past labour until that

of present labour comes in. There will be no greater number of productive

labourers in any country, or in the world, than can be supported from that

portion of the produce of past labour, which is spared from the enjoyments of

its possessor for purposes of reproduction, and is termed Capital. We have

next, therefore, to inquire into the conditions of the increase of capital: the

causes by which the rapidity of its increase is determined, and the necessary

limitations of that increase.

              Since all capital is the product of saving, that is, of abstinence from

present consumption for the sake of a future good, the increase of capital

must depend upon two things — the amount of the fund from which saving

can be made, and the strength of the dispositions which prompt to it.

              The fund from which saving can be made, is the surplus of the

produce of labour, after supplying the necessaries of life to all concerned in

the production: (including those employee in replacing the materials, and

keeping the fixed capital in repair.) More than this surplus cannot be saved

under any circumstances. As much as this, though it never is saved, always

might be. This surplus is the fund from which the enjoyments, as

distinguished from the necessaries, of the producers are provided; it is the

fund from which all are subsisted, who are not themselves engaged inproduction; and from which all additions are made to capital. It is the real net

produce of the country. The phrase, net produce, is often taken in a more

limited sense, to denote only the profits of the capitalist and the rent of the

landlord, under the idea that nothing can be included in the net produce of

capital, but what is returned to the owner of the capital after replacing his

expenses. But this is too narrow an acceptation of the term. The capital of the

employer forms the revenue of the labourers, and if this exceeds the

necessaries of life, it gives them a surplus which they may either expend in

enjoyments, or save. For every purpose for which there can be occasion to

speak of the net produce of industry, this surplus ought to be included in it.

When this is included, and not otherwise, the net produce of the country is

the measure of its effective power; of what it can spare for any purposes of

public utility, or private indulgence; the portion of its produce of which it can

dispose at pleasure; which can be drawn upon to attain any ends, or gratify

any wishes, either of the government or of individuals; which it can either

spend for its satisfaction, or save for future advantage.

              The amount of this fund, this net produce, this excess of production

above the physical necessaries of the producers, is one of the elements that

determine the amount of saving. The greater the produce of labour after

supporting the labourers, the more there is which can be saved. The same

thing also partly contributes to determine how much will be saved. A part of

the motive to saving consists in the prospect of deriving an income from

savings; in the fact that capital, employed in production, is capable of not

only reproducing itself but yielding an increase. The greater the profit that

can be made from capital, the stronger is the to its accumulation. That indeed

which forms the inducement to save, is not the whole of the fund which

supplies the means of saving, not the whole net produce of the land, capital,

and labour of the country, but only a part of it, the part which forms the

remuneration of the capitalist, and is called profit of stock. It will however be

readily enough understood, even previously to the explanations which will be

given hereafter, that when the general productiveness of labour and capital is

great, the returns to the capitalist are likely to be large, and that some

proportion, though not an uniform one, will commonly obtain between the

two.

              2. But the disposition to save does not wholly depend on the external

inducement to it; on the amount of profit to be made from savings. With thesame pecuniary inducement, the inclination is very different, in different

persons, and in different communities. The effective desire of accumulation is

of unequal strength, not only according to the. varieties of individual

character, but to the general state of society and civilization. Like all other

moral attributes, it is one in which the human race exhibits great differences,

conformably to the diversity of its circumstances and the stage of its progress.

              On topics which if they were to be fully investigated would exceed

the bounds that can be allotted to them in this treatise, it is satisfactory to be

able to refer to other works in which the necessary developments have been

presented more at length. On the subject of Population this valuable service

has been rendered by the celebrated Essay of Mr. Malthus; and on the point

which now occupies us I can refer with equal confidence to another, though a
                                                                                  37
less known work, “New Principles of Political Economy,” by Dr. Rae. In no

other book known to me is so much light thrown, both from principle and

history, on the causes which determine the accumulation of capital.

              All accumulation involves the sacrifice of a present, for the sake of a

future good. But the expediency of such a sacrifice varies very much in

different states of circumstances; and the willingness to make it, varies still

more.

              In weighing the future against the present, the uncertainty of all

things future is a leading element; and that uncertainty is of very different

degrees. “All circumstances” therefore, “increasing the probability of the

provision we make for futurity being enjoyed by ourselves or others, tend”

justly and reasonably “to give strength to the effective desire of

accumulation. Thus a healthy climate or occupation, by increasing the

probability of life, has a tendency to add to this desire. When engaged in safe

occupations, and living in healthy countries, men are much more apt to be

frugal, than in unhealthy or hazardous occupations, and in climates

pernicious to human life. Sailors and soldiers are prodigals. In the West

Indies, New Orleans, the East Indies, the expenditure of the inhabitants is

profuse. The same people, coming to reside in the healthy parts of Europe,

and not getting into the vortex of extravagant fashion, live economically. War

and pestilence have always waste and luxury among the other evils that

follow in their train. For similar reasons, whatever gives security to the affairs

of the community is favourable to the strength of this principle. In this

respect the general prevalence of law and order, and the prospect of thecontinuance of peace and tranquillity, have considerable influence.” * The

more perfect the security, the greater will be the effective strength of the

desire of accumulation. Where property is less safe, or the vicissitudes

ruinous to fortunes are more frequent and severe, fewer persons will save at

all, and of those who do, many will require the inducement of a higher rate of

profit on capital, to make them prefer a doubtful future to the temptation of

present enjoyment.

              These are considerations which affect the expediency, in the eye of

reason, of consulting future interests at the expense of present. But the

inclination to make the sacrifice does not solely depend upon its expediency.

The disposition to save is often far short of what reason would dictate: and at

other times is liable to be in excess of it.

              Deficient strength of the desire of accumulation may arise from

improvidence, or from want of interest in other. Improvidence may be

connected with intellectual as well as moral causes. individuals and

communities of a very low state of intelligence are always improvident. A

certain measure of intellectual development seems necessary to enable absent

things, and especially things future, to act with any force on the imagination

and will. The effect of want of interest in others in diminishing accumulation

will be admitted, if we considered how much saving at present takes place,

which has for its object the interest of others rather than of ourselves; the

education of children, their advancement in life, the future interests of other

personal connexions, the power of promoting, by the bestowal of money or

time, objects of public or private usefulness. If mankind were generally in the

state of mind to which some approach was seen in the declining period of the

Roman Empire — caring nothing for their heirs, as well as nothing for

friends, the public, or any object which survived them — they would seldom

deny themselves any indulgence for the sake of saving, beyond what was

necessary for their own future years; which they would place in life annuities,

or in some other form which would make its existence and their lives

terminate together.

              3. From these various causes, intellectual and moral, there is, in

different portions of the human race, a greater diversity than is usually

adverted to, in the strength of the effective desire of accumulation. A

backward state of general civilization is often more the effect of deficiency in

this particular, than in many others which attract more attention. In thecircumstances, for example, of a hunting tribe, “man may be said to be

necessarily improvident, and regardless of futurity, because, in this state, the

future presents nothing which can be with certainty either foreseen or

governed...... Besides a want of the motives exciting to provide for the needs

of futurity through means of the abilities of the present, there is a want of the

habits of perception and action, leading to a constant connexion in the mind

of those distant points, and of the series of events serving to unite them.

Even, therefore, if motives be awakened capable of producing the exertion

necessary to effect this connexion, there remains the task of training the mind

to think and act so as to establish it.”

              For instance: “Upon the banks of the St. Lawrence there are several

little Indian villages. They are surrounded, in general, by a good deal of land,

from which the wood seems to have been long extirpated, and have, besides,

attached to them, extensive tracts of forest. The cleared land is rarely, I may

almost say never, cultivated, nor are any inroads made in the forest for such a

purpose. The soil is, nevertheless, fertile, and were it not, manure lies in

heaps by their houses. Were every family to inclose half an acre of ground,

till it, and plant it in potatoes and maize, it would yield a sufficiency to

support them one half the year. They suffer, too, every now and then, extreme

want, insomuch that, joined to occasional intemperance, it is rapidly reducing

their numbers. This, to us, so strange apathy proceeds not, in any great

degree, from repugnance to labour; on the contrary, they apply very diligently

to it when its reward is immediate. Thus, besides their peculiar occupations

of hunting and fishing, in which they are ever ready to engage, they are much

employed in the navigation of the St. Lawrence, and may be seen labouring at

the oar, or setting with the pole, in the large boats used for the purpose, and

always furnish the greater part of the additional hands necessary to conduct

rafts through some of the rapids. Nor is the obstacle aversion to agricultural

labour. This is no doubt a prejudice of theirs; but mere prejudices always

yield, principles of action cannot be created. When the returns from

agricultural labour are speedy and great, they are also agriculturists. Thus,

some of the little islands on Lake St. Francis, near the Indian village of St.

Regis, are favourable to the growth of maize, a plant yielding a return of a

hundredfold, and forming, even when half ripe, a pleasant and substantial

repast. Patches of the best land on these islands are therefore every year

cultivated by them for this purpose. As their situation renders them

inaccessible to cattle, no fence is required; were this additional outlaynecessary, I suspect they would be neglected, like the commons adjoining

their village. These had apparently, at one time, been under crop. The cattle

of the neighbouring settlers would now, however, destroy any crop not

securely fenced, and this additional necessary outlay consequently bars their

culture. It removes them to an order of instruments of slower return than that

which corresponds to the strength of the effective desire of accumulation in

this little society.

              “It is here deserving of notice, that what instruments of this kind

they do form, are completely formed. The small spots of corn they cultivate

are thoroughly weeded and hoed. A little neglect in this part would indeed

reduce the crop very much; of this experience has made them perfectly

aware, and they act accordingly. It is evidently not the necessary labour that

is the obstacle to more extended culture, but the distant return from that

labour. I am assured, indeed, that among some of the more remote tribes, the

labour thus expended much exceeds that given by the whites. The same

portions of ground being cropped without remission, and manure not being

used, they would scarcely yield any return, were not the soil most carefully

broken and pulverized, both with the hoe and the hand. In such a situation a

white man would clear a fresh piece of ground. It would perhaps scarce repay

his labour the first year, and he would have to look for his reward in

succeeding years. On the Indian, succeeding years are too distant to make

sufficient impression; though, to obtain what labour may bring about in the

course of a few months, he toils even more assiduously than the white man.”*

              This view of things is confirmed by the experience of the Jesuits, in

their interesting efforts to civilize the Indians of Paraguay. They gained the

confidence of these savages in a most extraordinary degree. They acquired

influence over them sufficient to make them change their whole manner of

life. They obtained their absolute submission and obedience. They

established peace. They taught them all the operations of European

agriculture, and many of the more difficult arts. There were everywhere to be

seen, according to Charlevoix, “workshops of gilders, painters, sculptors,

goldsmiths, watchmakers, carpenters, joiners, dyers,” * &c. These

occupations were not practised for the personal gain of the artificers: the

produce was at the absolute disposal of the missionaries, who ruled the

people by a voluntary despotism. The obstacles arising from aversion to

labour were therefore very completely overcome. The real difficulty was theimprovidence of the people; their inability to think for the future: and the

necessity accordingly of the most unremitting and minute superintendence on

the part of their instructors. “Thus at first, if these gave up to them the care of

the oxen with which they ploughed, their indolent thoughtlessness would

probably leave them at evening still yoked to the implement. Worse than this,

instances occurred where they cut them up for supper, thinking, when

reprehended, that they sufficiently excused themselves by saying they were

hungry.... These fathers, says Ulloa, have to visit the houses, to examine what

is really wanted: for without this care, the Indians would never look after

anything. They must be present, too, when animals are slaughtered, not only

that the meat may be equally divided, but that nothing may be lost.” “But

notwithstanding all this care and superintendence,” says Charlevoix, “and all

the precautions which are taken to prevent any want of the necessaries of life,

the missionaries are sometimes much embarrassed. It often happens that

they” (the Indians,) “do not reserve to themselves a sufficiency of grain, even

for seed. As for their other provisions, were they not well looked after, they

would soon be without wherewithal to support life.”*

              As an example intermediate, in the strength of the effective desire of

accumulation, between the state of things thus depicted and that of modern

Europe, the case of the Chinese deserves attention. From various

circumstances in their personal habits and social condition, it might be

anticipated that they would possess a degree of prudence and self-control

greater than other Asiatics, but inferior to most European nations. and the

following evidence is adduced of the fact.

              “Durability is one of the chief qualities, marking a high degree of the

effective desire of accumulation. The testimony of travellers ascribes to the

instruments formed by the Chinese, a very inferior durability to similar

instruments constructed by Europeans. The houses, we are told, unless of the

higher ranks, are in general of unburnt bricks, of clay, or of hurdles plastered

with earth; the roofs, of reeds fastened to laths. We can scarcely conceive

more unsubstantial or temporary fabrics. Their partitions are of paper,

requiring to be renewed every year. A similar observation may be made

concerning their implements of husbandry, and other utensils. They are

almost entirely of wood, the metals entering but very sparingly into their

construction; consequently they soon wear out, and require frequent

renewals. A greater degree of strength in the effective desire of accumulation,would cause them to be constructed of materials requiring a greater present

expenditure but being far more durable. From the same cause, much land,

that in other countries would be cultivated, lies waste. All travellers take

notice of large tracts of lands, chiefly swamps, which continue in a state of

nature. To bring a swamp into tillage is generally a process, to complete

which, requires several years. It must be previously drained, the surface long

exposed to the sun, and many operations performed, before it can be made

capable of bearing a crop. Though yielding, probably, a very considerable

return for the labour bestowed on it, that return is not made until a long time

has elapsed. The cultivation of such land implies a greater strength of the

effective desire of accumulation than exists in the empire.

              “The produce of the harvest is, as we have remarked, always an

instrument of some order or another; it is a provision for future want, and

regulated by the same laws as those to which other means of attaining a

similar end conform. It is there chiefly rice, of which there are two harvests,

the one in June, the other in October. The period then of eight months

between October and June, is that for which provision is made each year, and

the different estimate they make of today and this day eight months will

appear in the self-denial they practise now, in order to guard against want

then. The amount of this self-denial would seem to be small. The father

Parennin, indeed, (who seems to have been one of the most intelligent of the

Jesuits, and spent a long life among the Chinese of all classes,) asserts, that it

is their great deficiency in forethought and frugality in this respect, which is

the cause of the scarcities and famines that frequently occur.”

              That it is defect of providence, not defect of industry, that limits

production among the Chinese, is still more obvious than in the case of the

semi-agriculturized Indians. “Where the returns are quick, where the

instruments formed require but little time to bring the events for which they

were formed to an issue,” it is well known that “the great progress which has

been made in the knowledge of the arts suited to the nature of the country and

the wants of its inhabitants” makes industry energetic and effective. “The

warmth of the climate, the natural fertility of the country, the knowledge

which the inhabitants have acquired of the arts of agriculture, and the

discovery and gradual adaptation to every soil of the most useful vegetable

productions, enable them very speedily to draw from almost any part of the

surface, what is there esteemed an equivalent to much more than the labourbestowed in tilling and cropping it. They have commonly double, sometimes

treble harvests. These, when they consist of a Cain so productive as rice, the

usual crop, can scarce fail to yield to their skill, from almost any portion of

soil that can be at once brought into culture, very ample returns. Accordingly

there is no spot that labour can immediately bring under cultivation that is not

made to yield to it. Hills, even mountains, are ascended and formed into

terraces; and water, in that country the great productive agent, is led to every

part by drains, or carried up to it by the ingenious and simple hydraulic

machines which have been in use from time immemorial among this singular

people. They effect this the more easily, from the soil, even in these

situations, being very deep and covered with much vegetable mould. But

what yet more this marks the readiness with which labour is forced to form

the most difficult materials into instruments, where these instruments soon

bring to an issue the events for which they are formed, is the frequent

occurrence on many of their lakes and rivers, of structures resembling the

floating gardens of the Peruvians, rafts covered with vegetable soil and

cultivated. Labour in this way draws from the materials on which it acts very

speedy returns. Nothing can exceed the luxuriance of vegetation when the

quickening powers of a genial sun are ministered to by a rich soil and

abundant moisture. It is otherwise, as we have seen, in cases where the return,

though copious, is distant. European travellers are surprised at meeting these

little floating farms by the side of swamps which only require draining to

render them tillable. It seems to them strange that labour should not rather be

bestowed on the solid earth, where its fruits might endure, than on structures

that must decay and perish in a few years. The people they are among think

not so much of future years as of the present time. The effective desire of

accumulation is of very different strength in the one, from what it is in the

other. The views of the European extend to a distant futurity, and he is

surprised at the Chinese, condemned through improvidence, and want of

sufficient prospective care, to incessant toil, and as he thinks, insufferable

wretchedness. The views of the Chinese are confined to narrower bounds; he

is content to live from day to day, and has learnt to conceive even a life of

toil a blessing.”*

              When a country has carried production as far as in the existing state

of knowledge it can be carried with an amount of return corresponding to the

average strength of the effective desire of accumulation in that country, it has

reached what is called the stationary state; the state in which no furtheraddition will be made to capital, unless there takes place either some

improvement in the arts of production, or an increase in the strength of the

desire to accumulate. In the stationary state, though capital does not on the

whole increase, some persons grow richer and others poorer. Those whose

degree of providence is below the usual standard, become impoverished, their

capital perishes, and makes room for the savings of those whose effective

desire of accumulation exceeds the average. These become the of the lands,

manufactories, and other instruments of production owned by their less

provident countrymen.

              What the causes are which make the return to capital greater in one

country than in another, and which, in certain circumstances, make it

impossible for any additional capital to find investment unless at diminished

returns, will appear clearly hereafter. In China, if that count has really

attained, as it is supposed to have done, the stationary state, accumulation has

stopped when the returns to capital are still as high as is indicated by a rate of

interest legally twelve per cent, and practically varying (it is said) between

eighteen and thirty-six. It is to be presumed therefore that no greater amount

of capital than the country already possesses, can find employment at this

high rate of profit, and that any lower rate does not hold out to a Chinese

sufficient temptation to induce him to abstain from present enjoyment. What

a contrast with Holland, where, during the most flourishing period of its

history, the government was able habitually to borrow at two per cent, and

private individuals, on good security, at three. Since China is not a country

like Burma or the native states of India, where an enormous interest is but an

indispensable compensation for the risk incurred from the bad faith or

poverty of the state, and of almost all private borrowers; the fact, if fact it be,

that the increase of capital has come to a stand while the returns to it are still

so large, denotes a much less degree of the effective desire of accumulation,

in other words a much lower estimate of the future relatively to the present,

than that of most European nations.

              4. We have hitherto spoken of countries in which the average

strength of the desire to accumulate is short of that which, in circumstances

of any tolerable security, reason and sober calculation would approve. We

have now to speak of others in which it decidedly surpasses that standard. In

the more prosperous countries of Europe, there are to be found abundance of

prodigals; in some of them (and in none more than England) the ordinarydegree of economy and providence among those who live by manual labour

cannot be considered high: still, in a very numerous portion of the

community, the professional, manufacturing, and trading classes, being those

who, generally speaking, unite more of the means with more of the motives

for saving than any other class, the spirit of accumulation is so strong, that

the signs of rapidly increasing wealth meet every eye: and the great amount

of capital seeking investment excites astonishment, whenever peculiar

circumstances turning much of it into some one channel, such as railway

construction or foreign speculative adventure, bring the largeness of the total

amount into evidence.

              There are many circumstances, which, in England, give a peculiar

force to the accumulating propensity. The long exemption of the country

from the ravages of war, and the far earlier period than elsewhere at which

property was secure from military violence or arbitrary spoliation, have

produced a long-standing and hereditary confidence in the safety of funds

when trusted out of the owner’s hands, which in most other countries is of

much more recent origin, and less firmly established. The geographical

causes which have made industry rather than war the natural source of power

and importance to Great Britain, have turned an unusual proportion of the

most enterprising and energetic characters into the direction of manufactures

and commerce; into supplying their wants and gratifying their ambition by

producing and saving, rather than by appropriating what has been produced

and saved. Much also depended on the better political institutions of this

country, which by the scope they have allowed to individual freedom of

action, have encouraged personal activity and self-reliance, while by the

liberty they confer of association and combination, they facilitate industrial

enterprise on a large scale. The same institutions in another of their aspects,

give a most direct and potent stimulus to the desire of acquiring wealth. The

earlier decline of feudalism having removed or much weakened invidious

distinctions between the originally trading classes and those who had been

accustomed to despise them; and a polity having grown up which made

wealth the real source of political influence; its acquisition was invested with

a factitious value, independent of its intrinsic utility. It became synonymous

with power; and since power with the common herd of mankind gives power,

wealth became the chief source of personal consideration, and the measure

and stamp of success in life. To get out of one rank in society into the next

above it, is the great aim of English middle-class life, and the acquisition ofwealth the means. And inasmuch as to be rich without industry, has always

hitherto constituted a step in the social scale above those who are rich by

means of industry, it becomes the object of ambition to save not merely as

much as will afford a large income while in business, but enough to retire

from business and live in affluence on realized gains. These causes have, in

England, been greatly aided by that extreme incapacity of the people for

personal enjoyment, which is a characteristic of countries over which

puritanism has passed. But if accumulation is, on one hand, rendered easier

by the absence of a taste for pleasure, it is, on the other, made more difficult

by the presence of a very real taste for expense. So strong is the association

between personal consequence and the signs of wealth, that the silly desire

for the appearance of a large expenditure has the force of a passion, among

large classes of a nation which derives less pleasure than perhaps any other in

the world from what it spends. Owing to this circumstance, the effective

desire of accumulation has never reached so high a pitch in England as it did

in Holland, where, there being no rich idle class to set the example of a

reckless expenditure, and the mercantile classes, who possessed the

substantial power on which social influence always waits, being left to

establish their own scale of living and standard of propriety, their habits

remained frugal and unostentatious.

              In England and Holland, then, for a long time past, and now in most

other countries in Europe (which are rapidly following England in the same

race), the desire of accumulation does not require, to make it effective, the

copious returns which it requires in Asia, but is sufficiently called into action

by a rate of profit so low, that instead of slackening, accumulation seems now

to proceed more rapidly than ever. and the second requisite of increased

production, increase of capital, shows no tendency to become deficient. So

far as that element is concerned, production is susceptible of an increase

without any assignable bounds.

              The progress of accumulation would no doubt be considerably

checked, if the returns to capital were to be reduced still lower than at

present. But why should any possible increase of capital have that effect?

This question carries the mind forward to the remaining one of the three

requisites of production. The limitation to production, not consisting in any

necessary limit to the increase of the other two elements, labour and capital,

must turn upon the properties of the only element which is inherently, and initself, limited in quantity. It must depend on the properties of land.

        38
               This treatise is an example, such as not unfrequently presents

itself, how much more depends on accident, than on the qualities of a book,

in determining its reception. Had it appeared at a suitable time, and been

favoured by circumstances, it would have had every requisite for great

success. The author, a Scotchman settled in the United States, unites much

knowledge, an original vein of thought, a considerable turn for philosophic

generalities, and a manner of exposition and illustration calculated to make

ideas tell not only for what they are worth, but for more than they are worth,

and which sometimes, I think, has that effect in the writer’s own mind. The

principal fault of the book is the position of antagonism in which, with the

controversial spirit apt to be found in those who have new thoughts on old

subjects, he has placed himself towards Adam Smith. I call this a fault,

(though I think many of the criticisms just, and some of them far-seeing,)

because there is much less real difference of opinion than might be supposed

from Dr Rae’s animadversions and because what he has found vulnerable in

his great predecessor is chiefly the “human too much” in his premises; the

portion of them that is over and above what was either required or is actually

used for the establishment of his conclusions.

 

 

   Chapter 12 – Of the Law of the Increase of Production from Land

 

 

              1. Land differs from the other elements of production, labour and

capital, in not being susceptible of indefinite increase. Its extent is limited,

and the extent of the more productive kinds of it more limited still. It is also

evident that the quantity of produce capable of being raised on any given

piece of land is not indefinite. This limited quantity of land, and limited

productiveness of it, are the real limits to the increase of production.

              That they are the ultimate limits, must always have been clearly

seen. But since the final barrier has never in any instance been reached; since

there is no country in which all the land, capable of yielding food, is so

highly cultivated that a larger produce could not (even without supposing any

fresh advance in agricultural knowledge) be obtained from it, and since a

large portion of the earth’s surface still remains entirely uncultivated; it is

commonly thought, and is very natural at first to suppose, that for the present

all limitation of production or population from this source is at an indefinite

distance, and that ages must elapse before any practical necessity arises for

taking the limiting principle into serious consideration.

              I apprehend this to be not only an error, but the most serious one, to

be found in the whole field of political economy. The question is more

important and fundamental than any other; it involves the whole subject of

the causes of poverty, in a rich and industrious community: and unless this

one matter be thoroughly understood, it is to no purpose proceeding any

further in our inquiry.

              2. The limitation to production from the properties of the soil, is not

like the obstacle opposed by a wall, which stands immovable in one

particular spot, and offers no hindrance to motion short of stopping it

entirely. We may rather compare it to a highly elastic and extensible band,

which is hardy ever so violently stretched that it could not possibly be

stretched any more, yet the pressure of which is felt long before the final limit

is reached, and felt more severely the nearer that limit is approached.

              After a certain, and not very advanced, stage in the progress of

agriculture, it is the law of production from the land, that in any given state ofagricultural skill and knowledge, by increasing the labour, the produce is not

increased in an equal degree; doubling the labour does not double the

produce; or, to express the same thing in other words, every increase of

produce is obtained by a more than proportional increase in the application of

labour to the land.

              This general law of agricultural industry is the most important

proposition in political economy. Were the law different, nearly all the

phenomena of the production and distribution of wealth would be other than

they are. The most fundamental errors which still prevail on our subject,

result from not perceiving this law at work underneath the more superficial

agencies on which attention fixes itself; but mistaking those agencies for the

ultimate causes of effects of which they may influence the form and mode,

but of which it alone determines the essence.

              When, for the purpose of raising an increase of produce, recourse is

had to inferior land, it is evident that, so far, the produce does not increase in

the same proportion with the labour. The very meaning of inferior land, is

land which with equal labour returns a smaller amount of produce. Land may

be inferior either in fertility or in situation. The one requires a greater

proportional amount of labour for growing the produce, the other for carrying

it to market. If the land A yields a thousand quarters of wheat, to a given

outlay in wages, manure, &c., and in order to raise another thousand recourse

must be had to the land B, which is either less fertile or more distant from the

market, the two thousand quarters will cost more than twice as much labour

as the original thousand, and the produce of agriculture will be increased in a

less ratio than the labour employed in procuring it.

              Instead of cultivating the land B, it would be possible, by higher

cultivation, to make the land A produce more. It might be ploughed or

harrowed twice instead of once, or three times instead of twice; it might be

dug instead of being ploughed; after ploughing, it might be gone over with a

hoe instead of a harrow, and the soil more completely pulverized; it might be

oftener or more thoroughly weeded; the implements used might be of higher

finish, or more elaborate construction; a greater quantity or more expensive

kinds of manure might be applied, or when applied, they might be more

carefully mixed and incorporated with the soil. These are some of the modes

by which the same land may be made to yield a greater produce; and when a

greater produce must be had, some of these are among the means usuallyemployed for obtaining it. But, that it is obtained at a more than proportional

increase of expense, is evident from the fact that inferior lands are cultivated.

Inferior lands, or lands at a greater distance from the market, of course yield

an inferior return, and an increasing demand cannot be supplied from them

unless at an augmentation of cost, and therefore of price. If the additional

demand could continue to be supplied from the superior lands, by applying

additional labour and capital, at no greater proportional cost than that at

which they yield the quantity first demanded of them, the owners or farmers

of those lands could undersell all others, and engross the whole market.

Lands of a lower degree of fertility or in a more remote situation, might

indeed be cultivated by their proprietors, for the sake of subsistence or

independence; but it never could be the interest of any one to farm them for

profit. That a profit can be made from them, sufficient to attract capital to

such an investment, is a proof that cultivation on the more eligible lands has

reached a point, beyond which any greater application of labour and capital

would yield, at the best, no greater return than can be obtained at the same

expense from less fertile or less favourably situated lands.

              The careful cultivation of a well-farmed district of England or

Scotland is a symptom and an effect of the more unfavourable terms which

the land has begun to exact for any increase of its fruits. Such elaborate

cultivation costs much more in proportion, and requires a higher price to

render it profitable, than farming on a more superficial system; and would not

be adopted if access could be had to land of equal fertility, previously

unoccupied. Where there is the choice of raising the increasing supply which

society requires, from fresh land of as good quality as that already cultivated,

no attempt is made to extract from land anything approaching to what it will

yield on what are esteemed the best European modes of cultivating. The land

is tasked up to the point at which the greatest return is obtained in proportion

to the labour employed, but no further: any additional labour is carried
                                                                                    38
elsewhere. “It is long,” says an intelligent traveller in the United States,

“before an English eye becomes reconciled to the lightness of the crops and

the careless farming (as we should call it) which is apparent. One forgets that

where land is so plentiful and labour so dear as it is here, a totally different

principle must be pursued to that which prevails in populous countries, and

that the consequence will of course be a want of tidiness, as it were, and

finish, about everything which requires labour.” Of the two causes

mentioned, the plentifulness of land seems to me the true explanation, ratherthan the dearness of labour; for, however dear labour may be, when food is

wanted, labour will always be applied to producing it in preference to

anything else. But this labour is more effective for its end by being applied to

fresh soil, than if it were employed in bringing the soil already occupied into

higher cultivation. Only when no soils remain to be broken up but such as

either from distance or inferior quality require a considerable rise of price to

render their cultivation profitable, can it become advantageous to apply the

high farming of Europe to any American lands; except, perhaps, in the

immediate vicinity of towns, where saving in cost of carriage may

compensate for great inferiority in the return from the soil itself. As

American farming is to English, so is the ordinary English to that of Flanders,

Tuscany, or the Terra di Lavoro; where by the application of a far greater

quantity of labour there is obtained a considerably larger gross produce, but

on such terms as would never be advantageous to a mere speculator for

profit, unless made so by much higher prices of agricultural produce.

              The principle which has now been stated must be received, no doubt,

with certain explanations and limitations. Even after the land is so highly

cultivated that the mere application of additional labour, or of an additional

amount of ordinary dressing, would yield no return proportioned to the

expense, it may still happen that the application of a much greater additional

labour and capital to improving the soil itself, by draining or permanent

manures, would be as liberally remunerated by the produce, as any portion of

the labour and capital already employed. It would sometimes be much more

amply remunerated. This could not be, if capital always sought and found the

most advantageous employment; but if the most advantageous employment

has to wait longest for its remuneration, it is only in a rather advanced stage

of industrial development that the preference will be given to it; and even in

that advanced stage, the laws or usages connected with property in land and

the tenure of farms, are often such as to prevent the disposable capital of the

country from flowing freely into the channel of agricultural improvement:

and hence the increased supply, required by increasing population, is

sometimes raised at an augmenting cost by higher cultivation, when the

means of producing it without increase of cost are known and accessible.

There can be no doubt, that if capital were forthcoming to execute, within the

next year, all known and recognised improvements in the land of the United

Kingdom which would pay at the existing prices, that is, which would

increase the produce in as great or a greater ratio than the expense; the resultwould be such (especially if we include Ireland in the supposition) that

inferior land would not for a long time require to be brought under tillage:

probably a considerable part of the less productive lands now cultivated,

which are not particularly favoured by situation, would go out of culture; or

(as the improvements in question are not so much applicable to good land,

but operate rather by converting bad land into good) the contraction of

cultivation might principally take place by a less high dressing and less

elaborate tilling of land generally; a falling back to something nearer the

character of American farming; such only of the poor lands being altogether

abandoned as were not found susceptible of improvement. And thus the

aggregate produce of the whole cultivated land would bear a larger

proportion than before to the labour expended on it; and the general law of

diminishing return from land would have undergone, to that extent, a

temporary supersession. No one, however, can suppose that even in these

circumstances, the whole produce required for the country could be raised

exclusively from the best lands, together with those possessing advantages of

situation to place them on a par with the best. Much would undoubtedly

continue to be produced under less advantageous conditions, and with a

smaller proportional return, than that obtained from the best soils and

situations. And in proportion as the further increase of population required a

still greater addition to the supply, the general law would resume its course,

and the further augmentation would be obtained at a more than proportionate

expense of labour and capital.

              3. That the produce of land increases, caeteris paribus, in a

diminishing ratio to the increase in the labour employed, is a truth more often

ignored or disregarded than actually denied. It has, however, met with a

direct impugner in the well-known American political economist, Mr. H.C.

Carey, who maintains that the real law of agricultural industry is the very

reverse; the produce increasing in a greater ratio than the labour, or in other

words affording to labour a perpetually increasing return. To substantiate this

assertion, he argues that cultivation does not begin with the better soils, and

extend from them, as the demand increases, to the poorer, but begins with the

poorer, and does not, till long after, extend itself to the more fertile. Settlers

in a new country invariably commence on the high and thin lands; the rich

but swampy soils of the river bottoms cannot at first be brought into

cultivation, by reason of their unhealthiness, and of the great and prolonged

labour required for clearing and draining them. As population and wealthincrease, cultivation travels down the hill sides, clearing them as it goes, and

the most fertile soils, those of the low grounds, are generally (he even says

universally) the latest cultivated. These propositions, with the inferences

which Mr. Carey draws from them, are set forth at much length in his latest

and most elaborate treatise, “Principles of Social Science;” and he considers

them as subverting the very foundation of what he calls the English political

economy, with all its practical consequences, especially the doctrine of free

trade.

              As far as words go, Mr. Carey has a good case against several of the

highest authorities in political economy, who certainly did enunciate in too

universal a manner the law which they laid down, not remarking that it is not

true of the first cultivation in a newly settled country. Where population is

thin and capital scanty, land which requires a large outlay to render it fit for

tillage must remain untilled; though such lands, when their time has come,

often yield a greater produce than those earlier cultivated, not only

absolutely, but proportionally to the labour employed, even if we include that

which had been expended in originally fitting them for culture. But it is not

pretended that the law of diminishing return waS operative from the very

beginning of society: and though some political economists may have

believed it to come into operation earlier than it does, it begins quite early

enough to support the conclusions they founded on it. Mr. Carey will hardly

assert that in any old country — in England or France, for example — the

lands left waste are, or have for centuries been, more naturally fertile than

those under tillage. Judging even by his own imperfect test, that of local

situation — how imperfect I need not stop to point out — is it true that in

England or France at the present day the uncultivated part of the soil consists

of the plains and valleys, and the cultivated, of the hills? Every one knows,

on the contrary, that it is the high lands and thin soils which are left to nature,

and when the progress of population demands an increase of cultivation, the

extension is from the plains to the hills. Once in a century, perhaps, a Bedford

Level may be drained, or a Lake of Harlem pumped out: but these are slight

and transient exceptions to the normal progress of things; and in old countries

which are at all advanced in civilization, little of this sort remains to be
    39
done.

              Mr. Carey himself unconsciously bears the strongest testimony to

the reality of the law he contends against: for one of the propositions moststrenuously maintained by him is, that the raw products of the soil, in an

advancing community, steadily tend to rise in price. Now, the most

elementary truths of political economy show that this could not happen,

unless the cost of production, measured in labour, of those products, tended

to rise. If the application of additional labour to the land was, as a general

rule, attended with an increase in the proportional return, the price of

produce, instead of rising, must necessity fall as society advances, unless the

cost of production of gold and silver fell still more: a case so rare, that there

are only two periods in all history when it is known to have taken place; the

one, that which followed the opening of the Mexican and Peruvian mines; the

other, that in which we now live. At all known periods, except these two, the

cost of production of the precious metals has been either stationary or rising.

If, therefore, it be true that the tendency of agricultural produce is to rise in

money price as wealth and population increase, there needs no other evidence

that the labour required for rising it from the soil tends to augment when a

greater quantity is demanded.

              I do not go so far as Mr. Carey: I do not assert that the cost of

production, and consequently the price, of agricultural produce, always and

necessity rises as population increases. It tends to do so; but the tendency

may be, and sometimes is, even during long periods, held in check. The effect

does not depend on a single principle, but on two antagonizing principles.

There is another agency, in habitual antagonism to the law of diminishing

return from land; and to the consideration of this we shall now proceed. It is

no other than the progress of civilization. I use this general and somewhat

vague expression, because the things to be included are so various, that

hardly any term of a more restricted signification would comprehend them

all.

              Of these, the most obvious is the progress of agricultural knowledge,

skill, and invention. Improved processes of agriculture are of two kinds: some

enable the land to yield a greater absolute produce, without an equivalent

increase of labour; others have not the power of increasing the produce, but

have that of diminishing the labour and expense by which it is obtained.

Among the first are to be reckoned the disuse of fallows, by means of the

rotation of crops; and the introduction of new articles of cultivation capable

of entering advantageously into the rotation. The change made in British

agriculture towards the close of the last century, by the introduction of turniphusbandry, is spoken of as amounting to a revolution. These improvements

operate not only by enabling the land to produce a crop every year, instead of

remaining idle one year in every two or three to renovate its powers, but also

by direct increase of its productiveness; since the great addition made to the

number of cattle by the increase of their food, affords more abundant manure

to fertilize the corn lands. Next in order comes the introduction of new

articles of food, containing a greater amount of sustenance, like the potato, or

more productive species or varieties of the same plant, such as the Swedish

turnip. In the same class of improvements must be placed a better knowledge

of the properties of manures, and of the most effectual modes of applying

them; the introduction of new and more powerful fertilizing agents, such as

guano, and the conversion to the same purpose, of substances previously

wasted; inventions like subsoil-ploughing or tile-draining; improvements in

the bree or feeding of labouring cattle; augmented stock or the animals which

consume and convert into human food what would otherwise be wasted; and

the like. The other sorts of improvements, those which diminish labour, but

without increasing the capacity of the land to produce, are such as the

improved construction of tools; the introduction of new instruments which

spare manual labour, as the winnowing and threshing machines; a more

skilful and economical application of muscular exertion, such as the

introduction, so slowly accomplished in England, of Scotch ploughing, with

two horses abreast and one man, instead of three or four horses in a team and

two men, &c. These improvements do not add to the productiveness of the

land, but they are equally calculated with the former to counteract the

tendency in the cost of production of agricultural produce, to rise with the

progress of population and demand.

              Analogous in effect to this second class of agricultural

improvements, are improved means of communication. Good roads are

equivalent to good tools. It is of no consequence whether the economy of

labour takes place in extracting the produce from the soil, or in conveying it

to the place where it is to be consumed. Not to say in addition, that the labour

of cultivation itself is diminished by whatever lessens the cost of bringing

manure from a distance, or facilitates the many operations of transport from

place to place which occur within the bounds of the farm. Railways and

canals are virtually a diminution of the cost of production of all things sent to

market by them; and literally so of all those, the appliances and aids for

producing which, they serve to transmit. By their means land can becultivated, which could not otherwise have remunerated the cultivators

without a rise of price. improvements in navigation have, with respect to food

or materials brought from beyond sea, a corresponding effect.

              From similar considerations, it appears that many purely mechanical

improvements, which have, apparently at least, no peculiar connexion with

agriculture, nevertheless enable a given amount of food to be obtained with a

smaller expenditure of labour. A great improvement in the process of

smelting iron, would tend to cheapen agricultural implements, diminish the

cost of railroads, of waggons and carts, ships, and perhaps buildings, and

many other things to which iron is not at present applied, because it is, too

costly. and would thence diminish the cost of production of food. The same

effect would follow from an improvement in those processes of what may be

termed manufacture, to which the material of food is subjected after it is

separated from the ground. The first application of wind or water power to

grind corn, tended to cheapen bread as much as a very important discovery in

agriculture would have done; and any great improvement in the construction

of corn-mills, would have, in proportion, a similar influence. The effects of

cheapening locomotion have been already considered. There are also

engineering inventions which facilitate all great operations on the earth’s

surface. An improvement in the art of taking levels is of importance to

draining, not to mention canal and railway making. The fens of Holland, and

of some parts of England, are drained by pumps worked by the wind or by

steam. Where canals of irrigation, or where tanks or embankments are

necessary, mechanical skill is a great resource for cheapening production.

              Those manufacturing improvements which cannot be made

instrumental to facilitate, in any of its stages, the actual production of food,

and therefore do not help to counteract or retard the diminution of the

proportional return to labour from the soil, have, however, another effect,

which is practically equivalent. What they do not prevent, they yet, in some

degree, compensate for.

              The materials of manufacture being all drawn from the land, and

many of them from agriculture, which supplies in particular the entire

material of clothing; the general law of production from the land, the law of

diminishing return, must in the last resort be applicable to manufacturing as

well as to agricultural history. As population increases, and the power of the

land to yield increased produce is strained harder and harder, any additionalsupply of material, as well as of food, must be obtained by a more than

proportionally increasing expenditure of labour. But the cost of the material

forming generally a very small portion of the entire cost of the manufacture,

the agricultural labour concerned in the production of manufactured goods is

but a small fraction of the whole labour worked up in the commodity. All the

rest of the labour tends constantly and strongly towards diminution, as the

amount of production increases. Manufactures are vastly more susceptible

than agriculture, of mechanical improvements, and contrivances for saving

labour; and it has already been seen how greatly the skilful and economical

distribution, depend on the extent of the market, and on the possibility of

production in large masses. In manufactures, accordingly, the causes tending

to increase the productiveness of industry, preponderate greatly over the one

cause which tends to diminish it: and the increase of production, called forth

by the progress of society, takes place, not at an increasing, but at a

continually diminishing proportional cost. This fact has manifested itself in

the progressive fall of the prices and values of almost every kind of

manufactured goods during two centuries past; a fall accelerated by the

mechanical inventions of the last seventy or eighty years, and susceptible of

being prolonged and extended beyond any limit which it would be safe to

specify.

              Now it is quite conceivable that the efficiency of agricultural labour

might be undergoing, with the increase of produce, a gradual diminution; that

the price of food, in consequence, might be progressively rising, and an ever

growing proportion of the population might be needed to raise food for the

whole; while yet the productive power of labour in all other branches of

industry might be so rapidly augmenting, that the required amount of labour

could be spared from manufactures, and nevertheless a greater produce be

obtained, and the aggregate wants of the community be on the whole better

supplied, than before. The benefit might even extend to the poorest class. The

increased cheapness of clothing and lodging might make up to them for the

augmented cost of their food.

              There is, thus, no possible improvement in the arts of production

which does not in one or another mode exercise an antagonist influence to the

law of diminishing return to agricultural labour. Nor is it only industrial

improvements which have this effect. Improvements in government, and

almost every kind of moral and social advancement, operate in the samemanner. Suppose a country in the condition of France before the Revolution:

taxation imposed almost exclusively on the industrial classes, and on such a

principle as to be an actual penalty on production; and no redress obtainable

for any injury to property or person, when inflicted by people of rank, or

court influence. Was not the hurricane which swept away this system of

things, even if we look no further than to its effect in augmenting the

productiveness of labour, equivalent to many industrial inventions? The

removal of a fiscal burthen on agriculture, such as,. tithe, has the same effect

as if the labour necessary for obtaining the existing produce were suddenly

reduced one-tenth. The abolition of corn laws, or of any other restrictions

which prevent commodities from being produced where the cost of their

production is lowest, amounts to a vast improvement in production. When

fertile land, previously reserved as hunting ground, or for any other purpose

of amusement, is set free for culture, the aggregate productiveness of

agricultural industry is increased. It is well known what has been the effect in

England of badly administered poor laws, and the still worse effect in Ireland

of a bad system of tenancy, in rendering agricultural labour slack and

ineffective. No improvements operate more directly upon the productiveness

of labour, than those in the tenure of farms, and in the laws relating to landed

property. The breaking up of entails, the cheapening of the transfer of

property, and whatever else promotes the natural tendency of land in a system

of freedom, to pass out of hands which can make little of it into those which

can make more; the substitution of long leases for tenancy at will, and of any

tolerable system of tenancy whatever for the wretched cottier system; above

all, the acquisition of a permanent interest in the soil by the cultivators of it;

all these things are as real, and some of them as great, improvements in

production, as the invention of the spinning jenny or the steam-engine.

              We may say the same of improvements in education. The

intelligence of the workman is a most important element in the

productiveness of labour. So low, in some of the most civilized countries, is

the present standard of intelligence, that there is hardly any source from

which a more indefinite amount of improvement may be looked for in

productive power, than by endowing with brains those who now have only

hands. The carefulness, economy, and general trustworthiness of labourers

are as important as their intelligence. Friendly relations, and a community of

interest and feeling between labourers and employers, are eminently so: I

should rather say, would be: for I know not where any such sentiment offriendly alliance now exists. Nor is it only in the labouring class that

improvement of mind and character operates with beneficial effect even on

industry. In the rich and idle classes, increased mental energy, more solid

instruction, and stronger feelings of conscience, public spirit, or philanthropy,

would qualify them to originate and promote the most valuable

improvements, both in the economical resources of their country, and in its

institutions and customs. To look no further than the most obvious

phenomena; the backwardness of French agriculture in the precise points in

which benefit might be expected from the influence of an educated class, is

partly accounted for by the exclusive devotion of the richer landed

proprietors to town interests and town pleasures. There is scarcely any

possible amelioration of human affairs which would not, among its other

benefits, have a favourable operation, direct or indirect, upon the

productiveness of industry. The intensity of devotion to industrial

occupations would indeed in many cases be moderated by a more liberal and

genial mental culture, but the labour actually bestowed on those occupations

would almost always be rendered more effective.

              Before pointing out the principal inferences to be drawn from the

nature of the two antagonist forces by which the productiveness of

agricultural industry is determined, we must observe that what we have said

of agriculture, is true with little variation, of the other occupations which it

represents; of all the arts which extract materials from the globe. Mining

industry, for example, usually yields an increase of produce at a more than

proportional increase of expense. It does worse, for even its customary annual

produce requires to be extracted by a greater and greater expenditure of

labour and capital. As a mine does not reproduce the coal or ore taken from

it, not only are all mines at last exhausted, but even when they as yet show no

signs of exhaustion, they must be worked at a continually increasing cost;

shafts must be sunk deeper, galleries driven farther, greater power applied to

keep them clear of water; the produce must be lifted from a greater depth, or

conveyed a greater distance. The law of diminishing return applies therefore

to mining, in a still more unqualified sense than to agriculture: but the

antagonizing agency, that of improvements in production, also applies in a

still greater degree. Mining operations are more susceptible of mechanical

improvements than agricultural : the first great application of the steam-

engine was to mining; and there are unlimited possibilities of improvement in

the chemical processes by which the metals are extracted. There is anothercontingency, of no unfrequent occurrence, which avails to counterbalance the

progress of all existing mines towards exhaustion: this is, the discovery of

new ones, equal or superior in richness.

              To resume; all natural agents which are limited in quantity, are not

only limited in their ultimate productive power, but, long before that power is

stretched to the utmost, they yield to any additional demands on

progressively harder terms. This law may however be suspended, or

temporarily controlled, by whatever adds to the general power of mankind

over nature; and especially by any extension of their knowledge, and their

consequent command, of the properties and powers of natural agents.

        39
               Letters from America, by John Robert Godley, vol i. p. 42. See

also Lyell’s Travels in America, vol. ii. p. 83.

        40
               Ireland may be alleged as an exception; a large fraction of the

entire soil of that country being still incapable of cultivation for want of

drainage. But though Ireland is an old country, unfortunate social and

political circumstances have kept it a poor and backward one. Neither is it at

all certain that the bogs of Ireland, if drained and brought under tillage, would

take their place along with Mr Carey’s fertile river bottoms, or among any

but the poorer soils.

 

 

             Chapter 13 – Consequences of the Foregoing Laws

 

 

              1. From the preceding exposition it appears that the limit to the

increase of production is two-fold; from deficiency of capital, or of land.

Production comes to a pause, either because the effective desire of

accumulation is not sufficient to give rise to any further increase of capital, or

because, however disposed the possessors of surplus income may be to save a

portion of it, the limited land at the disposal of the community does not

permit additional capital to be employed with such a return, as would be an

equivalent to them for their abstinence.

              In countries where the principle of accumulation is as weak as it is in

the various nations of Asia; where people will neither save, nor work to

obtain the means of saving, unless under the inducement of enormously high

profits, nor even then if it is necessary to wait a considerable time for them;

where either productions remain scanty, or drudgery great, because there is

neither capital forthcoming nor forethought sufficient for the adoption of the

contrivances by which natural agents are made to do the work of human

labour; the desideratum for such a country, economically considered, is an

increase of industry, and of the effective desire of accumulation. The means

are, first, a better government: more complete security of property; moderate

taxes, and freedom from arbitrary exaction under the name of taxes; a more

permanent and more advantageous tenure of land, securing to the cultivator

as far as possible the undivided benefits of the industry, skill, and economy

he may exert. Secondly, improvement of the public intelligence: the decay of

usages or superstitions which interfere with the effective employment of

industry; and the growth of mental activity, making the people alive to new

objects of desire. Thirdly, the introduction of foreign arts, which raise the

returns derivable from additional capital, to a rate corresponding to the low

strength of the desire of accumulation: and the importation of foreign capital,

which renders the increase of production no longer exclusively dependent on

the thrift or providence of the inhabitants themselves, while it places before

them a stimulating example, and by instilling new ideas and breaking the

chains of habit, if not by improving the actual condition of the population,

tends to create in them new wants, increased ambition, and greater thoughtfor the future. These considerations apply more or less to all the Asiatic

populations, and to the less civilized and industrious parts of Europe, as

Russia, Turkey, Spain, and Ireland.

              2. But there are other countries, and England is at the head of them,

in which neither the spirit of industry nor the effective desire of accumulation

need any encouragement; where the people will toil hard for a small

remuneration, and save much for a small profit; where, though the general

thriftiness of the labouring class is much below what is desirable, the spirit of

accumulation in the more prosperous part of the community requires

abatement rather than increase. In these countries there would never be any

deficiency of capital, if its increase were never checked or brought to a stand

by too great a diminution of its returns. It is the tendency of the returns to a

progressive diminution, which causes the increase of production to be often

attended with a deterioration in the condition of the producers; and this

tendency, which would in time put an end to increase of production

altogether, is a result of the necessary and inherent conditions of production

from the land.

              In all countries which have passed beyond a rather early stage in the

progress of agriculture, every increase in the demand for food, occasioned by

increased population, will always, unless there is a simultaneous

improvement in production, diminish the share which on a fair division

would fall to each individual. An increased production, in default of

unoccupied tracts of fertile land, or of fresh improvements tending to cheapen

commodities, can never be obtained but by increasing the labour in more than

the same proportion. The population must either work harder, or eat less, or

obtain their usual food by sacrificing a part of their other customary comforts.

Whenever this necessity is postponed, notwithstanding an increase of

population, it is because the improvements which facilitate production

continue progressive; because the contrivances of mankind for making their

labour more effective, keep up an equal struggle with nature, and extort fresh

resources from her reluctant powers as fast as human necessities occupy and

engross the old.

              From this, results the important corollary, that the necessity of

restraining population is not, as many persons believe, peculiar to a condition

of great inequality of property. A greater number of people cannot, in any

given state of civilization, be collectively so well provided for as a smaller.The niggardliness of nature, not the injustice of society, is the cause of the

penalty attached to over-population. An unjust distribution of wealth does not

even aggravate the evil, but, at most, causes it to be somewhat earlier felt. It

is in vain to say, that all mouths which the increase of mankind calls into

existence, bring with them hands. The new mouths require as much food as

the old ones, and the hands do not produce as much. If all instruments of

production were held in joint property by the whole people, and the produce

divided with perfect equality among them, and if, in a society thus

constituted, industry were as energetic and the produce as ample as at

present, there would be enough to make all the existing population extremely

comfortable; but when that population had doubled itself, as, with the

existing habits of the people, under such an encouragement, it undoubtedly

would in little more than twenty years, what would then be their condition?

Unless the arts of production were in the same time improved in an almost

unexampled degree, the inferior soils which must be resorted to, and the more

laborious and scantily remunerative cultivation which must be employed on

the superior soils, to procure food for so much larger a population, would, by

an insuperable necessity, render every individual in the community poorer

than before. If the population continued to increase at the same rate, a time

would soon arrive when no one would have more than mere necessaries, and,

soon after, a time when no one would have a sufficiency of those, and the

further increase of population would be arrested by death.

              Whether, at the present or any other time, the produce of industry

proportionally to the labour employed, is increasing or diminishing, and the

average condition of the people improving or deteriorating, depends upon

whether population is advancing faster than improvement, or improvement

than population. After a degree of density has been attained, sufficient to

allow the principal benefits of combination of labour, all further increase

tends in itself to mischief, so far as regards the average condition of the

people; but the progress of improvement has a counteracting operation, and

allows of increased numbers without any deterioration, and even consistently

with a higher average of comfort. Improvement must here be understood in a

wide sense, including not only new industrial inventions, or an extended use

of those already known, but improvements in institutions, education,

opinions, and human affairs generally, provided they tend, as almost all

improvements do, to give new motives or new facilities to production. If the

productive powers of the country increase as rapidly as advancing numberscall for an augmentation of produce, it is not necessary to obtain that

augmentation by the cultivation of soils more sterile than the worst already

under culture, or by applying additional labour to the old soils at a diminished

advantage; or at all events this loss of power is compensated by the increased

efficiency with which, in the progress of improvement, labour is employed in

manufactures. In one way or the other, the increased population is provided

for, and all are as well off as before. But if the growth of human power over

nature is suspended or slackened, and population does not slacken its

increase; if, with only the existing command over natural agencies, those

agencies are called upon for an increased produce; this greater produce will

not be afforded to the increased population, without either demanding on the

average a greater effort from each, or on the average reducing each to a

smaller ration out of the aggregate produce.

              As a matter of fact, at some periods the progress of population has

been the more rapid of the two, at others that of improvement. In England

during a long interval preceding the French Revolution, population increased

slowly. but the progress of improvement, at least in agriculture, would seem

to have been still slower, since though nothing occurred to lower the value of

the precious metals, the price of corn rose considerably, and England, from

an exporting, became an importing country. This evidence, however, is short

of conclusive, inasmuch as the extraordinary number of abundant seasons

during the first half of the century, not continuing during the last, was a cause

of increased price in the later period, extrinsic to the ordinary progress of

society. Whether during the same period improvements in manufactures, or

diminished cost of imported commodities, made amends for the diminished

productiveness of labour on the land, is uncertain. But ever since the great

mechanical inventions of Watt, Arkwright, and their contemporaries, the

return to labour has probably increased as fast as the population; and would

have out-stripped it, if that very augmentation of return had not called forth

an additional portion of the inherent power of multiplication in the human

species. During the twenty or thirty years last elapsed, so rapid has been the

extension of improved processes of agriculture, that even the land yields a

greater produce in proportion to the labour employed; the average price of

corn had become decidedly lower, even before the repeal of the corn laws had

so materially lightened, for the time being, the pressure of population upon

production. But though improvement may during a certain space of time keep

up with, or even surpass, the actual increase of population, it assuredly nevercomes up to the rate of increase of which population is capable; and nothing

could have prevented a general deterioration in the condition of the human

race, were it not that population has in fact been restrained. Had it been

restrained still more, and the same improvements taken place, there would

have been a larger dividend than there now is, for the nation or the species at

large. The new ground wrung from nature by the improvements would not

have been all used up in the support of mere numbers. Though the gross

produce would not have been so great, there would have been a greater

produce per head of the population.

              3. When the growth of numbers outstrips the progress of

improvement, and a country is driven to obtain the means of subsistence on

terms more and more unfavourable, by the inability of its land to meet

additional demands except on more onerous conditions; there are two

expedients by which it may hope to mitigate that disagreeable necessity, even

though no change should take place in the habits of the people with respect to

their rate of increase. One of these expedients is the importation of food from

abroad. The other is emigration.

              The admission of cheaper food from a foreign country, is equivalent

to an agricultural invention by which food could be raised at a similarly

diminished cost at home. It equally increases the productive power of labour.

The return was before, so much food for so much labour employed in the

growth of food: the return is now, a greater quantity of food, for the same

labour employed in producing cottons or hardware or some other commodity,

to be given in exchange for food. The one improvement, like the other,

throws back the decline of the productive power of labour by a certain

distance: but in the one case as in the other, it immediately resumes its

course; the tide which has receded, instantly begins to re-advance. It might

seem, indeed, that when a country draws its supply of food from so wide a

surface as the whole habitable globe, so little impression can be produced on

that great expanse by any increase of mouths in one small corner of it, that

the inhabitants of the country may double and treble their numbers, without

feeling the effect in any increased tension of the springs of production, or any

enhancement of the price of food throughout the world. But in this

calculation several things are overlooked.

              In the first place, the foreign regions from which corn can be

imported do not comprise the whole globe, but those parts of it principallywhich are in the immediate neighbourhood of coasts or navigable rivers. The

coast is the part of most countries which is earliest and most thickly peopled,

and has seldom any food to spare. The chief source of supply, therefore, is

the strip of country along the banks of some navigable river, as the Nile, the

Vistula, or the Mississippi; and of such there is not, in the productive regions

of the earth, so great a multitude as to suffice during an indefinite time for a

rapidly growing demand, without an increasing strain on the productive

powers of the soil. To obtain auxiliary supplies of corn from the interior in

any abundance, is, in the existing state of the communications, in most cases

impracticable. By improved roads, and by canals and railways, the obstacle

will eventually be so reduced as not to be insuperable: but this is a slow

progress; in all the food-exporting counties except America, a very slow

progress; and one which cannot keep pace with population, unless the

increase of the last is very effectually restrained.

              In the next place, even if the supply were drawn from the whole

instead of a small part of the surface of the exporting counties, the quantity of

food would still be limited, which could be obtained from them without an

increase of the proportional cost. The countries which export food may be

divided into two classes; those in which the effective desire of accumulation

is strong, and those in which it is weak. In Australia and the United States of

America, the effective desire of accumulation is strong; capital increases fast,

and the production of food might be very rapidly extended. But in such

countries population also increases with extraordinary rapidity. Their

agriculture has to provide for their own expanding numbers, as well as for

those of the importing countries. They must, therefore, from the nature of the

case, be rapidly driven, if not to less fertile, at least what is equivalent, to

remoter and less accessible lands, and to modes of cultivation like those of

old countries, less productive in proportion to the labour and expense.

              But the countries which have at the same time cheap food and great

industrial prosperity are few, being only those in which the arts of civilized

life have been transferred full-grown to a rich and uncultivated soil. Among

old countries, those which are able to export food, are able only because their

industry is in a very backward state; because capital, and hence population,

have never increased sufficiently to make food rise to a higher price. Such

countries are Russia, Poland, and the plains of the Danube. In those regions

the effective desire of accumulation is weak, the arts of production mostimperfect, capital scanty, and its increase, especially from domestic sources,

slow. When an increased demand arose for food to be exported to other

countries, it would only be very gradually that food could be produced to

meet it. The capital needed could not be obtained by transfer from other

employments, for such do not exist. The cottons or hardware which would be

received from England in exchange for corn, the Russians and Poles do not

now produce in the country: they go without them. Something might in time

be expected from the increased exertions to which producers would be

stimulated by the market opened for their produce; but to such increase of

exertion, the habits of countries whose agricultural population consists of

serfs, or of peasants who have but just emerged from a servile condition, are

the reverse of favourable, and even in this age of movement these habits do

not rapidly change. If a greater outlay of capital is relied on as the source

from which the produce is to he increased, the means must either be obtained

by the slow process of saving, under the impulse given by new commodities

and more extended intercourse (and in that case the population would most

likely increase as fast), or must be brought in from foreign countries. If

England is to obtain a rapidly increasing supply of corn from Russia or

Poland, English capital must go there to produce it. This, however, is

attended with so many difficulties, as are equivalent to great positive

disadvantages. It is opposed by differences of language, differences of

manners, and a thousand obstacles. arising from the institutions and social

relations of the country. and after all it would inevitably so stimulate

population on the spot, that nearly all the increase of food produced by its

means would probably be consumed without leaving the country: so that, if it

were not the almost only mode of introducing foreign arts and ideas, and

giving an effectual spur to the backward civilization of those countries, little

reliance could be placed on it for increasing the exports, and supplying other

countries with a progressive and indefinite increase of food. But to improve

the civilization of a country is a slow process, and gives time for so great an

increase of population both in the country itself, and in those supplied from it,

that its effect in keeping down the price of food against the increase of

demand, is not likely to be more decisive on the scale of all Europe, than on

the smaller one of a particular nation.

              The law, therefore, of diminishing return to industry, whenever

population makes a more rapid progress than improvement, is not solely

applicable to countries which are fed from their own soil, but in substanceapplies quite as much to those which are willing to draw their food from any

accessible quarter that can afford it cheapest. A sudden and great cheapening

of food, indeed, in whatever manner produced, would, like any other sudden

improvement in the arts of life, throw the natural tendency of affairs a stage

or two further back, though without altering its course. There is one

contingency connected with freedom of importation, which may yet produce

temporary effects greater than were ever contemplated either by the bitterest

enemies or the most ardent adherents of free-trade in food. Maize, or Indian

corn, is a product capable of being supplied in quantity sufficient to feed the

whole country, at a cost, allowing for difference of nutritive quality, cheaper

even than the potato. If maize should ever substitute itself for wheat as the

staple food of the poor, the productive power of labour in obtaining food

would be so enormously increased, and the expense of maintaining a family

so diminished, that it would require perhaps some generations for population,

even if it started forward at an American pace, to overtake this great

accession to the facilities of its support.

              4. Besides the importation of corn, there is another resource which

can he invoked by a nation whose increasing numbers press hard, not against

their capital, but against the productive capacity of their land: I mean

Emigration, especially in the form of Colonization. Of this remedy the

efficacy as far as it goes is real, since it consists in seeking elsewhere those

unoccupied tracts of fertile land, which if they existed at home would enable

the demand of an increasing population to be met without any falling off in

the productiveness of labour. Accordingly, when the region to be colonized is

near at hand, and the habits and tastes of the people sufficiently migratory,

this remedy is completely effectual. The migration from the older parts of the

American Confederation to the new territories, which is to all intents and

purposes colonization, is what enables population to go on unchecked

throughout the Union without having yet diminished the return to industry, or

increased the difficulty of earning a subsistence. If Australia or the interior of

Canada were as near to Great Britain as Wisconsin and Iowa to New York; if

the superfluous people could remove to it without crossing the sea, and were

of as adventurous and restless a character, and as little addicted to staying at

home, as their kinsfolk of New England, those unpeopled continents would

render the same service to the United Kingdom which the old states of

America derive from the new. But, these things being as they are — though a

judiciously conducted emigration is a most important resource for suddenlylightening the pressure of population by a single effort — and though in such

an extraordinary case as that of Ireland under the threefold operation of the

potato failure, the poor law, and the general turning out of tenant throughout

the country, spontaneous emigration may at a particular crisis remove greater

multitudes than it was ever proposed to remove at once by any national

scheme; it still remains to be shown by experience whether a permanent

steam of emigration can be kept up, sufficient to take off, as in America, all

that portion of the annual increase (when proceeding at its greatest rapidity)

which being in excess of the progress made during the same short period in

the arts of life, tends to render living more difficult for every averagely-

situated individual in the community. And unless this can be done,

emigration cannot, even in an economical point of view, dispense with the

necessity of checks to population. Further than this we have not to speak of it

in this place. The general subject of colonization as a practical question, its

importance to old countries, and the principles on which it should be

conducted, will be discussed at some length in a subsequent portion of this

Treatise.

 

 

                               Book 2: Distribution

 

 

 

 

                               Chapter 1 – Of Property

 

 

              1. The principles which have been set forth in the first part of this

Treatise, are, in certain respects, strongly distinguished from those, on the

consideration of which we are now about to enter. The laws and conditions of

the production of wealth partake of the character of physical truths. There is

nothing optional or arbitrary in them. Whatever mankind produce, must be

produced in the modes, and under the conditions, imposed by the constitution

of external things, and by the inherent properties of their own bodily and

mental structure. Whether they like it or not, their productions will be limited

by the amount of their previous accumulation, and, that being given, it will be

proportional to their energy, their skill, the perfection of their machinery, and

their judicious use of the advantages of combined labour. Whether they like it

or not, a double quantity of labour will not raise, on the same land, a double

quantity of food, unless some improvement takes place in the processes of

cultivation. Whether they like it or not, the unproductive expenditure of

individuals will pro tanto tend to impoverish the community, and only their

productive expenditure will enrich it. The opinions, or the wishes, which may

exist on these different matters, do not control the things themselves. We

cannot, indeed, foresee to what extent the modes of production may be

altered, or the productiveness of labour increased, by future extensions of our

knowledge of the laws of nature, suggesting new processes of industry of

which we have at present no conception. But howsoever we may succeed in

making for ourselves more space within the limits set by the constitution of

things, we know that there must be limits. We cannot alter the ultimate

properties either of matter or mind, but can only employ those properties

more or less successfully, to bring about the events in which we are

interested.

              It is not so with the Distribution of Wealth. That is a matter of

human institution solely. The things once there, mankind, individually or

collectively, can do with them as they like. They can place them at the

disposal of whomsoever they please, and on whatever terms. Further, in the

social state, in every state except total solitude, any disposal whatever of

them can only take place by the consent of society, or rather of those whodispose of its active force. Even what a person has produced by his individual

toil, unaided by any one, he cannot keep, unless by the permission of society.

Not only can society take it from him, but individuals could and would take it

from him, if society only remained passive; if it did not either interfere en

masse, or employ and pay people for the purpose of preventing him from

being disturbed in the possession. The distribution of wealth, therefore,

depends on the laws and customs of society. The rules by which it is

determined, are what the opinions and feelings of the ruling portion of the

community make them, and are very different in different ages and countries;

and might be still more different, if mankind so chose.

              The opinions and feelings of mankind, doubtless, are not a matter of

chance. They are consequences of the fundamental laws of human nature,

combined with the existing state of knowledge and experience, and the

existing condition of social institutions and intellectual and moral culture. But

the laws of the generation of human opinions are not within our present

subject. They are part of the general theory of human progress, a far larger

and more difficult subject of inquiry than political economy. We have here to

consider, not the causes, but the consequences, of the rules according to

which wealth may be distributed. Those, at least, are as little arbitrary, and

have as much the character of physical laws, as the laws of production.

Human beings can control their own acts, but not the consequences of their

acts neither to themselves or to others. Society can subject the distribution of

wealth to whatever rules it thinks best: but what practical results will flow

from the operation of those rules, must be discovered, like any other physical

or mental truths, by observation and reasoning.

              We proceed, then, to the consideration of the different modes of

distributing the produce of land and labour, which have been adopted in

practice, or may be conceived in theory. Among these, our attention is first

claimed by that primary and fundamental institution, on which, unless in

some exceptional and very limited cases, the economical arrangements of

society have always rested, though in its secondary features it has varied, and

is liable to vary. I mean, of course, the institution of individual property.

              2. Private property, as an institution, did not owe its origin to any of

those considerations of utility, which plead for the maintenance of it when

established. Enough is known of rude ages, both from history and from

analogous states of society in our own time, to show, that tribunals (whichalways precede laws) were originally established, not to determine rights, but

to repress violence and terminate quarrels. With this object chiefly in view,

they naturally enough gave legal effect to first occupancy, by treating as the

aggressor the person who first commenced violence, by turning, or

attempting to turn, another out of possession. The preservation of the peace,

which was the original object of civil government, was thus attained; while

by confirming, to those who already possessed it, even what was not the fruit

of personal exertion, a guarantee was incidentally given to them and others

that they would be protected in what was so.

              In considering the institution of property as a question in social

philosophy, we must leave out of consideration its actual origin in any of the

existing nations of Europe. We may suppose a community unhampered by

any previous possession; a body of colonists, occupying for the first time an

uninhabited country’. bringing nothing with them but what belonged to them

in common, and having a clear field for the adoption of the institutions and

polity which they judged most expedient; required, therefore, to choose

whether they would conduct the work of production on the principle of

individual property, or on some system of common ownership and collective

agency.

              If private property were adopted, we must presume that it would be

accompanied by none of the initial inequalities and injustices which obstruct

the beneficial operation of the principle in old societies. Every full grown

man or woman, we must suppose, would be secured in the unfettered use and

disposal of his or her bodily and mental faculties; and the instruments of

production, the land and tools, would be divided fairly among them, so that

all might start, in respect to outward appliances, on equal terms. It is possible

also to conceive that in this original apportionment, compensation might be

made for the injuries of nature, and the balance redressed by assigning to the

less robust members of the community advantages in the distribution,

sufficient to put them on a par with the rest. But the division, once made,

would not again be interfered with; individuals would be left to their own

exertions and to the ordinary chances, for making an advantageous use of

what was assigned to them. If individual property, on the contrary, were

excluded, the plan which must be adopted would be to hold the land and all

instruments of production as the joint property of the community, and to

carry on the operations of industry on the common account. The direction ofthe labour of the community would devolve upon a magistrate or magistrates,

whom we may suppose elected by the suffrages of the community, and whom

we must assume to be voluntarily obeyed by them. The division of the

produce would in like manner be a public act. The principle might either be

that of complete equality, or of apportionment to the necessities or deserts of

individuals, in whatever manner might be conformable to the ideas of justice

or policy prevailing in the community.

              Examples of such associations, on a small scale, are the monastic

orders, the Moravians, the followers of Rapp, and others: and from the hopes

which they hold out of relief from the miseries and iniquities of a state of

much inequality of wealth, schemes for a larger application of the same idea

have reappeared and become popular at all periods of active speculation on

the first principles of society. In an age like the present, when a general

reconsideration of all first principles is felt to be inevitable, and when more

than at any former period of history the suffering portions of the community

have a voice in the discussion, it was impossible but that ideas of this nature

should spread far and wide. The late revolutions in Europe have thrown up a

great amount of speculation of this character, and an unusual share of

attention has consequently been drawn to the various forms which these ideas

have assumed: nor is this attention likely to diminish, but on the contrary, to

increase more and more.

              The assailants of the principle of individual property may be divided

into two classes: those whose scheme implies absolute equality in the

distribution of the physical means of life and enjoyment, and those who admit

inequality, but grounded on some principle, or supposed principle, of justice

or general expediency, and not, like so many of the existing social

inequalities, dependent on accident alone. At the head of the first class, as the

earliest of those belonging to the present generation, must be placed Mr.

Owen and his followers. M. Louis Blanc and M. Cabet have more recently

become conspicuous as apostles of similar doctrines (though the former

advocates equality of distribution only as a transition to a still higher standard

of justice, that all should work according to their capacity, and receive

according to their wants). The characteristic name for this economical system

is Communism, a word of continental origin, only of late introduced into this

country. The word Socialism, which originated among the English

Communists, and was assumed by them as a name to designate their owndoctrine, is now, on the Continent, employed in a larger sense; not

necessarily implying Communism, or the entire abolition of private property,

but applied to any system which requires that the land and the instruments of

production should be the property, not of individuals, but of communities or

associations, or of the government. Among such systems, the two of highest

intellectual pretension are those which, from the names of their real or

reputed authors, have been called St. Simonism and Fourierism; the former

defunct as a system, but which during the few years of its public

promulgation, sowed the seeds of nearly all the Socialist tendencies which

have since spread so widely in France: the second, still flourishing in the

number, talent, and zeal of its adherents.

              3. Whatever may be the merits or defects of these various schemes,

they cannot be truly said to be impracticable. No reasonable person can doubt

that a village community, composed of a few thousand inhabitants cultivating

in joint ownership the same extent of land which at present feeds that number

of people, and producing by combined labour and the most improved

processes the manufactured articles which they required, could raise an

amount of productions sufficient to maintain them in comfort; and would find

the means of obtaining, and if need be, exacting, the quantity of labour

necessary for this purpose, from every member of the association who was

capable of work.

              The objection ordinarily made to a system of community of property

and equal distribution of the produce, that each person would be incessantly

occupied in evading his fair share of the work, points, undoubtedly, to a real

difficulty. But those who urge this objection, forget to how great an extent the

same difficulty exists under the system on which nine-tenths of the business

of society is now conducted. The objection supposes, that honest and efficient

labour is only to be had from those who are themselves individually to reap

the benefit of their own exertions. But how small a part of all the labour

performed in England, from the lowest-paid to the highest, is done by persons

working for their own benefit. From the Irish reaper or hodman to the chief

justice or the minister of state, nearly all the work of society is remunerated

by day wages or fixed salaries. A factory operative has less personal interest

in his work than a member of a Communist association, since he is not, like

him, working for a partnership of which he is himself a member. It will no

doubt be said, that though the labourers themselves have not, in most cases, apersonal interest in their work, they are watched and superintended, and their

labour directed, and the mental part of the labour performed, by persons who

have. Even this, however, is far from being universally the fact. In all public,

and many of the largest and most successful private undertakings, not only

the labours of detail but the control and superintendence are entrusted to

salaried officers. And though the “master’s eye,” when the master is vigilant

and intelligent, is of proverbial value, it must be remembered that in a

Socialist farm or manufactory, each labourer would be under the eye not of

one master, but of the whole community. In the extreme case of obstinate

perseverance in not performing the due share of work, the community would

have the same resources which society now has for compelling conformity to

the necessary conditions of the association. Dismissal, the only remedy at

present, is no remedy when any other labourer who may be engaged does no

better than his predecessor: the power of dismissal only enables an employer

to obtain from his workmen the customary amount of labour, but that

customary labour may be of any degree of inefficiency. Even the labourer

who loses his employment by idleness or negligence, has nothing worse to

suffer, in the most unfavourable case, than the discipline of a workhouse, and

if the desire to avoid this be a sufficient motive in the one system, it would be

sufficient in the other. I am not undervaluing the strength of the incitement

given to labour when the whole or a large share of the benefit of extra

exertion belongs to the labourer. But under the present system of industry this

incitement, in the great majority of cases, does not exist. If Communistic

labour might be less vigorous than that of a peasant proprietor, or a workman

labouring on his own account, it would probably be more energetic than that

of a labourer for hire, who has no personal interest in the matter at all. The

neglect by the uneducated classes of labourers for hire, of the duties which

they engage to perform, is in the present state of society most flagrant. Now it

is an admitted condition of the Communist scheme that all shall be educated:

and this being supposed, the duties of the members of the association would

doubtless be as diligently performed as those of the generality of salaried

officers in the middle or higher classes; who are not supposed to be

necessarily unfaithful to their trust, because so long as they are not dismissed,

their pay is the same in however lax a manner their duty is fulfilled.

Undoubtedly, as a general rule, remuneration by fixed salaries does not in

any class of functionaries produce the maximum of zeal: and this is as much

as can be reasonably alleged against Communistic labour.              That even this inferiority would necessarily exist, is by no means so

certain as is assumed by those who are little used carry to their minds beyond

the state of things with which they are familiar. Mankind are capable of a far

greater amount of public spirit than the present age is accustomed to suppose

possible. History bears witness to the success with which large bodies of

human beings may be trained to feel the public interest their own. And no soil

could be more favourable to the growth of such a feeling, than a Communist

association, since all the ambition, and the bodily and mental activity, which

are now exerted in the pursuit of separate and self-regarding interests, would

require another sphere of employment, and would naturally find it in the

pursuit of the general benefit of the community. The same cause, so often

assigned in explanation of the devotion of the Catholic priest or monk to the

interest of his order — that he has no interest apart from it — would, under

Communism, attach the citizen to the community. And independently of the

public motive, every member of the association would be amenable to the

most universal, and one of the strongest, of personal motives, that of public

opinion. The force of this motive in deterring from any act or omission

positively reproved by the community, no one is likely to deny; but the power

also of emulation, in exciting to the most strenuous exertions for the sake of

the approbation and admiration of others, is borne witness to by experience in

every situation in which human beings publicly compete with one another,

even if it be in things frivolous, or from which the public derive no benefit. A

contest, who can do most for the common good, is not the kind of

competition which Socialists repudiate. To what extent, therefore, the energy

of labour would be diminished by Communism, or whether in the long run it

would be diminished at all, must be considered for the present an undecided

question.

              Another of the objections to Communism is similar to that, so often

urged against poor-laws: that if every member of the community were

assured of subsistence for himself and any number of children, on the sole

condition of willingness to work, prudential restraint on the multiplication of

mankind would be at an end, and population would start forward at a rate

which would reduce the community, through successive stages of increasing

discomfort, to actual starvation. There would certainly be much ground for

this apprehension if Communism provided no motives to restraint, equivalent

to those which it would take away. But Communism is precisely the state of

things m which opinion might be expected to declare itself with greatestintensity against this kind of selfish intemperance. Any augmentation of

numbers which diminished the comfort or increased the toil of the mass,

would then cause (which now it does not) immediate and unmistakeable

inconvenience to every individual in the association; inconvenience which

could not then be imputed to the avarice of employers, or the unjust

privileges of the rich. In such altered circumstances opinion could not fail to

reprobate, and if reprobation did not suffice, to repress by penalties of some

description, this or any other culpable self-indulgence at the expense of the

community. The Communistic scheme, instead of being peculiarly open to

the objection drawn from danger of over-population, has the recommendation

of tending in an especial degree to the prevention of that evil.

              A more real difficulty is that of fairly apportioning the labour of the

community among its members. There are many kinds of work, and by what

standard are they to be measured one against another? Who is to judge how

much cotton spinning, or distributing goods from the stores, or bricklaying,

or chimney sweeping, is equivalent to so much ploughing? The difficulty of

making the adjustment between different qualities of labour is so strongly felt

by Communist writers, that they have usually thought it necessary to provide

that all should work by turns at every description of useful labour. an

arrangement which, by putting an end to the division of employments, would

sacrifice so much of the advantage of co-operative production as greatly to

diminish the productiveness of labour. Besides, even in the same kind of

work, nominal equality of labour would be so great a real inequality, that the

feeling of justice would revolt against its being enforced. All persons are not

equally fit for all labour; and the same quantity of labour is an unequal

burthen on the weak and the strong, the hardy and the delicate, the quick and

the slow, the dull and the intelligent.

              But these difficulties, though real, are not necessarily insuperable.

The apportionment of work to the strength and capacities of individuals, the

mitigation of a general rule to provide for cases in which it would operate

harshly, are not problems to which human intelligence, guided by a sense of

justice, would be inadequate. And the worst and most unjust arrangement

which could be made of these points, under a system aiming at equality,

would be so far short of the inequality and injustice with which labour (not to

speak of remuneration) is now apportioned, as to be scarcely worth counting

in comparison. We must remember too, that Communism, as a system ofsociety, exists only in idea; that its difficulties, at present, are much better

understood than its resources; and that the intellect of mankind is only

beginning to contrive the means of organizing it in detail, so as to overcome

the one and derive the greatest advantage from the other.

              If, therefore, the choice were to be made between Communism with

all its chances, and the present state of society with all its sufferings and

injustices; if the institution of private property necessarily carried with it as a

consequence, that the produce of labour should be apportioned as we now see

it, almost in an inverse ratio to the labour — the largest portions to those who

have never worked at all, the next largest to those whose work is almost

nominal, and so in a descending scale, the remuneration dwindling as the

work grows harder and more disagreeable, until the most fatiguing and

exhausting bodily labour cannot count with certainty on being able to earn

even the necessaries of life; if this or Communism were the alternative, all the

difficulties, great or small, of Communism would be but as dust in the

balance. But to make the comparison applicable, we must compare

Communism at its best, with the regime of individual property, not as it is,

but as it might be made. The principle of private property has never yet had a

fair trial in any country; and less so, perhaps, in this country than in some

others. The social arrangements of modern Europe commenced from a

distribution of property which was the result, not of just partition, or

acquisition by industry, but of conquest and violence: and notwithstanding

what industry has been doing for many centuries to modify the work of force,

the system still retains many and large traces of its origin. The laws of

property have never yet conformed to the principles on which the justification

of private property rests. They have made property of things which never

ought to be property, and absolute property where only a qualified property

ought to exist. They have not held the balance fairly between human beings,

but have heaped impediments upon some, to give advantage to others; they

have purposely fostered inequalities, and prevented all from starting fair in

the race. That all should indeed start on perfectly equal terms, is inconsistent

with any law of private property: but if as much pains as has been taken to

aggravate the inequality of chances arising from the natural working of the

principle, had been taken to temper that inequality by every means not

subversive of the principle itself; if the tendency of legislation had been to

favour the diffusion, instead of the concentration of wealth — to encourage

the subdivision of the large masses, instead of striving to keep them together;the principle of individual property would have been found to have no

necessary connexion with the physical and social evils which almost all

Socialist writers assume to be inseparable from it.

              Private property, in every defence made of it, is supposed to mean,

the guarantee to individuals of the fruits of their own labour and abstinence.

The guarantee to them of the fruits of the labour and abstinence of others,

transmitted to them without any merit or exertion of their own, is not of the

essence of the institution, but a mere incidental consequence, which, when it

reaches a certain height, does not promote, but conflicts with, the ends which

render private property legitimate. To judge of the final destination of the

institution of property, we must suppose everything rectified, which causes

the institution to work in a manner opposed to that equitable principle, of

proportion between remuneration and exertion, on which in every vindication

of it that will bear the light, it is assumed to be grounded. We must also

suppose two conditions realized, without which neither Communism nor any

other laws or institutions could make the condition of the mass of mankind

other than degraded and miserable. One of these conditions is, universal

education; the other, a due limitation of the numbers of the community. With

these, there could be no poverty, even under the present social institutions:

and these being supposed, the question of Socialism is not, as generally stated

by Socialists, a question of flying to the sole refuge against the evils which

now bear down humanity; but a mere question of comparative advantages,

which futurity must determine. We are too ignorant either of what individual

agency in its best form, or Socialism in its best form, can accomplish, to be

qualified to decide which of the two will be the ultimate form of human

society.

              If a conjecture may be hazarded, the decision will probably depend

mainly on one consideration, viz. which of the two systems is consistent with

the greatest amount of human liberty and spontaneity. After the means of

subsistence are assured, the next in strength of the personal wants of human

beings is liberty; and (unlike the physical wants, which as civilization

advances become more moderate and more amenable to control) it increases

instead of diminishing in intensity, as the intelligence and the moral faculties

are more developed. The perfection both of social arrangements and of

practical morality would be, to secure to all persons complete independence

and freedom of action, subject to no restriction but that of not doing injury toothers: and the education which taught or the social institutions which

required them to exchange the control of their own actions for any amount of

comfort or affluence, or to renounce liberty for the sake of equality, would

deprive them of one of the most eLevated characteristics of human nature. It

remains to be discovered how far the preservation of this characteristic would

be found compatible with the Communistic organization of society. No

doubt, this, like all the other objections to the Socialist schemes, is vastly

exaggerated. The members of the association need not be required to live

together more than they do now, nor need they be controlled in the disposal

of their individual share of the produce, and of the probably large amount of

leisure which, if they limited their production to things really worth

producing, they would possess. Individuals need not be chained to an

occupation, or to a particular locality. The restraints of Communism would be

freedom in comparison with the present condition of the majority of the

human race. The generality of labourers in this and most other countries,

have as little choice of occupation or freedom of locomotion, are practically

as dependent on fixed rules and on the will of others, as they could be on any

system short of actual slavery; to say nothing of the entire domestic

subjection of one half the species, to which it is the signal honour of

Owenism and most other forms of Socialism that they assign equal rights, in

all respects, with those of the hitherto dominant sex. But it is not by

comparison with the present bad state of society that the claims of

Communism can be estimated; nor is it sufficient that it should promise

greater personal and mental freedom than is now enjoyed by those who have

not enough of either to deserve the name. The question is, whether there

would be any asylum left for individuality of character; whether public

opinion would not be a tyrannical yoke; whether the absolute dependence of

each on all, and surveillance of each by all, would not grind all down into a

tame uniformity of thoughts, feelings, and actions. This is already one of the

glaring evils of the existing state of society, notwithstanding a much greater

diversity of education and pursuits, and a much less absolute dependence of

the individual on the mass, than would exist in the Communistic regime. No

society in which eccentricity is a matter of reproach, can be in a wholesome

state. It is yet to be ascertained whether the Communistic scheme would be

consistent with that multiform development of human nature, those manifold

unlikenesses, that diversity of tastes and talents, and variety of intellectual

points of view, which not only form a great part of the interest of human life,but by bringing intellects into stimulating collision, and by presenting to each

innumerable notions that he would not have conceived of himself, are the

mainspring of mental and moral progression.

              4. I have thus far observations to the Communistic doctrine, which

forms the extreme limit of Socialism; according to which not only the

instruments of the land and capital, are the joint property of the community,

but the produce is divided and the labour apportioned, as far as possible,

equally. The objections, whether well or ill grounded, to which Socialism is

liable, apply to this form of it in their greatest force. The other varieties of

Socialism mainly differ from Communism, in not relying solely on what M.

Louis Blanc calls the point of honour of industry, but retaining more or less

of the incentives to labour derived from private pecuniary interest. Thus it is

already a modification of the strict theory of Communism, when the principle

is professed of proportioning remuneration to labour. The attempts which

have been made in France to carry Socialism into practical effect, by

associations of workmen manufacturing on their own account, mostly began

by sharing the remuneration equally, without regard to the quantity of work

done by the individual: but in almost every case this plan was after a short

time abandoned, and recourse was had to working by the piece. The original

principle appeals to a higher standard of justice, and is adapted to a much

higher moral condition of human nature. The proportioning of remuneration

to work done, is really just, only in so far as the more or less of the work is a

matter of choice: when it depends on natural difference of strength or

capacity, this principle of remuneration is in itself an injustice: it is giving to

those who have; assigning most to those who are already most favoured by

nature. Considered, however, as a compromise with the selfish type of

character formed by the present standard of morality, and fostered by the

existing social institutions, it is highly expedient; and until education shall

have been entirely regenerated, is far more likely to prove immediately

successful, than an attempt at a higher ideal.

              The two elaborate forms of non-communistic Socialism known as

St. Simonism and Fourierism, are totally free from the objections usually

urged against Communism; and though they are open to others of their own,

yet by the great intellectual power which in many respects distinguishes

them, and by their large and philosophic treatment of some of the

fundamental problems of society and morality, they may justly be countedamong the most remarkable productions of the past and present age.

              The St. Simonian scheme does not contemplate an equal, but an

unequal division of the produce; it does not propose that all should be

occupied alike, but differently, according to their vocation or capacity., the

function of each being assigned, like grades in a regiment, by the choice of

the directing authority, and the remuneration being by salary, proportioned to

the importance, in the eyes of that authority, of the function itself, and the

merits of the person who fulfils it. For the constitution of the ruling body,

different plans might be adopted, consistently with the essentials of the

system. It might be appointed by popuLar suffrage. In the idea of the original

authors, the rulers were supposed to be persons of genius and virtue, who

obtained the voluntary adhesion of the rest by the force of mental superiority.

That the scheme might in some peculiar states of society work with

advantage, is not improbable. There is indeed a successful experiment, of a

somewhat similar kind, on record, to which I have once alluded; that of the

Jesuits in Paraguay. A race of savages, belonging to a portion of mankind

more averse to consecutive exertion for a distant object than any other

authentically known to us, was brought under the mental dominion of

civilized and instructed men who were united among themselves by a system

of community of goods. To the absolute authority of these men they

reverentially submitted themselves, and were induced by them to learn the

arts of civilized life, and to practise labours for the community, which no

inducement that could have been offered would have prevailed on them to

practise for themselves. This social system was of short duration, being

prematurely destroyed by diplomatic arrangements and foreign force. That it

could be brought into action at all was probably owing to the immense

distance in point of knowledge and intellect which separated the few rulers

from the whole body of the ruled, without any intermediate orders, either

social or intellectual. In any other circumstances it would probably have been

a complete failure. It supposes an absolute despotism in the heads of the

association; which would probably not be much improved if the depositaries

of the despotism (contrary to the views of the authors of the system) were

varied from time to time according to the result of a popular canvass. But to

suppose that one or a few human beings, howsoever selected, could, by

whatever machinery of subordinate agency, be qualified to adapt each

person’s work to his capacity, and proportion each person’s remuneration to

his merits — to be, in fact, the dispensers of distributive justice to everymember of a community; or that any use which they could make of this

power would give general satisfaction, or would be submitted to without the

aid of force — is a supposition almost too chimerical to be reasoned against.

A fixed rule, like that of equality, might be acquiesced in, and so might

chance, or an external necessity; but that a handful of human beings should

weigh everybody in the balance, and give more to one and less to another at

their sole pleasure and judgment would not be borne, unless from persons

believed to be more than men, and backed by supernatural terrors.

              The most skilfully combined, and with the greatest foresight of

objections, of all the forms of Socialism, is that commonly known as

Fourierism. This system does not contemplate the abolition of private

property, nor even of inheritance; on the contrary, it avowedly takes into

consideration, as an element in the distribution of the produce, capital as well

as labour. It proposes that the operations of industry should be carried on by

associations of about two thousand members, combining their labour on a

district of about a square league in extent, under the guidance of chiefs

selected by themselves. In the distribution, a certain minimum is first

assigned for the subsistence of every member of the community, whether

capable or not of labour. The remainder of the produce is shared in certain

proportions, to be deterred beforehand, among the three elements, Labour,

Capital, and Talent. The capital of the community may be owned in unequal

shares by different members, who would in that case receive, as in any other

joint-stock company, proportional dividends. The claim of each person on the

share of the produce apportioned to talent, is estimated by the grade or rank

which the individual occupies in the several groups of labourers to which he

or she belongs; these grades being in all cases conferred by the choice of his

or her companions. The remuneration, when received, would not of necessity

be expended or enjoyed in common; there would be separate menages for all

who preferred them, and no other community of living is contemplated, than

that all the members of the association should reside in the same pile of

buildings; for saving of labour and expense, not only in building, but in every

branch of domestic economy; and in order that, the whole of the buying and

selling operations of the community being performed by a single agent, the

enormous portion of the produce of industry now carried off by the profits of

mere distributors might be reduced to the smallest amount possible.

              This system, unlike Communism, does not, in theory at least,withdraw any of the motives to exertion which exist in the present state of

society. On the contrary, if the arrangement worked according to the

intentions of its contrivers, it would even strengthen those motives; since

each person would have much more certainty of reaping individually the

fruits of increased skill or energy, bodily or mental, than under the present

social arrangements can be felt by any but those who are in the most

advantageous positions, or to whom the chapter of accidents is more than

ordinarily favourable. The Fourierists, however, have still another resource.

They believe that they have solved the great and fundamental problem of

rendering labour attractive. That this is not impracticable, they contend by

very strong arguments; in particular by one which they have in common with

the Owenites, viz., that scarcely any labour, however severe, undergone by

human beings for the sake of subsistence, exceeds in intensity that which

other human beings, whose subsistence is already provided for, are found

ready and even eager to undergo for pleasure. This certainly is a most

significant fact, and one from which the student in social philosophy may

draw important instruction. But the argument founded on it may easily be

stretched too far. If occupations full of discomfort and fatigue are freely

pursued by many persons as amusements, who does not see that they are

amusements exactly because they are pursued freely, and may be

discontinued at pleasure? The liberty of quitting a position often makes the

whole difference between its being painful and pleasurable. Many a person

remains in the same town, street, or house from January to December,

without a wish or a thought tending towards removal, who, if confined to that

same place by the mandate of authority, would find the imprisonment

absolutely intolerable.

              According to the Fourierists, scarcely any kind of useful labour is

naturally and necessarily disagreeable, unless it is either regarded as

dishonourable, or is immoderate in degree, or destitute of the stimulus of

sympathy and emulation. Excessive toil needs not, they contend, be

undergone by any one, in a society in which there would be no idle class, and

no labour so enormous an amount of labour is now wasted, in was here

useless things; full advantage would be taken of the power of association,

both in increasing the efficiency of production, and in economizing

consumption. The other requisites for rendering labour attractive would, they

think, be found in the execution of all labour by social groups, to any number

of which the same individual might simultaneously belong, at his or her ownchoice: their grade in each being determined by the degree of service which

they were found capable of rendering, as appreciated by the suffrages of their

comrades. It is inferred from the diversity of tastes and talents, that every

member of the community would be attached to several groups, employing

themselves in various kinds of occupation, some bodily, others mental, and

would be capable of occupying a high place in some one or more; so that a

real equality, or something more nearly approaching to it than might at first

be supposed, would practically result: not, from the compression, but, on the

contrary, from the largest possible development, of the various natural

superiorities residing in each individual.

              Even from so brief an outline, it must be evident that this system

does no violence to any of the general laws by which human action, even in

the present imperfect state of moral and intellectual cultivation, is influenced;

and that it would be extremely rash to pronounce it incapable of success, or

unfitted to realize a great part of the hopes founded on it by its partisans.

With regard to this, as to all other varieties of Socialism, the thing to be

desired, and to which they have a just claim, is opportunity of trial. They are

all capable of being tried on a moderate scale, and at no risk, either personal

or pecuniary, to any except those who try them. It is for experience to

determine how far or how soon any one or more of the possible systems of

community of property will be fitted to substitute itself for the “organization

of industry” based on private ownership of land and capital. In the meantime

we may, without attempting to limit the ultimate capabilities of human

nature, affirm, that the political economist, for a considerable time to come,

will be chiefly concerned with the conditions of existence and progress

belonging to a society founded on private property and individual

competition; and that the object to be principally aimed at in the present stage

of human improvement, is not the subversion of the system of individual

property, but the improvement of it, and the full participation of every

member of the community in its benefits.

 

 

                   Chapter 2 – The Same Subject Continued

 

 

              1. It is next to be considered, what is included in the idea of private

property, and by what considerations the application of the principle should

be bounded.

              The institution of property, when limited to its essential elements,

consists in the recognition, in each person, of a right to the exclusive disposal

of what he or she have produced by their own exertions, or received either by

gift or by fair agreement, without force or fraud, from those who produced it.

The foundation of the whole is, the right of producers to what they

themselves have produced. It may be objected, therefore, to the institution as

it now exists, that it recognises rights of property in individuals over things

which they have not produced. For example (it may be said) the operatives in

a manufactory create, by their labour and skill, the whole produce; yet,

instead of its belonging to them, the law gives them only their stipulated hire,

and transfers the produce to some one who has merely supplied the funds,

without perhaps contributing anything to the work itself, even in the form of

superintendence. The answer to this is, that the labour of manufacture is only

one of the conditions which must combine for the production of the

commodity. The labour cannot be carried on without materials and

machinery, nor without a stock of necessaries provided in advance, to

maintain the labourers during the production. All these things are the fruits of

previous labour. If the labourers were possessed of them, they would not

need to divide the produce with any one; but while they have them not, an

equivalent must be given to those who have, both for the antecedent labour,

and for the abstinence by which the produce of that labour, instead of being

expended on indulgences, has been reserved for this use. The capital may not

have been, and in most cases was not, created by the labour and abstinence of

the present possessor; but it was created by the labour and abstinence of some

former person, who may indeed have been wrongfully dispossessed of it, but

who, in the present age of the world, much more probably transferred his

claims to the present capitalist by gift or voluntary contract: and the

abstinence at least must have been continued by each successive owner,

down to the present. If it he said, as it may with truth, that those who haveinherited the savings of others have an advantage which they may have in no

way deserved, over the industrious whose predecessors have not left them

anything; I not only admit, but strenuously contend, that this unearned

advantage should be curtailed, as much as is consistent with justice to those

who thought fit to dispose of their savings by giving them to their

descendants. But while it is true that the labourers are at a disadvantage

compared with those whose predecessors have saved, it is also true that the

labourers are far better off than if those predecessors had not saved. They

share in the advantage, though not to an equal extent with the inheritors. The

terms of co-operation between present labour and the fruits of past labour and

saving, are a subject for adjustment between the two parties. Each is

necessary to the other. The capitalists can do nothing without labourers, nor

the labourers without capital. If the labourers compete for employment, the

capitalists on their part compete for labour, to the full extent of the circulating

capital of the country. Competition is often spoken of as if it were necessarily

a cause of misery and degradation to the labouring class; as if high wages

were not precisely as much a product of competition as low wages. The

remuneration of labour is as much the result of the law of competition in the

United States, as it is in Ireland, and much more completely so than in

England.

              The right of property includes then, the freedom of acquiring by

contract. The right of each to what he has produced, implies a right to what

has been produced by others, if obtained by their free consent; since the

producers must either have given it from good will, or exchanged it for what

they esteemed an equivalent, and to prevent them from doing so would be to

infringe their right of property in the product of their own industry.

              2. Before proceeding to consider the things which the principle of

individual property does not include, we must specify one more thing which

it does include: and this is that a title, after a certain period, should be given

by prescription. According to the fundamental idea of property, indeed,

nothing ought to be treated as such, which has been acquired by force or

fraud, or appropriated in ignorance of a prior title vested in some other

person; but it is necessary to the security of rightful possessors, that they

should not be molested by charges of wrongful acquisition, when by the lapse

of time witnesses must have perished or been lost sight of, and the real

character of the transaction can no longer be cleared up. Possession whichhas not been legally questioned within a moderate number of years, ought to

be, as by the laws of all nations it is, a complete title. Even when the

acquisition was wrongful, the dispossession, after a generation has elapsed, of

the probably bonâ fide possessors, by the revival of a claim which had been

long dormant, would generally be a greater injustice, and almost always a

greater private and public mischief, than leaving the original wrong without

atonement. It may seem hard that a claim, originally just, should be defeated

by mere lapse of time; but there is a time after which (even looking at the

individual case, and without regard to the general effect on the security of

possessors), the balance of hardship turns the other way. With the injustices

of men, as with the convulsions and disasters of nature, the longer they

remain unrepaired, the greater become the obstacles to repairing them, arising

from the aftergrowths which would have to be torn up or broken through. In

no human transactions, not even in the simplest and clearest, does it follow

that a thing is fit to be done now, because it was fit to be done sixty years

ago. It is scarcely needful to remark, that these reasons for not disturbing acts

of injustice of old date, cannot apply to unjust systems or institutions; since a

bad law or usage is not one bad act, in the remote past, but a perpetual

repetition of bad acts, as long as the law or usage lasts.

              Such, then, being the essentials of private property, it is now to be

considered, to what extent the forms in which the institution has existed in

different states of society, or still exists, are necessary consequences of its

principle, or are recommended by the reasons on which it is grounded.

              3. Nothing is implied in property but the right of each to his (or her)

own faculties, to what he can produce by them, and to whatever he can get

for them in a fair market; together with his right to give this to any other

person if he chooses, and the right of that other to receive and enjoy it.

              It follows, therefore, that although the right of bequest, or gift after

death, forms part of the idea of private property, the right of inheritance, as

distinguished from bequest, does not. That the property of persons who have

made no disposition of it during their lifetime, should pass first to their

children, and failing them, to the nearest relations, may be a proper

arrangement or not, but is no consequence of the principle of private

property. Although there belong to the decision of such questions many

considerations besides those of political economy, it is not foreign to the plan

of this work to suggest, for the judgment of thinkers, the view of them whichmost recommends itself to the writer’s mind.

              No presumption in favour of existing ideas on this subject is to be

derived from their antiquity. In early ages, the property of a deceased person

passed to his children and nearest relatives by so natural and obvious an

arrangement, that no other was likely to be even thought of in competition

with it. In the first place, they were usually present on the spot : they were in

possession, and if they had no other title, had that, so important in an early

state of society, of first occupancy. Secondly, they were already, in a manner,

joint owners of his property during his life. If the property was in land, it had

generally been conferred by the State on a family rather than on an

individual: if it consisted of cattle or moveable goods, it had probably been

acquired, and was certainly protected and defended, by the united efforts of

all members of the family who were of an age to work or fight. Exclusive

individual property in the modern sense, scarcely entered into the ideas of the

time; and when the first magistrate of the association died, he really left

nothing vacant but his own share in the division, which devolved on the

member of the family who succeeded to his authority. To have disposed of

the property otherwise, would have been to break up a little commonwealth,

united by ideas, interest, and habits, and to cast them adrift on the world.

These considerations, though rather felt than reasoned about, had so great an

influence on the minds of mankind, as to create the idea of an inherent right

in the children to the possessions of their ancestor; a right which it was not

competent to himself to defeat. Bequest, in a primitive state of society, was

seldom recognised; a clear proof, were there no other, that property was

conceived in a manner totally different from the conception of it in the
              40
present time.

              But the feudal family, the last historical form of patriarchal life, has

long perished, and the unit of society is not now the family or clan, composed

of all the reputed descendants of a common ancestor, but the individual; or at

most a pair of individuals, with their unemancipated children. Property is

now inherent in individuals, not in families:the children when grown up do

not follow the occupations or fortunes of the parent: if they participate in the

parent’s pecuniary means it is at his or her pleasure, and not by a voice in the

ownership and government of the whole, but generally by the exclusive

enjoyment of a part; and in this country at least (except as far as entails or

settlements are an obstacle) it is in the power of parents to disinherit even