 
University of Chicago Press 
Translated from the French, La Pensée savage 
© 1962 by Librarie Plon, 8, rue Garancière, Paris-6e 
©Translated from the French by George Weidenfield and Nicholson Ltd. 
 
 has also been exploited to prove the intellectual poverty of 
                        From Savages: 
 
 
              THE SAVAGE MIND Among plants and animals he [the Indian] designates by 
 
                by Claude Lévi Strauss name only those which are useful or harmful, all others are in-
 cluded under the classification of bird, weed, etc. (Krause, p. 
                                                                          104). 
                    Chapter One  
 A more recent observer seems in the same way to be-
        THE SCIENCE OF THE CONCRETE lieve that the native gives names and forms concepts solely 
 
                                                                          in accordance with his needs: 
  
    It has long been the fashion to invoke languages which I well remember the hilarity of Marquesian friends . . . over 
lack the terms for expressing such a concept as ‘tree’ or the (to them) fatuous interest of the botanist of our expedition in 
                                                                          1921, who was collecting nameless (‘useless’) ‘weeds’ and ask-
‘animal’, even though they contain all the words necessary 
                                                                          ing their names (Handy and Pukui, Part VI, p. 127n) 
for a detailed inventory of species and varieties. But, to  
begin with, while these cases are cited as evidence of the However, Handy compares this indifference to that 
supposed ineptitude of ‘primitive people’ for abstract which specialists in our civilization show towards phe-
thought, other cases are at the same time ignored which nomena which have no immediate bearing on their own 
make it plain that richness of abstract words is not a mo-field. When his native collaborator stressed the fact that in 
nopoly of civilized languages. In Chinook, a language Hawaii ‘every botanical, zoological or inorganic form that 
widely spoken in the north-west of North America, to take is known to have been named (and personalized), was 
one example, many properties and qualities are referred to some thing . . . used’, she is careful to add ‘in some way’. 
by means of abstract words: ‘This method’, Boas says, ‘is She goes on to say that the reason why ‘there was an infi-
applied to a greater extent than in any other language I nite variety of living things in forest and sea, of meteoro-
know.’ The proposition ‘The bad man killed the poor logical or marine phenomena, which were unnamed’ was 
child’ is rendered in Chinook: ‘The man’s badness killed that they were regarded as being of no ‘use or interest’ – 
the child’s poverty’; and for ‘The woman used too small a terms which are not equivalent, as ‘use’ concerns practical, 
basket’ they say: ‘She put the potentilla-roots into the and ‘interest’ theoretical, matters. What follows confirms 
smallness of a clam basket’ (Boas 2, pp. 657-8). this by concentrating on the latter aspect at the expense of 
    In every language, moreover, discourse and syntax the former: ‘Living was experience fraught with exact and 
supply indispensable means of supplementing deficiencies definite significance’ (id., p. 126-7), 
of vocabulary. And the tendentious character of the argu-In fact, the delimitation of concepts is different in 
ment referred to in the last paragraph becomes very appar-every language, and, as the author of the article ‘nom’ in 
ent when one observes that the opposite state of affairs, the Encyclopédie correctly observed in the eighteenth cen-
that is, where very general terms outweigh specific names, tury, the use of more or less abstract terms is a function not 
                                                                          of greater or lesser intellectual capacity, but of differences in the interests – in their intensity and attention to detail – the present commercial era which ruthlessly exploits the few 
of particular social groups within the national society: ‘In things that are financially profitable for the time being, neglect-
an observatory a star is not simply a star but β of Capri-ing and often obliterating the rest (Handy and Pukui, Part VIII, 
                                                                          p. 62). 
corn or γ of Centaur or ζ of the Great Bear, etc. In stables  
every horse has a proper name – Diamond, Sprite, Fiery, Cash-crop agriculture is hardly to be confused with the 
etc.’ Further, even if the observation about so-called primi-science of the botanist. But, in ignoring the latter and tak-
tive languages referred to at the beginning of the chapter ing only the former into account, the old Hawaiian aristo-
could be accepted as it stands, one would not be able to crat is simply repeating, and turning to the advantage of a 
conclude from this that such languages are deficient in native culture, a mistake of the same kind that Malinowski 
general ideas. Words like ‘oak’, ‘beech’, ‘birch’, etc., are made when he claimed that primitive peoples’ interest in 
no less entitled to be considered as abstract words than the totemic plants and animals was inspired by nothing but the 
word ‘tree’; and a language possessing only the word rumbling of their stomachs. 
‘tree’ would be, from this point of view less rich in con-Tessman (Vol. 2, p. 192) mentions ‘the accuracy with 
cepts than one which lacked this term but contained doz-which (the Fang of the Gabon) identify the slightest differ-
ens or hundreds for the individual species and varieties. ences between species of the same genus’. The two 
    The proliferation of concepts, as in the case of techni-authors quoted above make a similar observation about 
cal languages, goes with more constant attention to proper-Oceania: 
 
ties of the world, with an interest that is more alert to pos-
                                                                              The acute faculties of this native folk noted with exactitude 
sible distinctions which can be introduced between them. the generic characteristics of all species of terrestial and marine 
This thirst for objective knowledge is one of the most ne-life, and the subtlest variations of natural phenomena such as 
glected aspects of the thought of people we call ‘primi-winds, light and colour, ruffling of water and variation in surf, 
tive’. Even if it is rarely directed towards facts of the same and the currents of water and air (Handy and Pukui, Part VI, p. 
level as those with which modern science is concerned, it 126). 
 
implies comparable intellectual application and methods of Among the Hanunóo of the Philippines a custom as 
observation. In both cases the universe is an object of simple as that of betel chewing demands a knowledge of 
thought at least as much as it is a means of satisfying four varieties of areca nut and eight substitutes for them, 
needs. and of five varieties of betel and five substitutes (Conklin, 
    Every civilization tends to overestimate the objective 3). 
orientation of its thought and this tendency is never absent. Almost all Hanunóo activities require an intimate fa-
When we make the mistake of thinking that the Savage is miliarity with local plants and a precise knowledge of 
governed solely by organic or economic needs, we forget plant classification. Contrary to the assumption that subsis-
that he levels the same reproach at us, and that to him his tence level groups never use but a small segment of the 
own desires for knowledge seems more balanced than local flora, ninety-three per cent of the total number of 
ours: native plant types are recognized by the Hanunóo as cul-
 
    These native Hawaiians’ utilization of their available natural turally significant (Conklin 1, p. 249). This is equally true 
assets was well-nigh complete – infinitely more so than that of of fauna: 



 2  boo clumps, the kolumboy in holes in trees, the konanaba in dark 
    The Hanunóo classify all forms of the local avifauna into thickets, and so forth. In this manner, the Pinatubo Negritos can 
seventy-five categories ... (they) distinguish about a dozen kinds distinguish the habits of more than fifteen species of bats. Of 
of snakes . . . sixty-odd types of fish . . . more than a dozen . . . course, the classification of bats, as well as of insects, birds, 
types of fresh and salt water crustaceans . . . a similar number of animals, fish and plants, is determined primarily by their actual 
. . . types of arachnids and myriapods . . . The thousands of in-physical differences and/or similarities. 
sect forms present are grouped by the Hanunóo into a hundred Most Negrito men can with ease enumerate the specific or 
and eight named categories, including thirteen for ants and ter-descriptive names of at least four hundred and fifty plants, sev-
mites . . . Salt water molluscs . . . of more than sixty classes are enty-five birds, most of the snakes, fish, insects, and animals, 
                                                                                                        *
recognized by the Hanunóo, while terrestrial and fresh water and of even twenty species of ants . . . and the botanical knowl-
types number more than twenty-five . . . Four distinct types of edge of the mananambal, the ‘medicine men and women, who 
  bloodsucking leeches are distinguished . . . : altogether 461 ani-use plants constantly in their practice, is truly astounding (R. B. 
mal types are recorded (id., pp. 67-70). Fox, pp. 187-8). 
  
    A biologist writes the following about pygmies of the Of a backward people of the Tyukyu archipelago, we 
  Philippines: read: 
  
    Another characteristic of Negrito life, a characteristic which Even a child can frequently identify the kind of tree from 
strikingly demarcates them from the surrounding Christian low-which a tiny wood fragment has come and, furthermore, the sex 
landers, is their inexhaustible knowledge of the plant and animal of that tree, as defined by Kabiran notions of plant sex, by ob-
kingdoms. This lore includes not only a specific recognition of a serving the appearance of its wood and bark, its smell, its hard-
phenomenal number of plants, birds, animals, and insects, but ness, and similar characteristics. Fish and shellfish by the dozen 
also includes a knowledge of the habits and behaviour of each. . are known by individually distinctive terms, and their separate 
. . features and habits, as well as the sexual differences within each 
    The Negrito is an intrinsic part of his environment, and what type, are well recognized (Smith, p. 150). 
 
is still more important, continually studies his surroundings. 
                                                                              Several thousand Coahuila Indians never exhausted 
Many times I have seen a Negrito, who, when not being certain 
                                                                          the natural resources of a desert region in South California, 
of the identification of a particular plant, will taste the fruit, 
                                                                          in which today only a handful of white families manage to 
smell the leaves, break and examine the stem, comment upon its 
                                                                          subsist. They lived in a land of plenty, for in this appar-
habitat, and only after all of this, pronounce whether he did or 
did not know the plant. ently completely barren territory, they were familiar with 
 
                                                                          no less than sixty kinds of edible plants and twenty-eight 
    The natives are also interested in plants which are of 
                                                                          others of narcotic, stimulant or medicinal properties (Bar-
no direct use to them, because of their significant links 
                                                                          rows). A single Seminol informant could identify two 
with the animal and insect world, and having shown this, 
                                                                          hundred and fifty species and varieties of plants (Stur-
the same author continues: 
 tevant). Three hundred and fifty plants known to the Hopi 
    The acute observation of the pygmies and their awareness of 
                                                
the interrelationships between the plant and animal life . . . is *
 Also at least forty-five types of edible ground-mushrooms and ear-
strikingly pointed out by their discussions of the living habits of 
                                                                          fungi (1.c., p. 231) and on the technological plane, more than fifty types 
bats. The tididin lives on the dry leaves of palms, the dikidik on 
                                                                          of arrows (id., pp. 265-8). 
the underside of the leaves of the wild banana, the litlit in bam- 


 3 Indians and more than five hundred to the Navaho have These people are farmers: to them plants are as important 
been recorded. The botanical vocabulary of the Subanun of and familiar as people. I’d never been on a farm and am not even 
the Southern Philippines greatly exceeds a hundred terms sure which are begonias, dahlias, or petunias. Plants, like alge-
                                                                          bra, have a habit of looking alike and being different, or looking 
(Frake) and that of the Hanunoo approaches two thou-
      †different and being alike; consequently mathematics and botany 
sand. Sillans, working with a single informant in the Ga-
                                                                          confuse me. For the first time in my life I found myself in a 
bon, recently published an ethno-botanical list of about 
                                                                          community where ten-year-old children weren’t my mathemati-
eight thousand terms, distributed between the languages or 
                                                                          cal superiors. I also found myself in a place where every plant, 
dialects of twelve or thirteen neighbouring tribes. (Walker 
                                                                          wild or cultivated, had a name and a use, and where every man, 
and Sillans). The, for the most part unpublished, results of woman and child knew literally hundreds of plants . . . (my in-
Marcel Griaule and his co-workers in the Sudan promise to structor) simply could not realize that it was not the words but 
be equally impressive. the plants which baffled me (Smith Bowen, p. 19). 
    Their extreme familiarity with their biological envi-The reaction of a specialist is quite different. In a 
ronment, the passionate attention which they pay to it and monograph in which he describes nearly three hundred 
their precise knowledge of it has often struck inquirers as species or varieties of medicinal or toxic plants used by 
an indication of attitudes and preoccupations which distin-certain peoples of Northern Rhodesia, Gilges writes: 
 
guish the natives from their white visitors. Among the 
                                                                            It has always been a surprise to me to find with what eager-
Tewa Indians of New Mexico: ness the people in and around Balovale were ready and willing 
 
    Small differences are noted . . . they have a name for every to talk about their medicines. Was it that they found my interest 
one of the coniferous trees of the region; in these cases differ-in their methods pleasing? Was it an exchange of information 
ences are not conspicuous. The ordinary individual among the amongst colleagues? Or was it to show off their knowledge? 
whites does not distinguish (them) . . . Indeed, it would be possi-Whatever the reason, information was readily forthcoming. I 
ble to translate a treatise on botany into Tewa . . . (Robbins, Har-remember a wicked old Luchozi who brought bundles of dried 
rington and Freire-Marreco, pp. 9, 12). leaves, roots and stems and told me about their uses. How far he 
 
                                                                          was a herbalist and how far a witch-doctor I could never fathom, 
    E. Smith Bowen scarcely exaggerates in the amusing 
                                                                          but I regret that I shall never possess his knowledge of African 
description she gives of her confusion when, on her arrival psychology and his art in the treatment of his fellow men, that, 
in an African tribe, she wanted to begin by learning the coupled with my scientific medical knowledge, might have 
language. Her informants found it quite natural, at an ele-made a most useful combination (Gilges, P. 20). 
 
mentary stage of their instruction, to collect a large num-
                                                                              Conklin quotes the following extract from his field 
ber of botanical specimens, the names of which they told 
                                                                          notes to illustrate the intimate contact between man and his 
her as they showed them to her. She was unable to identify 
                                                                            environment which the native is constantly imposing on 
them, not because of their exotic nature but because she 
                                                                          the ethnologist: 
had never taken an interest in the riches and diversities of  
                                                                              At 0600 and in a light rain, Langba and I left Parina for 
the plant world. The natives on the other hand took such 
                                                                          Binli . . . At Aresaas, Langba told me to cut off several 10 X 50 
an interest for granted. 
                                                                          cm. strips of bark from an anapla kilala tree (Albizzia procera 
                                                                          (Roxb.) Benth.) for protection against the leeches. By periodi-
                                                
†cally rubbing the cambium side of the strips of sapanceous (and 
 See below, pp. 138, 153. 


 4 poisonous: Quisumbling, 1947, 148) bark over our ankles and leaves of trees or plants, and there are fifteen distinct terms 
legs – already wet from the rain-soaked vegetation – we pro-for the different parts of a maize plant. 
duced a most effective leech-repellent lather of pink suds. At 
                                                                              The Hanunóo have more than a hundred and fifty 
one spot along the trail near Aypud, Langba stopped suddenly, 
                                                                          terms for the parts and properties of plants. These provide 
jabbed his walking stick sharply into the side of the trail and 
                                                                          categories for the identification of plants and for ‘discuss-
pulled up a small weed, tawag kagum buladlad (Buchnera ur-
                                                                          ing the hundreds of characteristics which differentiate 
ticifolia R. Br.) which he told me he will use as a lure . . . for a 
spring-spear boar trap. A few minutes later, and we were going plant types and often indicate significant features of me-
at a good pace, he stopped in a similar manner to dig up a small dicinal or nutritional value’ (Conklin I, p. 97). Over six 
terrestrial orchid (hardly noticeable beneath the other foliage) hundred named plants have been recorded among the Pi-
known as líyamlíyam (Epipogum roseum (D. Don.) Lindl.). This natubo and ‘in addition to having an amazing knowledge 
herb is useful in the magical control of insect pests which de-of plants and their uses, . . . (they) employ nearly one hun-
stroy cultivated plants. At Binli, Langha was careful not to dam-dred terms in describing the parts or characteristics of 
age those herbs when searching through the contents of his palm 
                                                                          plants’ (R. B. Fox, p. 179). 
leaf shoulder basket for apug ‘slaked lime’ and tabaku (Nico-
                                                                              Knowledge as systematically developed as this clearly 
tiana tabacum L.) to offer in exchange for other betel ingredi-
                                                                          cannot relate just to practical purposes. The ethnologist 
ents with the Binli folk. After an evaluative discussion about the 
                                                                          who has made the best study of the Indians of the north-
local forms of betel pepper (Piper betle L.) Langba got permis-
sion to cut sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas (L.) Poir.) vines of eastern United States and Canada (the Montagnais, Nas-
two vegetatively distinguishable types, kamuti inaswang and kapi, Micmac, Malecite, Penobscot) emphasizes the wealth 
kamuti lupaw . . . In the camote patch, we cut twenty-five vine-and accuracy of their zoological and botanical knowledge 
tip sections (about 75 cm long) of each variety, and carefully and then continues: 
 
wrapped them in the broad fresh leaves of the cultivated saging 
                                                                              Such knowledge, of course, is to be expected with respect to 
saba (Musa sapientum compressa (Blco. Teoforo) so that they 
                                                                          the habits of the larger animals which furnish food and the mate-
would remain moist until we reached Langba’s place. Along the 
                                                                          rials of industry to primitive man. We expect, for instance, that 
way we munched on a few stems of tubu minuma, a type of 
                                                                          the Penobscot hunter of Maine will have a somewhat more prac-
sugar cane (Saccharum officinarum L.), stopped once to gather 
                                                                          tical knowledge of the habits and character of the moose than 
fallen bunga area nuts (Areca catechu L.), and another time to 
                                                                          even the expert zoologist. But when we realize how the Indians 
pick and eat the wild cherrylike fruits from some bugnay shrubs 
                                                                          have taken pains to observe and systematize facts of science in 
(Antidesma brunius (L.) Spreng). We arrived at the Mararim by 
                                                                          the realm of lower animal life, we may perhaps be pardoned a 
  mid-afternoon having spent much of our time on the trail dis-
                                                                          little surprise. 
cussing changes in the surrounding vegetation in the last few 
                                                                              The whole class of reptiles . . . affords no economic benefit 
decades! (Conklin I, pp. 15-17). 
 to these Indians; they do not eat the flesh of any snakes or batra-
    This knowledge and the linguistic means which it has chians, nor do they make use of other parts except in a very few 
at its disposal also extend to morphology. In Tewa there cases where they serve in the preparation of charms against 
are distinct terms for all or almost all the parts of birds and sickness or sorcery (Speck I, p. 273). 
 
mammals (Henderson and Harrington, p. 9). Forty terms And nevertheless, as Speck has shown, the north-
are employed in the morphological description of the eastern Indians have developed a positive herpetology, 



 5 with distinct terms for each genus of reptile and other are deemed to be useful or interesting because they are 
terms applying to particular species and varieties. first of all known. 
    The precise definition of and the specific uses ascribed It may be objected that science of this kind can 
to the natural products which Siberian peoples use for me-scarcely be of much practical effect. The answer to this is 
dicinal purposes illustrate the care and ingeniousness, the that its main purpose is not a practical one. It meets intel-
attention to detail and concern with distinctions employed lectual requirements rather than or instead of satisfying 
by theoretical and practical workers in societies of this needs. 
kind. We find, for instance: spiders and whiteworms swal-The real question is not whether the touch of a wood-
lowed as a cure for sterility among the Helmene and Iak-pecker’s beak does in fact cure toothache. It is rather 
oute; fat of black beetle (Ossete, hydrophobia); squashed whether there is a point of view from which a wood-
cockroach, chicken’s gall (Russians of Sourgout, abscesses pecker’s beak and a man’s tooth can be seen as ‘going to-
and hernias); macerated redworms (Iakoute, rheumatism); gether’ (the use of this congruity for therapeutic purposes 
pike’s gall (Bouriate, eye complaints); loach and crayfish being only one of its possible uses), and whether some 
swallowed alive (Russians of Siberia, epilepsy and all dis-initial order can be introduced into the universe by means 
eases); contact with a woodpecker’s beak, blood of a of these groupings. Classifying, as opposed to not classify-
woodpecker, nasal insufflation of the powder of a mummi-ing, has a value of its own, whatever form the classifica-
fied woodpecker, gobbled egg of the bird koukcha (Iak-tion may take. As a recent theorist of taxonomy writes: 
 
oute, against toothache, scrofula, high fevers and tubercu-
                                                                              Scientists do tolerate uncertainty and frustration, because 
losis respectively); partridge’s blood, horse’s sweat (Oi-
                                                                          they must. The one thing that they do not and must not tolerate is 
rote, hernias and warts); pigeon broth (Bouriate, coughs); disorder. The whole aim of theoretical science is to carry to the 
powder made of the crushed feet of the bird tilegous (Ka-highest possible and conscious degree the perceptual reduction 
zak, bite of mad dog); dried bat worn round the neck (Rus-of chaos that began in so lowly and (in all probability) uncon-
sians of the Altaï, fever); instillation of water from an ici-scious a way with the origin of life. In specific instances it can 
cle hanging on the nest of the bird remiz (Oïrote, eye com-well be questioned whether the order so achieved is an objective 
                                                                          characteristic of the phenomena or is an artifact constructed by 
plaints). Taking just the case of bears among the Bouriate: 
                                                                          the scientist. That question comes up time after time in animal 
the flesh of bears has seven distinct therapeutic uses, the 
                                                                          taxonomy . . . Nevertheless, the most basic postulate of science 
blood five, the fat nine, the brains twelve, the bile seven-
                                                                          is that nature itself is orderly. . . . All theoretical science is order-
teen, the fur two. It is also the bear’s frozen excretions 
                                                                          ing and if, systematics is equated with ordering, then systematics 
which the Kalar collect at the end of the winter season to 
                                                                          is synonymous with theoretical science (Simpson, p. 5). 
cure constipation (Zelenine, pp. 47-59). An equally exten- 
                                                                              The thought we call primitive is founded on this de-
sive list for an African tribe can be found in a study by 
                                                                          mand for order. This is equally true of all thought but it is 
Loeb. 
                                                                          through the properties common to all thought that we can 
    Examples like these could be drawn from all parts of 
                                                                          most easily begin to understand forms of thought which 
the world and one may readily conclude that animals and 
                                                                          seem very strange to us. 
plants are not known as a result of their usefulness; they 
                                                                            A native thinker makes the penetrating comment that 
                                                                          ‘All sacred things must have their place’ (Fletcher 2, p. 


 6 34). It could even be said that being in their place is what ence not so much by any ignorance or contempt of deter-
makes them sacred for if they were taken out of their minism but by a more imperious and uncompromising 
place, even in thought, the entire order of the universe demand for it which can at the most be regarded as unrea-
would be destroyed. Sacred objects therefore contribute to sonable and precipitate from the scientific point of view. 
 
the maintenance of order in the universe by occupying the 
                                                                            As a natural philosophy it (witchcraft) reveals a theory of 
places allocated to them. Examined superficially and from 
                                                                          causation. Misfortune is due to witchcraft co-operating with 
the outside, the refinements of ritual can appear pointless. natural forces. If a buffalo gores a man, or the supports of a 
They are explicable by a concern for what one might call granary are undermined by termites so that it falls on his head, 
  ‘micro-adjustment’ – the concern to assign every single or he is infected with cerebro-spinal meningitis, Azande say that 
creature, object or feature to a place within a class. The the buffalo, the granary, and the disease, are causes which com-
ceremony of the Hako among the Pawnee is particularly bine with witchcraft to kill a man. Witchcraft does not create the 
                                                                          buffalo and the granary and the disease for these exist in their 
illuminating in this respect, although only because it has 
                                                                          own right, but it is responsible for the particular situation in 
been so well analysed. The invocation which accompanies 
                                                                          which they are brought into lethal relations with a particular 
the crossing of a stream of water is divided into several 
                                                                          man. The granary would have fallen in any case, but since there 
parts, which correspond, respectively, to the moment when 
                                                                          was witchcraft present it fell at the particular moment when a 
the travellers put their feet in water, the moment when they 
                                                                          certain man was resting beneath it. Of these causes the only one 
move them and the moment when the water completely which permits intervention is witchcraft, for witchcraft emanates 
covers their feet. The invocation to the wind separates the from a person. The buffalo and the granary do not allow of in-
moment when only the wet parts of the body feel cool: tervention and are, therefore, whilst recognized as causes, not 
‘Now, we are ready to move forward in safety’ (id., pp. considered the socially relevant ones (Evans-Pritchard I, p. 418-
77-8). As the informant explains: ‘We must address with 19). 
 
song every object we meet, because Tira’wa (the supreme Seen in this way, the first difference between magic and 
spirit) is in all things, everything we come to as we travel science is therefore that magic postulates a complete and 
can give us help . . . ‘(id., pp 73, 81) all-embracing determinism. Science, on the other hand, is 
    This preoccupation with exhaustive observation and based on a distinction between levels: only some of these 
the systematic cataloguing of relations and connections admit forms of determinism; on others the same forms of 
can sometimes lead to scientifically valid results. The determinism are held not to apply. One can go further and 
Blackfoot Indians for instance were able to prognosticate think of the rigorous precision of magical thought and rit-
the approach of spring by the state of development of the ual practices as an expression of the unconscious appre-
foetus of bison which they took from the uterus of females hension of the truth of determinism, the mode in which 
killed in hunting. These successes cannot of course be iso-scientific phenomena exist. In this view, the operations of 
lated from the numerous other associations of the same determinism are divined and made use of in an all-
kind which science condemns as illusory. It may however embracing fashion before being known and properly ap-
be the case that magical thought, that ‘gigantic variation plied, and magical rites and beliefs appear as so many ex-
on the theme of the principle of Causality’ as Hubert and pressions of an act of faith in a science yet to be born. 
Mauss called it (2, p. 61), can be distinguished from sci-



 7     The nature of these anticipations is such that they may intersection of two groups, one also containing broiled 
sometimes succeed. Moreover they may anticipate not meat and brown crusts of bread (which are like it in being 
only science itself but even methods or results which sci-composed of nitrogen) and the other one to which cheese, 
entific procedure does not incorporate until an advanced beer and honey belong on account of the presence of di-
stage of its development. For it seems to be the case that acetyl. Wild cherries, cinnamon, vanilla and sherry are 
man began by applying himself to the most difficult task, grouped together by the intellect as well as the senses, be-
that of systematizing what is immediately presented to the cause they all contain aldehyde, while the closely related 
senses, on which science for a long time turned its back smells of wintergreen, lavender and bananas are to be ex-
and which it is only beginning to bring back into its pur-plained by the presence of ester. On intuitive grounds 
view. In the history of scientific thought this ‘anticipation-alone we might group onions, garlic, cabbage, turnips, rad-
effect’, has, incidentally, occurred repeatedly As Simpson ishes and mustard together even though botany separates 
(pp. 84-5) has shown with the help of an example drawn liliaceae and crucifers. In confirmation of the evidence of 
from nineteenth-century biology, it is due to the fact that, the senses, chemistry shows that these different families 
since scientific explanation is always the discovery of an are united on another plane: they contain sulphur (W.K.). 
‘arrangement’, any attempt of this type, even one inspired A primitive philosopher or a poet could have effected 
by non-scientific principles, can hit on true arrangements. these regroupings on the basis of considerations foreign to 
This is even to be foreseen if one grants that the number of chemistry or any other form of science. Ethnographic lit-
structures is by definition finite: the ‘structuring’ has an erature reveals many of equal empirical and aesthetic 
intrinsic effectiveness of its own whatever the principles value. And this is not just the result of some associative 
and methods which suggested it. madness destined sometimes to succeed simply by the law 
    Modern chemistry reduces the variety of tastes and of chance. Simpson advances this interpretation in the pas-
smells to different combinations of five elements: carbon, sage quoted above; but he displays more insight when he 
hydrogen, oxygen, sulphur and nitrogen. By means of ta-shows that the demand for organization is a need common 
bles of the presence and absence of the elements and esti-to art and science and that in consequence ‘taxonomy, 
mates of proportions and minimum amounts necessary for which is ordering par excellence, has eminent aesthetic 
them to be perceptible, it succeeds in accounting for dif-value’ (loc. cit., p. 4). Given this, it seems less surprising 
ferences and resemblances which were previously ex-that the aesthetic sense can by itself open the way to tax-
cluded from its field on account of their ‘secondary’ char-onomy and even anticipate some of its results. 
acter. These connections and distinctions are however no I am not however commending a return to the popular 
surprise to our aesthetic sense. On the contrary they in-belief (although it has some validity in its own narrow 
crease its scope and understanding by supplying a basis for context) according to which magic is a timid and stuttering 
the associations it already divined; and at the same time form of science. One deprives oneself of all means of un-
one is better able to understand why and in what condi-derstanding magical thought if one tries to reduce it to a 
tions it should have been possible to discover such associa-moment or stage in technical and scientific evolution. Like 
tions solely by the systematic use of intuitive methods. a shadow moving ahead of its owner it is in a sense com-
Thus to a logic of sensations tobacco smoke might be the plete in itself, and as finished and coherent in its immateri-



 8 ality as the substantial being which it precedes. Magical Each of these techniques assumes centuries of active 
thought is not to be regarded as a beginning, a rudiment, a and methodical observation, of bold hypotheses tested by 
sketch, a part of a whole which has not yet materialized. It means of endlessly repeated experiments. A biologist re-
forms a well-articulated system, and is in this respect in-marks on the rapidity with which plants from the New 
dependent of that other system which constitutes science, World have been acclimatized in the Philippines and 
except for the purely formal analogy which brings them adopted and named by the natives. In many cases they 
together and makes the former a sort of metaphorical ex-seem even to have rediscovered their medicinal uses, uses 
pression of the latter. It is therefore better, instead of con-identical with those traditional in Mexico. Fox’s interpre-
trasting magic and science, to compare them as two paral-tation is this: 
 
lel modes of acquiring knowledge. Their theoretical and 
                                                                            . . . plants with bitter leaves or stems are commonly used in 
practical results differ in value, for it is true that science is 
                                                                          the Philippines for stomach disorders. If an introduced plant is 
more successful than magic from this point of view, al-found to have this characteristic, it will be quickly utilized. The 
though magic foreshadows science in that it is sometimes fact that many Philippine groups, such as the Pinatubo Negritos, 
also successful. Both science and magic however require constantly experiment with plants hastens the process of the rec-
the same sort of mental operations and they differ not so ognition of the potential usefulness, as defined by the culture, of 
much in kind as in the different types of phenomena to the introduced flora (R. B. Fox, pp. 212-13). 
 
which they are applied. To transform a weed into a cultivated plant, a wild 
    These relations are a consequence of the objective beast into a domestic animal, to produce, in either of these, 
conditions in which magic and scientific knowledge ap-nutritious or technologically useful properties which were 
peared. The history of the latter is short enough for us to originally completely absent or could only be guessed at; 
know a good deal about it. But the fact that modern sci-to make stout, water-tight pottery out of clay which is fri-
ence dates back only a few centuries raises a problem able and unstable, liable to pulverize or crack (which, 
which ethnologists have not sufficiently pondered. The however, is possible only if from a large number of or-
Neolithic Paradox would be a suitable name for it. ganic and inorganic materials, the one most suitable for 
    It was in neolithic times that man’s mastery of the refining it is selected, and also the appropriate fuel, the 
great arts of civilization – of pottery, weaving, agriculture temperature and duration of firing and the effective degree 
and the domestication of animals – became firmly estab-of oxidation); to work out techniques, often long and com-
lished. No one today would any longer think of attributing plex, which permit cultivation without soil or alternatively 
these enormous advances to the fortuitous accumulation of without water; to change toxic roots or seeds into food-
a series of chance discoveries or believe them to have been stuffs or again to use their poison for hunting, war or ritual 
revealed by the passive perception of certain natural phe-– there is no doubt that all these achievements required a 
      *
nomena. genuinely scientific attitude, sustained and watchful inter-

                                                                                                                                     
*
 An attempt has been made to discover what would happen if copper sisted in subjecting finely ground malachite to intense heat in a pottery 
ore had accidentally found its way into a furnace: complex and varied dish crowned with an inverted clay pot. This, the sole result, restricts 
experiments have shown that nothing happens at all. The simplest the play of chance to the confines of the kiln of some potter specializing 
method of obtaining metallic copper which could be discovered con-in glazed ware (Coghlan). 


 9 est and a desire for knowledge for its own sake. For only a of different features. This example already shows that 
small proportion of observations and experiments (which classification has its advantages even at the level of aes-
must be assumed to have been primarily inspired by a de-thetic perception. 
sire for knowledge) could have yielded practical and im-For the rest, and in spite of the fact there is no neces-
mediately useful results. There is no need to dwell on the sary connection between sensible qualities and properties, 
working of bronze and iron and of precious metals or even there is very often at least an empirical connection be-
the simple working of copper ore by hammering which tween them, and the generalization of this relation may be 
preceded metallurgy by several thousand years, and even rewarding from the theoretical and practical point of view 
at that stage they all demand a very high level of technical for a very long time even if it has no foundation in reason. 
proficiency. Not all poisonous juices are burning or bitter nor is every-
    Neolithic, or early historical, man was therefore the thing which is burning and bitter poisonous. Nevertheless, 
heir of a long scientific tradition. However, had he, as well nature is so constituted that it is more advantageous if 
as all his predecessors, been inspired by exactly the same thought and action proceed as though this aesthetically 
spirit as that of our own time, it would be impossible to satisfying equivalence also corresponded to objective real-
understand how he could have come to a halt and how ity. It seems probable, for reasons which are not relevant 
several thousand years of stagnation have intervened be-here, that species possessing some remarkable characteris-
tween the neolithic revolution and modern science like a tics, say, of shape, colour or smell give the observer what 
level plain between ascents. There is only one solution to might be called a ‘right pending disproof’ to postulate that 
the paradox, namely, that there are two distinct modes of these visible characteristics are the sign of equally singu-
scientific thought. These are certainly not a function of lar, but concealed, properties. To treat the relation between 
different stages of development of the human mind but the two as itself sensible (regarding a seed in the form of a 
rather of two strategic levels at which nature is accessible tooth as a safeguard against snake bites, yellow juices as a 
to scientific enquiry: one roughly adapted to that of per-cure for bilious troubles, etc.) is of more value provision-
ception and the imagination: the other at a remove from it. ally than indifference to any connection. For even a het-
It is as if the necessary connections which are the object of erogeneous and arbitrary classification preserves the rich-
all science, neolithic or modern, could be arrived at by two ness and diversity of the collection of facts it makes. The 
different routes, one very close to, and the other more re-decision that everything must be taken account of facili-
mote from, sensible intuition. tates the creation of a ‘memory bank’. 
    Any classification is superior to chaos and even a clas-It is moreover a fact that particular results, to the 
sification at the level of sensible properties is a step to-achievement of which methods of this kind were able to 
wards rational ordering. It is legitimate, in classifying lead, were essential to enable man to assail nature from a 
fruits into relatively heavy and relatively light, to begin by different angle. Myths and rites are far from being, as has 
separating the apples from the pears even though shape, often been held, the product of man’s ‘myth-making fac-
                                                                              *
colour and taste are unconnected with weight and volume. ulty’, turning its back on reality. Their principal value is 
This is because the larger apples are easier to distinguish 
                                                
from the smaller if the apples are not still mixed with fruit * The phrase is from Bergson, op. cit., ‘fonction fabulatrice’ (trans. 
                                                                          note). 


 10 indeed to preserve until the present time the remains of Like ‘bricolage’ on the technical plane, mythical re-
methods of observation and reflection which were (and no flection can reach brilliant unforeseen results on the intel-
doubt still are) precisely adapted to discoveries of a certain lectual plane. Conversely, attention has often been drawn 
type: those which nature authorised from the starting point to the mytho-poetical nature of ‘bricolage’ on the plane of 
of a speculative organization and exploitation of the sensi-so-called ‘raw’ or ‘naive’ art, in architectural follies like 
ble world in sensible terms. This science of the concrete the villa of Cheval the postman or the stage sets of 
was necessarily restricted by its essence to results other Georges Méliès, or, again, in the case immortalized by 
than those destined to be achieved by the exact natural sci-Dickens in Great Expectations but no doubt originally in-
ences but it was no less scientific and its results no less spired by observation, of Mr Wemmick’s suburban ‘castle’ 
genuine. They were secured ten thousand years earlier and with its miniature drawbridge, its cannon firing at nine 
still remain at the basis of our own civilization. o’clock, its bed of salad and cucumbers, thanks to which 
    There still exists among ourselves an activity which on its occupants could withstand a siege if necessary . . .  
the technical plane gives us quite a good understanding of The analogy is worth pursuing since it helps us to see 
what a science we prefer to call ‘prior’ rather than ‘primi-the real relations between the two types of scientific 
tive’, could have been on the plane of speculation. This is knowledge we have distinguished. The ‘bricoleur’ is adept 
what is commonly called ‘bricolage’ in French. In its old at performing a large number of diverse tasks; but, unlike 
sense the verb ‘bricoler’ applied to ball games and bil-the engineer, he does not subordinate each of them to the 
liards, to hunting, shooting and riding. It was however al-availability of raw materials and tools conceived and pro-
ways used with reference to some extraneous movement: a cured for the purpose of the project. His universe of in-
ball rebounding, a dog straying or a horse swerving from struments is closed and the rules of his game are always to 
its direct course to avoid an obstacle. And in our own time make do with ‘whatever is at hand’, that is to say with a 
the’bricoleur’ is still someone who works with his hands set of tools and materials which is always finite and is also 
                                                  *
and uses devious means compared to those of a craftsman. heterogeneous because what it contains bears no relation 
The characteristic feature of mythical thought is that it ex-to the current project, or indeed to any particular project, 
presses itself by means of a heterogeneous repertoire but is the contingent result of all the occasions there have 
which, even if extensive, is nevertheless limited. It has to been to renew or enrich the stock or to maintain it with the 
use this repertoire, however, whatever the task in hand remains of previous constructions or destructions. The set 
because it has nothing else at its disposal. Mythical of the ‘bricoleur’s’ means cannot therefore be defined in 
thought is therefore a kind of intellectual ‘bricolage’ – terms of a project (which would presuppose besides, that, 
which explains the relation which can be perceived be-as in the case of the engineer, there were, at least in theory, 
tween the two. as many sets of tools and materials or ‘instrumental sets’, 
                                                                          as there are different kinds of projects). It is to be defined 
                                                
                                                                          only by its potential use or, putting this another way and in 
*
 The ‘bricoleur’ has no precise equivalent in English. He is a man who 
                                                                          the language of the ‘bricoleur’ himself, because the ele-
undertakes odd jobs and is a Jack of all trades or a kind of professional 
do-it-yourself man, but, as the text makes clear, he is of a different ments are collected or retained on the principle that ‘they 
standing from, for instance, the English ‘odd job man’ or handyman may always come in handy’. Such elements are specialized 
(trans. note). 


 11 up to a point, sufficiently for the ‘bricoleur’ not to need the cover what each of them could ‘signify’ and so contribute 
equipment and knowledge of all trades and professions, to the definition of a set which has yet to materialize but 
but not enough for each of them to have only one definite which will ultimately differ from the instrumental set only 
and determinate use. They each represent a set of actual in the internal disposition of its parts. A particular cube of 
and possible relations; they are ‘operators’ but they can be oak could be a wedge to make up for the inadequate length 
used for any operations of the same type. of a plank of pine or it could be a pedestal – which would 
    The elements of mythical thought similarly lie half-allow the grain and polish of the old wood to show to ad-
way between percepts and concepts. It would be impossi-vantage. In one case it will serve as extension, in the other 
ble to separate percepts from the concrete situations in as material. But the possibilities always remain limited by 
which they appeared, while recourse to concepts would the particular history of each piece and by those of its fea-
require that thought could, at least provisionally, put its tures which are already determined by the use for which it 
projects (to use Husserl’s expression) ‘in brackets’. Now, was originally intended or the modifications it has under-
there is an intermediary between images and concepts, gone for other purposes. The elements which the ‘brico-
namely signs. For signs can always be defined in the way leur’ collects and uses are ‘pre-constrained’ like the consti-
introduced by Saussure in the case of the particular cate-tutive units of myth, the possible combinations of which 
gory of linguistic signs, that is, as a link between images are restricted by the fact that they are drawn from the lan-
and concepts. In the union thus brought about, images and guage where they already possess a sense which sets a 
concepts play the part of the signifying and signified re-limit on their freedom of manoeuvre (Lévi-Strauss, 5, p. 
spectively. 35). And the decision as to what to put in each place also 
    Signs resemble images in being concrete entities but depends on the possibility of putting a different element 
they resemble concepts in their powers of reference. Nei-there instead, so that each choice which is made will in-
ther concepts nor signs relate exclusively to themselves; volve a complete reorganization of the structure, which 
either may be substituted for something else. Concepts, will never be the same as one vaguely imagined nor as 
however, have an unlimited capacity in this respect, while some other which might have been preferred to it. 
signs have not. The example of the ‘bricoleur’ helps to The engineer no doubt also cross-examines his re-
bring out the differences and similarities. Consider him at sources. The existence of an ‘interlocutor’ is in his case 
work and excited by his project. His first practical step is due to the fact that his means, power and knowledge are 
  retrospective. He has to turn back to an already existent set never unlimited and that in this negative form he meets 
made up of tools and materials, to consider or reconsider resistance with which he has to come to terms. It might be 
what it contains and, finally and above all, to engage in a said that the engineer questions the universe, while the 
sort of dialogue with it and, before choosing between ‘bricoleur’ addresses himself to a collection of oddments 
them, to index the possible answers which the whole set left over from human endeavours, that is, only a sub-set of 
can offer to his problem. He interrogates all the heteroge-the culture. Again, Information Theory shows that it is 
                                *
neous objects of which his treasury is composed to dis-possible, and often useful, to reduce the physicists’ ap-

                                                proaches to a sort of dialogue with nature. This would 
*
 Cf. ‘Treasury of ideas’ as Hubert and Mauss so aptly describe magic make the distinction we are trying to draw less clearcut. 
(2, p. 136). 


 12 There remains however a difference even if one takes into interlocutor in spite of his reticence in pronouncing on 
account the fact that the scientist never carries on a dia-questions whose answers have not been rehearsed. Con-
logue with nature pure and simple but rather with a par-cepts thus appear like operators opening up the set being 
ticular relationship between nature and culture definable in worked with and signification like the operator of its reor-
terms of his particular period and civilization and the ma-ganization, which neither extends nor renews it and limits 
terial means at his disposal. He is no more able than the itself to obtaining the group of its transformations. 
‘bricoleur’ to do whatever he wishes when he is presented Images cannot be ideas but they can play the part of 
with a given task. He too has to begin by making a cata-signs or, to be more precise, co-exist with ideas in signs 
logue of a previously determined set consisting of theo-and, if ideas are not yet present, they can keep their future 
retical and practical knowledge, of technical means, which place open for them and make its contours apparent nega-
restrict the possible solutions. tively. Images are fixed, linked in a single way to the men-
    The difference is therefore less absolute than it might tal act which accompanies them. Signs, and images which 
appear. It remains a real one, however, in that the engineer have acquired significance, may still lack comprehension; 
is always trying to make his way out of and go beyond the unlike concepts, they do not yet possess simultaneous and 
constraints imposed by a particular state of civilization theoretically unlimited relations with other entities of the 
while the ‘bricoleur’ by inclination or necessity always same kind. They are however already permutable, that is, 
remains within them. This is another way of saying that capable of standing in successive relations with other enti-
the engineer works by means of concepts and the ‘brico-ties – although with only a limited number and, as we have 
leur’ by means of signs. The sets which each employs are seen, only on the condition that they always form a system 
at different distances from the poles on the axis of opposi-in which an alteration which affects one element automati-
tion between nature and culture. One way indeed in which cally affects all the others. On this plane logicians’ ‘exten-
signs can be opposed to concepts is that whereas concepts sion’ and ‘intension’ are not two distinct and complemen-
aim to be wholly transparent with respect to reality, signs tary aspects but one and the same thing. One understands 
allow and even require the interposing and incorporation then how mythical thought can be capable of generalizing 
of a certain amount of human culture into reality. Signs, in and so be scientific, even though it is still entangled in im-
Peirce’s vigorous phrase ‘address somebody’. agery. It too works by analogies and comparisons even 
    Both the scientist and ‘bricoleur’ might therefore be though its creations, like those of the ‘bricoleur’, always 
said to be constantly on the look out for ‘messages’. Those really consist of a new arrangement of elements, the nature 
which the ‘bricoleur’ collects are, however, ones which of which is unaffected by whether they figure in the in-
have to some extent been transmitted in advance – like the strumental set or in the final arrangement (these being the 
commercial codes which are summaries of the past experi-same, apart from the internal disposition of their parts): ‘it 
ence of the trade and so allow any new situation to be met would seem that mythological worlds have been built up, 
  economically, provided that it belongs to the same class as only to be shattered again, and that new worlds were built 
some earlier one. The scientist, on the other hand, whether from the fragments’ (Boas 1, p. 18). Penetrating as this 
he is an engineer or a physicist, is always on the look out comment is, it nevertheless fails to take into account that 
for that other message which might be wrested from an in the continual reconstruction from the same materials, it 



 13 is always earlier ends which are called upon to play the French ‘des bribes et des morceaux’, or odds and ends in 
part of means: the signified changes into the signifying and English, fossilized evidence of the history of an individual 
vice versa. or a society. The relation between the diachronic and the 
    This formula, which could serve as a definition of synchronic is therefore in a sense reversed. Mythical 
‘bricolage’, explains how an implicit inventory or concep-thought, that ‘bricoleur’, builds up structures by fitting 
                                                                                                                    *
tion of the total means available must be made in the case together events, or rather the remains of events, while sci-
of mythical thought also, so that a result can be defined ence, ‘in operation’ simply by virtue of coming into being, 
which will always be a compromise between the structure creates its means and results in the form of events, thanks 
of the instrumental set and that of the project. Once it ma-to the structures which it is constantly elaborating and 
terializes the project will therefore inevitably be at a re-which are its hypotheses and theories. But it is important 
move from the initial aim (which was moreover a mere not to make the mistake of thinking that these are two 
sketch), a phenomenon which the surrealists have felici-stages or phases in the evolution of knowledge. Both ap-
tously called ‘objective hazard’. Further, the ‘bricoleur’ proaches are equally valid. Physics and chemistry are al-
also, and indeed principally, derives his poetry from the ready striving to become qualitative again, that is, to ac-
fact that he does not confine himself to accomplishment count also for secondary qualities which when they have 
and execution: he ‘speaks’ not only with things, as we been explained will in their turn become means of expla-
have already seen, but also through the medium of things: nation. And biology may perhaps be marking time waiting 
giving an account of his personality and life by the choices for this before it can itself explain life. Mythical thought 
he makes between the limited possibilities. The ‘bricoleur’ for its part is imprisoned in the events and experiences 
may not ever complete his purpose but he always puts which it never tires of ordering and re-ordering in its 
something of himself into it. search to find them a meaning. But it also acts as a libera-
    Mythical thought appears to be an intellectual form of tor by its protest against the idea that anything can be 
‘bricolage’ in this sense also. Science as a whole is based meaningless with which science at first resigned itself to a 
on the distinction between the contingent and the neces-compromise. 
sary, this being also what distinguishes event and struc-The problem of art has been touched on several times 
ture. The qualities it claimed at its outset as peculiarly sci-in the foregoing discussion, and it is worth showing briefly 
entific were precisely those which formed no part of living how, from this point of view, art lies half-way between 
experience and remained outside and, as it were, unrelated scientific knowledge and mythical or magical thought. It is 
to events. This is the significance of the notion of primary common knowledge that the artist is both something of a 
qualities. Now, the characteristic feature of mythical scientist and of a ‘bricoleur’. By his craftsmanship he con-
thought, as of ‘bricolage’ on the practical plane, is that it structs a material object which is also an object of knowl-
builds up structured sets, not directly with other structured edge. We have already distinguished the scientist and the 
  *
sets but by using the remains and debris of events: in ‘bricoleur’ by the inverse functions which they assign to 

                                                                                     
                                                it: it builds ideological castles out of the debris of what was once a so-
*
 Mythical thought builds structured sets by means of a structured set, cial discourse. 
namely, language. But it is not at the structural level that it makes use of * ‘Bricolage’ also works with ‘secondary’ qualities, i.e. ‘second hand’. 


 14 events and structures as ends and means, the scientist cre-
ating events (changing the world) by means of structures 
and the ‘bricoleur’ creating structures by means of events. 
This is imprecise in this crude form but our analysis makes 
it possible for us to refine it. Let us now look at this por-
trait of a woman by Clouet and consider the reason for the 
very profound aesthetic emotion which is, apparently in-
explicably, aroused by the highly realistic, thread by 
thread, reproduction of a lace collar (Plate 1).  
    The choice of this example is not accidental. Clouet is 
known to have liked to paint at less than life-size. His 
paintings are therefore, like Japanese gardens, miniature 
vehicles and ships in bottles, what in the ‘bricoleur’s’ lan-
guage are called ‘small-scale models’ or ‘miniatures’. 
Now, the question arises whether the small-scale model or 
miniature, which is also the ‘masterpiece’ of the journey-
man may not in fact be the universal type of the work of 
art. All miniatures seem to have intrinsic aesthetic quality 
– and from what should they draw this constant virtue if 
not from the dimensions themselves? – and conversely the 
vast majority of works of art are small-scale. It might be 
thought that this characteristic is principally a matter of 
economy in materials and means, and one might appeal in 
support of this theory to works which are incontestably 
artistic but also on a grand scale. We have to be clear 
about definitions. The paintings of the Sistine Chapel are a 
small-scale model in spite of their imposing dimensions, 
since the theme which they depict is the End of Time. The 
same is true of the cosmic symbolism of religious monu-

ments. Further, we may ask whether the aesthetic effect, 1 François Clouet. Portrait of Elizabeth of Austria. 
say, of an equestrian statue which is larger than life derives  
from its enlargement of a man to the size of a rock or giving up certain dimensions of the object: volume in 
whether it is not rather due to the fact that it restores what painting, colour, smell, tactile impressions in sculpture and 
is at first from a distance seen as a rock to the proportions the temporal dimension in both cases since the whole work 
of a man. Finally even ‘natural size’ implies a reduction of represented is apprehended at a single moment in time. 
scale since graphic or plastic transposition always involves 



 15     What is the virtue of reduction either of scale or in the A child’s doll is no longer an enemy, a rival or even an 
number of properties? It seems to result from a sort of interlocutor. In it and through it a person is made into a 
                              reversal in the process of subject. In the case of miniatures, in contrast to what hap-
                              understanding. To under-pens when we try to understand an object or living crea-
                              stand a real object in its ture of real dimensions, knowledge of the whole precedes 
                              totality we always tend knowledge of the parts. And even if this is an illusion, the 
                              to work from its parts. point of the procedure is to create or sustain the illusion, 
                              The resistance it offers which gratifies the intelligence and gives rise to a sense of 
                              us is overcome by divid-pleasure which can already be called aesthetic on these 
                              ing it. Reduction in scale grounds alone. 
                              reverses this situation. I have so far only considered matters of scale which, 
                              Being smaller, the object as we have just seen, imply a dialectical relation between 
                              as a whole seems less size (i.e. quantity) and quality. But miniatures have a fur-
                              formidable. By being ther feature. They are ‘man made’ and, what is more, made 
                              quantitatively dimin-by hand. They are therefore not just projections or passive 
                              ished, it seems to us homologues of the object: they constitute a real experi-
                              qualitatively simplified. ment with it. Now the model being an artefact, it is possi-
                              More exactly, this quan-ble to understand how it is made and this understanding of 
                              titative transposition ex-the method of construction adds a supplementary dimen-
                              tends and diversifies our sion. As we have already seen in the case of ‘bricolage’, 
                              power over a homologue and the example of ‘styles’ of painters shows that the same 
                              of the thing, and by is true in art, there are several solutions to the same prob-
                              means of it the latter can lem. The choice of one solution involves a modification of 
  
2  Club used for killing fish be grasped, assessed and the result to which another solution would have led, and 
 apprehended at a glance. the observer is in effect presented with the general picture 
 
                                                                          of these permutations at the same time as the particular 
 solution offered. He is thereby transformed into an active 
                                                                          participant without even being aware of it. Merely by con-
                                                                          templating it he is, as it were, put in possession of other 
                                                                          possible forms of the same work; and in a confused way, 
                                                                          he feels himself to be their creator with more right than the 
                                                                          creator himself because the latter abandoned them in ex-
                                                                          cluding them from his creation. And these forms are so 
                                                                          many further perspectives opening out on to the work 
                                                                          which has been realized. In other words, the intrinsic value 
                                                                          of a small-scale model is that it compensates for the re-



 16 nunciation of sensible dimensions by the acquisition of of the lace collar is also affected by whether it indicates 
intelligible dimensions. casual or formal dress, is worn, either new or previously 
    Let us now return to the lace collar in Clouet’s picture. used, either freshly ironed or creased, by an ordinary 
Every thing that has been said applies in this case, for the woman or a queen, whose physiognomy confirms, contra-
procedure necessary to represent it as a projection, in a dicts or qualifies her status in a particular social class, so-
particular space, of properties whose sensible dimensions ciety, part of the world and period of history . . . The 
are fewer and smaller than that of the object is exactly the painter is always mid-way between design and anecdote, 
reverse of that which science would have employed had it and his genius consists in uniting internal and external 
proposed, in accordance with its function, to produce (in-knowledge, a ‘being’ and a ‘becoming’, in producing with 
stead of reproducing) not only a new, instead of an already his brush an object which does not exist as such and which 
known, piece of lace but also real lace instead of a picture he is nevertheless able to create on his canvas. This is a 
of lace. Science would have worked on the real scale but nicely balanced synthesis of one or more artificial and 
by means of inventing a loom, while art works on a dimin-natural structures and one or more natural and social 
ished scale to produce an image homologous with the ob-events. The aesthetic emotion is the result of this union 
ject. The former approach is of a metonymical order, it between the structural order and the order of events, which 
replaces one thing by another thing, an effect by its cause, is brought about within a thing created by man and so also 
while the latter is of a metaphorical order. in effect by the observer who discovers the possibility of 
    This is not all. For if it is true that the relation of prior-such a union through the work of art.  
ity between structure and event is exactly the opposite in Several points are suggested by this analysis. In the 
science and ‘bricolage’, then it is clear that art has an in-first place, the analysis helps us to see why we are inclined 
termediate position from this point of view as well. Even to think of myths both as systems of abstract relations and 
if, as we have shown, the depiction of a lace collar in as objects of aesthetic contemplation. The creative act 
miniature demands an intimate knowledge of its morphol-which gives rise to myths is in fact exactly the reverse of 
ogy and technique of manufacture (and had it been a ques-that which gives rise to works of art. In the case of works 
tion of the representation of people or animals we should of art, the starting point is a set of one or more objects and 
have said: of anatomy and physical attitudes), it is not just one or more events which aesthetic creation unifies by re-
a diagram or blueprint. It manages to synthesize these in-vealing a common structure. Myths travel the same road 
trinsic properties with properties which depend on a spatial but start from the other end. They use a structure to pro-
and temporal context. The final product is the lace collar duce what is itself an object consisting of a set of events 
exactly as it is but so that at the same time its appearance (for all myths tell a story). Art thus proceeds from a set 
is affected by the particular perspective. This accentuates (object + event) to the discovery of its structure. Myth 
some parts and conceals others, whose existence however starts from a structure by means of which it constructs a 
still influences the rest through the contrast between its set (object + event). 
whiteness and the colour of the other clothes, the reflection The first point tempts one to generalize the theory. The 
of the pearly neck it encircles and that of the sky on a par-second might seem to lead to a restriction of it. For we 
ticular day and at a particular time of day. The appearance may ask whether it is in fact the case that works of art are 



 17 always an integration of structure and event. This does not question. Depending on the style, place and period the 
on the face of it seem to be true for instance of the cedar-contingent plays a part in three different ways or at three 
wood Tlingit club, used to kill fish, which I have in front distinct points in artistic creation (or in all of them). It may 
of me on my bookshelf (Plate 2). The artist who carved it play a part in the occasion for the work or in the execution 
in the form of a sea monster intended the body of the im-of the work or in the purpose for which it is intended. It is 
plement to be fused with the body of the animal and the only in the first case that it takes the form of an event 
handle with its tail, and that the anatomical proportions, properly speaking, that is, of contingency exterior and 
taken from a fabulous creature, should be such that the prior to the creative act. The artist perceives it from with-
object could be the cruel animal slaying helpless victims, out as an attitude, an expression, a light effect or a situa-
at the same time as an easily handled, balanced and effi-tion, whose sensible and intellectual relations to the struc-
cient fishing utensil. Everything about this implement – ture of the object affected by these modalities he grasps 
which is also a superb work of art – seems to be a matter and incorporates in his work. But the contingent can also 
of structure: its mythical symbolism as well as its practical play an intrinsic part in the course of execution itself, in 
function. More accurately, the object, its function and its the size or shape of the piece of wood the sculptor lays 
symbolism seem to be inextricably bound up with each hands on, in the direction and quality of its grain, in the 
other and to form a closed system in which there is no imperfections of his tools, in the resistance which his ma-
place for events. The monster’s position, appearance and terials or project offer to the work in the course of its ac-
expression owe nothing to the historical circumstances in complishment, in the unforeseeable incidents arising dur-
which the artist saw it, in the flesh or in a dream, or con-ing work. Finally, the contingent can be extrinsic as in the 
ceived the idea of it. It is rather as if its immutable being first case but posterior, instead of anterior, to the act of 
were finally fixed in the wood whose fine grain allows the creation. This is the case whenever the work is destined for 
reproduction of all its aspects and in the use for which its a specific end, since the artist will construct it with a view 
empirical form seems to pre-determine it. And all this ap-to its potential condition and successive uses in the future 
plies equally to the other products of primitive art: an Af-and so will put himself, consciously or unconsciously, in 
rican statue or a Melanesian mask . . . So it looks as if we the place of the person for whose use it is intended. 
have defined only one local and historical form of aes-The process of artistic creation therefore consists in 
thetic creation and not its fundamental properties or those trying to communicate (within the immutable framework 
by means of which its intelligible relations with other of a mutual confrontation of structure and accident) either 
forms of creation can be described. with the model or with the materials or with the future 
    We have only to widen our explanation to overcome user as the case may be, according to which of these the 
this difficulty. What, with reference to a picture of artist particularly looks to for his directions while he is at 
Clouet’s, was provisionally defined as an event or set of work. Each case roughly corresponds to a readily identifi-
events now appears under a broader heading: events in this able form of art: the first to the plastic arts of the West, the 
sense are only one mode of the contingent whose integra-second to so-called primitive or early art and the third to 
tion (perceived as necessary) into a structure gives rise to the applied arts. But it would be an oversimplification to 
the aesthetic emotion. This is so whatever the type of art in take these identifications very strictly. All forms of art al-



 18 low all three aspects and they are only distinguished from positions reproduce the hour and order of battle and the 
one another by the relative proportion of each. Even the number and disposition of the buttons distinguishing the 
most academic of painters comes up against problems of uniforms of each Arm. To use a disrespectful analogy, 
                                                                                                    *
execution, for example. All the so-called primitive arts can ‘opportunity makes the thief’ in either case. The relative 
be called applied in a double sense: first, because many of proportions of the three aspects are reversed in the applied 
their productions are technical objects and, secondly, be-arts. In these, first place is given to purpose and execution, 
cause even those which seem most divorced from practical contingent factors playing an approximately equal part in 
  preoccupations have a definite purpose. Finally, as we each, in the examples we consider the most ‘pure’, at the 
know, implements lend themselves to disinterested con-same time the occasion of the work plays no part. This can 
templation even among ourselves. be seen from the fact that a wine cup or goblet, a piece of 
    With these reservations, it is easy to show that the basket work or a fabric seems to us perfect when its practi-
three aspects are functionally related and that the predomi-cal value manifestly transcends time and corresponds 
nance of any one of them leaves less or no place for the wholly to its functions for men of different periods and 
others. So-called professional painting is, or believes itself civilizations. If the difficulties of execution are entirely 
to be, quite free so far as both execution and purpose are mastered, as is the case when it is entrusted to machines, 
concerned. Its best examples display a complete mastery the purpose can become more and more precise and spe-
of technical difficulties – which, indeed, can be considered cific and applied art is transformed into industrial art. We 
to have been completely overcome since Van der Weyden; call it peasant or folk art if the reverse is the case. Finally, 
the problems which painters have set themselves since primitive art is the opposite of professional or academic 
then amount to little more than a game of technical re-art. Professional or academic art internalizes execution 
finement. In the extreme case it is as though, given his (which it has, or believes itself to have, mastered) and pur-
canvas, paints and brushes, the painter were able to do ex-pose (‘art for art’s sake’ being an end in itself). As a result, 
actly what he pleased. On the other hand, he also tries to it is impelled to externalize the occasion (which it requires 
make his work into an object independent of anything con-the model to provide) and the latter thus becomes a part of 
tingent, of value in itself and for itself. This is indeed what the signified. Primitive art, on the other hand, internalizes 
the formula of the ‘easel picture’ implies. Freed from the the occasion (since the supernatural beings which it de-
contingent both with regard to execution and purpose pro-lights in representing have a reality which is timeless and 
fessional painting can, then, bring it to bear upon the occa-independent of circumstances) and it externalizes execu-
sion of the work, and indeed if this account is correct it is tion and purpose which thus become a part of the signify-
bound to do so. Professional painting can therefore be de-ing. 
fined as ‘genre’ painting if the sense of this expression is On a different plane we therefore find once more this 
considerably widened. For, from the very general view-dialogue with the materials and means of execution by 
point we are taking, the attempt of a portrait painter – even which we defined ‘bricolage’. The essential problem for 
of a Rembrandt – to recapture on his canvas his model’s the philosophy of art is to know whether the artist regards 
most revealing expression or secret thoughts belongs to the 
same genre as that of a painter like Detaille, whose com-                                                
                                                                          *
 In the original: ‘l’occasion fait le larron’ (trans. note). 


 19 them as interlocutors or not. No doubt they are always re-From this point of view, it would seem that impressionism 
garded as such, although least of all in art which is too pro-and cubism are not so much two successive stages in the 
fessional and most of all in the raw or naive art which development of painting as partners in the same enterprise, 
verges on ‘bricolage’, to the detriment of structure in both which, although not exact contemporaries, nevertheless 
cases. No form of art is, however, worthy of the name if it collaborated by complementary distortions to prolong a 
allows itself to come entirely under the sway of extraneous mode of expression whose very existence, as we are better 
  contingencies, whether of occasion or purpose. If it did so able to appreciate today, was seriously threatened. The 
it would rate as an icon (supplementary to the model) or as intermittent fashion for ‘collages’, originating when 
an implement (complementary with the material worked). craftsmanship was dying, could not for its part be anything 
Even the most professional art succeeds in moving us only but the transposition of ‘bricolage’ into the realms of con-
if it arrests in time this dissipation of the contingent in fa-templation. Finally, the stress on the event can also break 
vour of the pretext and incorporates it in the work, thereby away at certain times through greater emphasis either on 
investing it with the dignity of being an object in its own transient social phenomena (as in the case of Grenze at the 
right. In so far as early art, primitive art and the ‘primitive’ end of the eighteenth century or with socialist realism) or 
periods of professional painting are the only ones which do on transient natural, or even meteorological, phenomena 
not date, they owe it to this dedication of the accidental to (impressionism) at the expense of structure, ‘structure’ 
the service of execution and so to the use, which they try here being understood as ‘structure of the same level’, for 
to make complete, of the raw datum as the empirical mate-the possibility of the structural aspect being re-established 
                          *
rial of something meaningful. elsewhere on a new plane is not ruled out. 
    It is necessary to add that the balance between struc-We have seen that there are analogies between mythi-
ture and event, necessity and contingency, the internal and cal thought on the theoretical, and ‘bricolage’ on the prac-
external is a precarious one. It is constantly threatened by tical plane and that artistic creation lies mid-way between 
forces which act in one direction or the other according to science and these two forms of activity. There are relations 
fluctuations in fashion, style or general social conditions. of the same type between games and rites. 
                                                                              All games are defined by a set of rules which in prac-
                                                
*tice allow the playing of any number of matches. Ritual, 
 Pursuing this analysis, one might define non-representational painting 
by two features. One, which it has in common with ‘easel’ painting, which is also ‘played’, is on the other hand, like a favoured 
consists in a total rejection of the contingency of purpose: the picture is instance of a game, remembered from among the possible 
not made for a particular use. The other feature characteristic of non-
                                                                          ones because it is the only one which results in a particular 
representational painting is its methodical exploitation of the contin-
                                                                          type of equilibrium between the two sides. The transposi-
gency of execution, which is claimed to afford the external pretext or 
occasion of the picture. Non-representational painting adopts ‘styles’ as tion is readily seen in the case of the Gahuku-Gama of 
‘subjects’. It claims to give a concrete representation of the formal con-New Guinea who have learnt football but who will play, 
ditions of all painting. Paradoxically the result is that nonrepresenta-
                                                                          several days running, as many matches as are necessary 
tional painting does not, as it thinks, create works which are as real as, 
                                                                          for both sides to reach the same score (Read, p. 429). This 
if not more real than, the objects of the physical world, but rather realis-
tic imitations of non-existent models. It is a school of academic painting is treating a game as a ritual. 
in which each artist strives to represent the manner in which he would 
execute his pictures if by chance he were to paint any.  


 20     The same can be said of the games which took place ing offered the dead the consolation of a last match before 
among the Fox Indians during adoption ceremonies. Their finally being rid of them. But, since the two teams are 
purpose was to replace a dead relative by a living one and asymmetrical in what they stand for, the outcome is inevi-
                                                  *
so to allow the final departure of the soul of the deceased. tably determined in advance: 
 
The main aim of funeral rites among the Fox seems indeed 
                                                                              This is how it is when they play ball. When the man for 
to be to get rid of the dead and to prevent them from 
                                                                          whom the adoption-feast is held is a Tokana, the Tokanagi win 
avenging on the living their bitterness and their regret that the game. The Kickoagi cannot win. And if it is a Kicko woman 
they are no longer among them. For native philosophy for whom the adoption feast is given, the Kickoagi win, as in 
resolutely sides with the living: ‘Death is a hard thing. Sor-turn the Tokanagi do not win (Michelson I, p. 385). 
 
row is especially hard’. 
                                                                              And what is in fact the case? It is clear that it is only 
    Death originated in the destruction by supernatural 
                                                                          the living who win in the great biological and social game 
powers of the younger of two mythical brothers who are 
                                                                          which is constantly taking place between the living and the 
cultural heroes among all the Algonkin. But it was not yet 
                                                                          dead. But, as all the North American mythology confirms, 
final. It was made so by the elder brother when, in spite of 
                                                                          to win a game is symbolically to ‘kill’ one’s opponent; this 
his sorrow, he rejected the ghost’s request to be allowed to 
                                                                          is depicted as really happening in innumerable myths. By 
return to his place among the living. Men must follow this 
                                                                          ruling that they should always win, the dead are given the 
example and be firm with the dead. The living must make 
                                                                          illusion that it is they who are really alive, and that their 
them understand that they have lost nothing by dying since 
                                                                          opponents, having been ‘killed’ by them, are dead. Under 
they regularly receive offerings of tobacco and food. In 
                                                                          the guise of playing with the dead, one plays them false 
return they are expected to compensate the living for the 
                                                                          and commits them. The formal structure of what might at 
reality of death which they recall to them and for the sor-
                                                                          first sight be taken for a competitive game is in fact identi-
row their demise causes them by guaranteeing them long 
                                                                          cal with that of a typical ritual such as the Mitawit or 
life, clothes and something to eat. ‘It is the dead who make 
                                                                          Midewinin of these same Algonkin peoples in which the 
food increase’, a native informant explains. ‘They (the In-
                                                                          initiates get symbolically killed by the dead whose part is 
dians) must coax them that way’ (Michelson 1, pp. 369, 
                                                                          played by the initiated; they feign death in order to obtain 
407). 
                                                                          a further lease of life. In both cases, death is brought in but 
    Now, the adoption rites which are necessary to make 
                                                                          only to be duped. 
the soul of the deceased finally decide to go where it will 
                                                                              Games thus appear to have a disjunctive effect: they 
take on the role of a protecting spirit are normally accom-
                                                                          end in the establishment of a difference between individual 
panied by competitive sports, games of skill or chance be-
                                                                          players or teams where originally there was no indication 
tween teams which are constituted on the basis of an ad 
                                                                          of inequality. And at the end of the game they are distin-
hoc division into two sides, Tokan and Kicko. It is said 
                                                                          guished into winners and losers. Ritual, on the other hand, 
explicitly over and over again that it is the living and the 
                                                                          is the exact inverse; it conjoins, for it brings about a union 
dead who are playing against each other. It is as if the liv-
                                                                          (one might even say communion in this context) or in any 
                                                case an organic relation between two initially separate 
*
 See below, p. 199 n. 
                                                                          groups, one ideally merging with the person of the offici-
 


 21 ant and the other with the collectivity of the faithful. In the  (3) ‘Betel Chewing among the Hanunóo’, Proceedings of the 4th 
                                                                              Fareastern Prehistoric Congress, Paper no. 56, Quezon City (Nat. 
case of games the symmetry is therefore preordained and it 
                                                                              Res. Council of the Philippines), 1985. 
is of a structural kind since it follows from the principle 
                                                                          EVANS-PRITCHARD, E. E.: (1) ‘Witchcraft’, Africa, vol. 8, no. 4, Lon-
that the rules are the same for both sides. Asymmetry is don, 1955. 
engendered: it follows inevitably from the contingent na-FOX, R. B.: ‘The Pinatubo Negritos: their useful plants and material 
ture of events, themselves due to intention, chance or tal-culture’, The Philippine Journal of Science, vol. 81 (1952), nos. 3-
                                                                            4, Manila, 1953. 
ent. The reverse is true of ritual. There is an asymmetry 
                                                                          GILGES, W.: “Some African Poison Plants and Medicines of Northern 
which is postulated in advance between profane and sa-
                                                                              Rhodesia’, Occasional Papers, Rhodes-Livingstone Museum, no. 
cred, faithful and officiating, dead and living, initiated and 11, 1955. 
  uninitiated, etc., and the ‘game’ consists in making all the HANDY, E. S. Craighill and PUKUI, M. Kawana: ‘The Polynesian Family 
participants pass to the winning side by means of events, System in Ka-‘u, Hawai’i’, parts VI and VII; and VII, Journal of 
                                                                              the Polynesian Society, vol. 62; and vol.64, Wellington, N. Z., 
the nature and ordering of which is genuinely structural. 
                                                                              1953 and 1955. 
Like science (though here again on both the theoretical and HE
                                                                            NDERSON, J. and HARRINGTON, J. P.: ‘Ethnozoology of the Tewa 
the practical plane) the game produces events by means of Indians’, Bulletin no. 56, Bureau of American Ethnology, Wash-
a structure; and we can therefore understand why competi-ington, D. C., 1914. 
                                                                          HUBERT, R. and MAUSS, M.: ‘Esquisse d’une théorie générale de la 
tive games should flourish in our industrial societies. Rites 
                                                                              magic’, L’Année Sociologique, tome VII, 1902-3, in: Mauss, M. 
and myths, on the other hand, like ‘bricolage’ (which these 
                                                                              Sociologie et Anthropologie, Paris, 1950. 
same societies only tolerate as a hobby or pastime), take to KRAUSE, A.: The Tlingit Indians, translated by E. Gunther, Seattle, 
pieces and reconstruct sets of events (on a psychical, so-1956. 
                                                                            MICHELSON, T.: (1) ‘Notes on Fox Mortuary Customs and Beliefs’, 40th 
cio-historical or technical plane) and use them as so many 
                                                                              Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology (1918-19), Wash-
indestructible pieces for structural patterns in which they 
                                                                              ington, D. C., 1925. 
serve alternatively as ends or means. RE
                                                                            AD, K. E.: ‘Leadership and Consensus in a New Guinea Society’, 
 
                                                                              American Anthropologist, vol. 61, no. 3, 1959. 
 
                                                                          ROBBINS, W. W., HARRINGTON, J. P., and FREIRE-MARRECO, B.: ‘Eth-
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
                                                                              nobotany of the Tewa Indians’, Bulletin no 55, Bureau of Ameri-
 
                                                                              can Ethnology, Washington, D. C., 1916. 
BERGSON, H.: The two sources of morality and religion (translated from 
                                                                          SIMPSON, G. G.: Principals of Animal Taxonomy, New York, 1961. 
    the French by R. Ashley Au and Cloudesley Brereton), New York, 
                                                                          SMITH, A. H.:’The Culture of Kabira, Southern Ryukyu Islands’, Pro-
    1956. 
                                                                              ceedings of the American Philosophical Society, vol. 104, no. 2, 
BOAS, F.: (1) Introduction to: James Teit, ‘Traditions of the Thompson 
                                                                              Philadelphia, 1960. 
    River Indians of British Columbia’, Memoirs of the American 
                                                                          SMITH BOWEN, E.: Return to Laughter, London, 1954. 
    Folklore Society, vol. 6, 1898. 
                                                                          SPECK, F. G.: (1) ‘Reptile Lore of the Northern Indians’, Journal of 
 (2) ‘Handbook of American Indian Languages’, Part 1, Bulletin 40, 
                                                                              American Folklore, vol. 36, no. 141, Boston-New York, 1923. 
    Bureau of American Ethnology, Washington D. C., 1911. 
                                                                          TESSMAN, G.: Die Pangwe, Völkerkundliche Monographie eines 
COGHLAN, H. H.: ‘Prehistoric Copper and some Experiments in Smelt-
                                                                              westafrikanischen Negerstammes, 2 vol., Berlin, 1913. 
    ing’, Transactions of the Newcomen Society, vol. 20, London, 
                                                                          ZELENINE, D.: Le culte des idoles en Sibérie, French translation, Paris, 
    1939-40. 
                                                                              1952. 
  CONKLIN, H. C.: (1) The Relation of Hanunóo Culture to the Plant 
 
    World, Doctoral Dissert., Yale, 1954 (microfilm). 
 


 22 