Neuroscience:



Neuropsychology, Neuropsychiatry, Brain & Mind


Introduction, Primer, & Overview R. Joseph, Ph.D.


University Press

Copyright 2011
Table of Contents
Brain Atlas - 3

I. Neuroscience: Neuropsychology, Neuropsychiatry, Brain & Mind -6
  Localization & Functional Neuroanatomy of the Brain -10
Knowing Yet Not Knowing: Disconnected Consciousness - 15
The Visual Mind: Denial of Blindness - 17
"Blind Sight" - 19
Body Consciousness: Denial of the Body, and Phantom Limbs - 21
Summary: Brain & Mind. -25
The Brainstem - 26
Brainstem Cranial Nerves - 31
Cerebellum - 32
Diencephalon: Hypothalamus and Thalamus - 36
The Limbic System: Emotion & Motivation - 40
Amygdala, Hippocampus, Septal Nuclei, Cingulate, Hypothalamus. - 40 Limbic System Sexuality - 41
Social Behavioral & the Limbic System - 44
Amygdala, Hippocampus & Memory -45
Hippocampus, Memory & Amnesia - 46
The Cingulate & Entorhinal Cortex - 48
Limbic & Corpus Striatum -50
Limbic System vs Neocortex: Consciousness - 53
The Neocortex (Gray Matter) - 54
Neocortical Layers - 55
The Cytoarchitextural Neuronal, & Chemical Organization of the Neocortex - 59 Conscious & Unconscious Mind -62
Frontal, Parietal, Temporal & Occipital Lobes - 65
Frontal Lobes - 66
Temporal Lobes - 69
Parietal Lobes - 73
Occipital Lobes & Vision - 78
Primary, Secondary & Association Ares - 81
Right & Left Hemisphere: Functional Laterality - 85
Dissociation and Self-Consciousness -88
Neuroanatomy of Mind - 91
Overview: Consciousness, Awareness & the Neuroscience of Mind -92 References - 94

Brain Atlas                                                      NEUROSCIENCE,

NEUROPSYCHOLOGY, NEUROPSYCHIATRY, BRAIN & MIND
Overview of the Brain and Mind

  The  functional  neuroanatomy  of  the  human  brain  is  functionally

localized, such that specific areas of the brain subserve specific functions. For

example, if you were to suffer a severe injury to the left frontal-temporal

region of your head and brain, you might lose the ability to talk. This is

because,  the  left  frontal  tissues  known  as  Broca's  Area  mediates  the

expression of speech. However, you would still be able to swear and sing

because these abilities are mediated by the right frontal-temporal region of

the brain  If instead, you suffered a massive stroke to the left temporal lobe (the

brain  area  inside  your  skull  near  your  ear),  you  would  be  unable  to

comprehend human speech. You would not understand what is being said to

you. This is because the left temporal region, known as Wernicke's Area,

subserves the ability to understand language.













    However,  Wernicke’s  area  only  comprehends  the  words  and  temporal

sequences of spoken language, not the melody. It is the right temporal lobe

which perceives the melody and emotional qualities of the speaker’s voice.

Therefore, if someone were to approach you in a nightclub or bar, and say:

“Do you want to step outside?” it is the left temporal lobe which understand a

question concern “outside” is being asked, but it is the right temporal lobe

which understand the emotion and context, what the speaker means. Thus

you  know  if  you  are  being  asked  outside  to  smoke  a  cigarette,  to  talk

privately, or if you are being threatened with a punch in the nose.

  It is the right temporal lobe which perceives emotion, melody, music, and

sounds from the environment. Thus, if the right temporal lobe were damaged,

the ability to hear music, sarcasm, emotion, or sounds from the environment

would be lost to varying degrees depending on the extent of the injury. For

example,  if  birds  were  singing,  water  was  dripping  from  a  faucet,  the

telephone were ringing, or even if someone were knocking on the door--these

sounds  may  no  longer  be  perceived  with  extensive  right  temporal  lobe

damage.  And  just  as  the  right  temporal  lobe  perceives  the  melody  and

environmental sounds, it is the right frontal ares which sing and provides the

prosodic, emotional qualities to the voice. Therefore, if the right frontal lobe

were injured, the voice may lose its emotional qualities and might sound

blunted and dulled. Certainly, those with extensive right frontal lobe damage

may no longer be able to sing.

  These  brain  areas  do  not  act  in  isolation,  however.  The  mind  is  a

multiplicity, and different regions act together. It takes both halves of the

brain  to  make  music,  the  left  frontal  providing  the  words  and  temporal

sequences,  the  right  temporal  perceiving  the  music,  the  right  frontal

providing the melody, and the left temporal perceive the words and rhythm.












  Broadly considered, there are two frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital

lobes, one in each hemisphere of the brain. Thus, the brain is a duality, as

well as a multiplicity, as there are two hemispheres, a right and a left.                                            Split-brain  view,  showing  the  medial

regions of the left hemisphere. 

LOCALIZATION  &  FUNCTIONAL  NEUROANATOMY  OF  THE

BRAIN

  The  human  brain  can  be  broadly  described  as  consisting  of  1)  two

cerebral hemispheres which are divided into frontal, parietal, temporal, and

occipital lobes, 2) "gray matter" which covers the surface of the brain, and

which  consists  of  6-7  major  layers  and  several  sublayers  of  specialized

neurons, 3) subcortical structures consisting of 2-5 layers, and which include

the  striatum  (caudate,  putaman,  globus  pallidus),  limbic  system

(hypothalamus,  amygdala,  hippocampus,  septal  nuclei,  cingulate  gyrus),

thalamus, cerebellum, and brainstem (midbrain, pons, medulla).

  The human brain is thus a multiplicity with specific areas serving specific

functions.  However,  even  specific  regions  serve  multiple  functions.  For

example the frontal lobes, located at the front of the brain, not only speaks

and sings, but maintains attention and concentration and acts to filter out and

suppress sensory and perceptual information. In fact, much of the brain works

by  inhibition,  otherwise,  the  mind  would  be  overwhelmed  by  sensory

impressions.  Consider,  by  way  of  example,  you  are  sitting  in  your  office

reading this text. The pressure of the chair, the physical sensations of your

shoes and clothes, the musculature of your body as it holds one then another

position,  the  temperature  of  the  room,  various  odors  and  fragrances,  a

multitude  of  sounds,  visual  sensations  from  outside  your  area  of

concentration and focus, and so on, are all being transmitted to the brainstem,

midbrain,  and  olfactory  limbic  system.  These  signals  are  then  relayed  to

various subnuclei within the thalamus  .

























  The  neural  tissues  of  the  brainstem,  midbrain,  limbic  system  and

thalamus  are  associated  with  the  "old  brain."  However,  those  aspects  of

consciousness we most closely associated with humans are associated with

the "new brain" the neocortex (Joseph, 1982, 1992). Therefore, although you

may be "aware" of these sensations while they are maintained within the old

brain, you are not "conscious" of them, unless a decision is made to becomeconscious or they increase sufficiently in intensity that they are transferred to

the neocortex via the the thalamus and frontal lobes, and forced into the focus

of consciousness (Joseph, 1982, 1986b, 1992, 1999a).



















  The old brain is covered by a gray mantle of new cortex, neocortex. The

sensations alluded to are transferred from the old brain to the thalamus which

relays these signals to the neocortex. Human consciousness and the "higher"

level of the multiplicity of mind, are associated with the "new brain."  (Left) The Corona Radiata. - The human Brainstem & Thalamus (Right)

  For example, visual input is transmitted from the eyes to the midbrain and

thalamus and is transferred to the primary visual receiving area maintained in

the neocortex of the occipital lobe (Casagrande & Joseph 1978, 1980; Joseph

and Casagrande, 1978). Auditory input is transmitted from the inner ears to

the  brainstem,  midbrain,  and  thalamus,  and  is  transferred  to  the  primary

auditory  receiving  area  within  the  neocortex  of  the  temporal  lobe.

Tactualphysical stimuli are also transmitted from the thalamus to the primary

somatosensory areas maintained in the neocortex of the parietal lobe. From

the primary areas these signals are transferred to the adjoining "association"

areas,  and  simple  percepts  become  more  complex  by  association  (Joseph,1996).






















    Monitoring all this perceptual and sensory activity within the thalamus

and  neocortex  is  the  frontal  lobes  of  the  brain,  also  known  as  the  senior

executive of the brain and personality (Joseph 1986b, 1999a; Joseph et al.,

1981). It is the frontal lobes which maintain the focus of attention and which

can selectively inhibit any additional processing of signals received in the

primary areas.

  There  are  two  frontal  lobes,  a  right  and  left  frontal  lobe  which

communicate via a bridge of nerve fibers. Each frontal lobe, and subdivisions

within each are concerned with different types of mental activity (Joseph,

1999a).

  The  left  frontal  lobe,  among  its  many  functions,  makes  possible  the

ability to speak. It is associated with the verbally expressive, speaking aspects

of  consciousness.  However,  there  are  different  aspects  of  consciousness

associated not only with the frontal lobe, but with each lobe of the brain and

its subdivisions (Joseph, 1986b; 1996, 1999a).

Knowing Yet Not Knowing: Disconnected Consciousness

    Consider the well known phenomenon of "word finding difficulty" also

known  as  "tip  of  the  tongue."  You  know  the  word  you  want  (the

"thingamajig") but at the same time, you can't gain access to it. That is, oneaspect  of  consciousness  knows  the  missing  word,  but  another  aspect  of

consciousness  associated  with  talking  and  speech  can't  gain  access  to  the

word. The mind is disconnected from itself. One aspect of mind knows, the

other aspect of mind does not.















  This same phenomenon, but much more severe and disabling, can occur if

the nerve fiber pathway linking the language areas of the left hemisphere are

damaged.  For  example,  Broca's  area  in  the  frontal  lobe  organizes  words

received from the posterior langauge areas, and expresses humans speech.

Wernicke's  area  in  the  temporal  lobe  comprehends  speech.  The  inferior

parietal lobe sits at the junction of the visual (occipital), somesthetic (parietal)

and auditory (temporal) areas and in association with the frontal lobes and

Broca’s  area,  associates  and  assimilates  these  associations  so  that,  for

example, we can say the word "dog" and come up with the names of dozens

of  different  breeds  and  then  visualize  and  describe  them  (Joseph,  1982;

Joseph and Gallagher 1985; Joseph et al., 1984). Therefore, if Broca's area is

disconnected from the posterior language areas, one aspect of consciousness

may know what it wants to say, but the speaking aspect of consciousness will

be unable to gain access to it and will have nothing to say; called "conduction

aphasia."  Or  consider  damage  which  disconnects  the  parietal  lobe  from  Broca's

area. If you place an object, e.g., a comb, out-of-sight, in the person's right

hand, and ask them to name the object, the speaking aspect of consciousness

may know something is in the hand, but will be unable to name it. However,

although they can't name it, and can't guess if shown pictures, if the patient is

asked to point to the correct object, they will correctly pick out the comb

(Joseph, 1996). Therefore, part of the brain and mind may act purposefully

(e.g. picking out the comb), whereas another aspect of the brain and mind is

denied access to the information that the disconnected part of the mind is

acting on.

  Thus, the part of the brain and mind which is perceiving and knowing, is

not  the  same  as  the  part  of  the  brain  and  mind  which  is  speaking.  This

phenomenon  occurs  even  in  undamaged  brains,  when  the  multiplicity  of

minds which make up one of the dominant streams of consciousness, become

disconnected and/or are unable to communicate.

The Visual Mind: Denial of Blindness

  All  visual  sensations  first  travel  from  the  eyes  to  the  thalamus  and

midbrain. At this level, these visual impressions are outside of consciousness,

though  we  may  be aware  of  them.  These  visual  sensations  are  then

transferred  to  the  primary  visual  receiving  areas  and  to  the  adjacent

association areas in the neocortex of the occipital lobe. Once these visualimpressions  reach  the  neocortex,  consciousness  of  the  visual  word  is

achieved. Visual consciousness is made possible by the occipital lobe.






























    Destruction of the occipital lobe and its neocortical visual areas results in

cortical blindness (Joseph, 1996). The consciousness mind is blinded and can

not see or sense anything except vague sensations of lightness and darkness.

However, because visual consciousness is normally maintained within the

occipital lobe, with destruction of this tissue, the other mental systems will

not know that they can't see. The remaining mental system do not know they

are blind.

    Wernicke's area in the left temporal lobe in association with the inferior

parietal lobe comprehends and can generate complex language. Normally,

visual input is transferred from the occipital to the inferior parietal lobe (IPL)

which is adjacent to Wernicke's area and the visual areas of the occipital lobe.Once these signals arrive in the IPL a person can name what they see; the

visual input is matched with auditory-verbal signals and the conscious mind

can label and talk about what is viewed (Joseph, 1982, 1986b; Joseph et al.,

1984). Talking and verbally describing what is seen is made possible when

this stream of information is transferred to Broca's area in the left frontal lobe

(Joseph, 1982, 1999a). It is Broca's area which speaks and talks.

    Therefore,  with  complete  destruction  of  the  occipital  lobe,  visual

consciousness is abolished whereas the other mental system remain intact but

are unable to receive information about the visual world. In consequence, the

verbal aspects of consciousness and the verbal-language mind does not know

it can't see because the brain area responsible for informing these mental

system  about  seeing,  no  longer  exists.  .  In  fact  the  languagedependent

conscious  mind  will  deny  that  it  is  blind;  and  this  is  called:  Denial  of

blindness.

    Normally, if it gets dark, or you close your eyes, the visual mind becomes

conscious of this change in light perception and will alert the other mental

realms. These other mental realms do not process visual signals and therefore

they must be informed about what the visual mind is seeing. If the occipital

lobe is destroyed, visual consciousness is destroyed, and the rest of the brain

cannot be told that visual consciousness can't see. Therefore, the rest of the

brain does not know it is blind, and when asked, will deny blindness and will

make up reasons for why they bump into furniture or can't recognize objects

held before their eyes (Joseph, 1986b, 1988a).

  For example, when unable to name objects, they might confabulate an

explanation: "I see better at home." Or, "I tripped because someone moved

the furniture."  Even if you tell them they are blind, they will deny blindness; that is, the

verbal  aspects  of  consciousness  will  claim  it  can  see,  when  it  can't.  The

Language-dependent aspects of consciousness does not know that it is blind

because  information  concerning  blindness  is  not  being  received  from  the

mental realms which support visual consciousness.

  The same phenomenon occurs with small strokes destroying just part of

the occipital lobe. Although a patient may lose a quarter or even half of their

visual field, they may be unaware of it. This is because that aspect of visual

consciousness no longer exists and can't inform the other mental realms of its

condition.

"Blind Sight"

  The brains of reptiles, amphibians, and fish do not have neocortex. Visual

input is processed in the midbrain and thalamus and other old-brain areas as

these creatures do not possess neocortex or lobes of the brain. In humans, this

information  is  also  received  in  the  brainstem  and  thalamus  and  is  then

transferred to the newly evolved neocortex. As is evident in non-mammalian

species, these creatures can see, and they are aware of their environment.

They possess an older-cortical (brainstem-thalamus) visual awareness which

in humans is dominated by neocortical visual consciousness.  (Left) Human Brain. Reptile Brain (Right)

Therefore, even with complete destruction of the visual neocortex, and after

the patient has had time to recover, some patients will demonstrate a non-

conscious awareness of their visual environment. Although they are cortically

blind and can't name objects and stumble over furniture and bump into walls,

they may correctly indicate if an object is moving in front of their face, and

they may turn their head or even reach out their arms to touch it-just as a frog

can see a fly buzzing by and lap it up with its tongue. Although the patient

can't name or see what has moved in front of his face, he may report that he

has a "feeling" that something has moved.

  Frogs do not have neocortex and they do not have language, and can'tdescribe what they see. However, humans and frogs have old cortex that

process  visual  impressions  and  which  can  control  and  coordinate  body

movements.  Therefore,  although  the  neocortical  realms  of  human

consciousness are blind, the mental realms of the old brain can continue to

see and can act on what it sees; and this is called: Blind sight (Joseph, 1996).

Body Consciousness: Denial of the Body, and Phantom Limbs

  All tactile and physical-sensory impressions are relayed from the body to

the  brainstem  and  the  thalamus,  and  are  then  transferred  to  the  primary

receiving and then the association area for somatosensory information located

in the neocortex of the parietal lobe (Joseph, 1986b, 1996). The entire image

of the body is represented in the parietal lobes (the right and left half of the

body in the left and right parietal lobe respectively), albeit in correspondence

with the sensory importance of each body part. Therefore, more neocortical

space is devoted to the hands and fingers than to the elbow.

  It is because the body image and body consciousness is maintained in the

parietal area of the brain, that victims of traumatic amputation and who lose

an arm or a leg, continue to feel as if their arm or their leg is still attached to

the body. This is called: phantom limbs. They can see the leg is missing, but

they feel as if it is still there; body-consciousness remains intact even though

part of the body is missing (Joseph, 1986b, 1996). They may also continue to

periodically  experience  the  pain  of  the  physical  trauma  which  led  to  the

amputation, and this is called "phantom limb pain."  Thus, via the mental system of the parietal lobe, consciousness of what is

not there, may appear to consciousness as if it is still there. This is not a

hallucination. The image of the body is preserved in the brain and so to is

consciousness of the body; and this is yet another example of experienced

reality being a manifestation of the brain and mind. In this regard, reality is

literally mapped into the brain and is represented within the brain, such that

even when aspects of this "reality" are destroyed and no longer exists external

to the brain, it nevertheless continues to be perceived and experienced by the

brain and the associated realms of body-consciousness.

    Conversely, if the parietal lobe is destroyed, particularly the right parietal

lobe (which maintains an image of the left half of the body), half of the body

image  may  be  erased  from  consciousness  (Joseph,  1986b,  1988a).  The

remaining realms of mind will lose all consciousness of the left half of the

body, which, in their minds, never existed.

  Doctor: "Give me your right hand!" (Patient offers right hand). "Now

give me your left!" (The patient presents the right hand again. The right hand

is held.) "Give me your left!" (The patient looks puzzled and does not move.)

"Is there anything wrong with your left hand?"

Patient: "No, doctor."

Doctor: "Why don't you move it, then?"

Patient: "I don't know."

Doctor: "Is this your hand?" (The left hand is held before her eyes.)

Patient: "Not mine, doctor."

Doctor: "Whose hand is it, then?"

Patient: "I suppose it's yours, doctor."Doctor: "No, it's not; I've already got two hands. look at it carefully." (The

left hand is again held before her eyes.)

Patient: "It is not mine, doctor."

Doctor:  "Yes  it  is,  look  at  that  ring;  whose  is  it?"  (Patient's  finger  with

marriage ring is held before her eyes)

Patient:  "That's  my  ring;  you've  got  my  ring,  doctor.  You're  wearing  my

ring!"

Doctor: "Look at it—it is your hand."

Patient: "Oh, no doctor."

Doctor: "Where is your left hand then?"

Patient: "Somewhere here, I think." (Making groping movements near her left

shoulder).

  Because the body image has been destroyed, consciousness of that half of

the body is also destroyed. The remaining mental systems and the language-

dependent conscious mind will completely ignore and fail to recognize their

left arm or leg because the mental system responsible for consciousness of

the body image no longer exists. If the left arm or leg is shown to them, they

will claim it belongs to someone else, such as the nurse or the doctor. They

may dress or groom only the right half of their body, eat only off the right

half of their plates, and even ignore painful stimuli applied to the left half of

their bodies (Joseph, 1986b, 1988a).

    However, if you show them their arm and leg (whose ownership they

deny), they will admit these extremities exists, but will insist the leg or arm

does not belong to them, even though the arm or the leg is wearing the same

clothes  covering  the  rest  of  their  body.  Instead,  the  language  dependent

aspects of consciousness will confabulate and make up explanations and thus

create their own reality. One patient said the arm belonged to a little girl,

whose arm had slipped into the patient's sleeve. Another declared (speaking

of his left arm and leg), "That's an old man. He stays in bed all the time."

  One such patient engaged in peculiar erotic behavior with his left arm and

leg which he believed belonged to a woman. Some patients may develop a

dislike for their left arms, try to throw them away, become agitated when they

are  referred  to,  entertain  persecutory  delusions  regarding  them,  and  even

complain of strange people sleeping in their beds due to their experience of

bumping into their left limbs during the night (Joseph, 1986b, 1988a). One

patient complained that the person sharing her bed, tried to push her out of

the bed and then insisted that if it happened again she would sue the hospital.Another complained about "a hospital that makes people sleep together." A

female patient expressed not only anger but concern least her husband should

find out; she was convinced it was a man in her bed.

  The right and left parietal lobes maintain a map and image of the left and

right half of the body, respectively. Therefore, when the right parietal lobe is

destroyed, the languagedependent mental systems of the left half of the brain,

having access only to the body image for the right half of the body, is unable

to become conscious of the left half of their body, except as body parts that

they then deduce must belong to someone else.

    However,  when  the  language  dominant  mental  system  of  the  left

hemisphere denies ownerhip of the left extremity these mental system are in

fact telling the truth. That is, the left arm and leg belongs to the right not the

left hemisphere; the mental system that is capable of becoming conscious of

the left half of their body no longer exist.

  When the language axis (Joseph, 1982, 2000), i.e. the inferior parietal

lobe, Broca's and Wernicke's areas, are functionally isolated from a particular

source of information, the language dependent aspect of mind begins to make

up a response based on the information available. To be informed about the

left leg or left arm, it must be able to communicate with the cortical area (i.e.

the  parietal  lobe)  which  is  responsible  for  perceiving  and  analyzing

information  regarding  the  extremities.  When  no  message  is  received  and

when  the  language  axis  is  not  informed  that  no  messages  are  being

transmitted, the language zones instead relie on some other source even when

that  source  provides  erroneous  input  (Joseph,  1982,  1986b;  Joseph  et  al.,

1984); substitute material is assimilated and expressed and corrections cannot

be  made  (due  to  loss  of  input  from  the  relevant  knowledge  source).  The

patient begins to confabulate. This is because the patient who speaks to you is

not the 'patient' who is perceiving- they are in fact, separate; multiple minds

exist in the same head.

    Summary: Brain & Mind . The brain and the mind are synonymous and

are  hierarchically,  vertically,  and  horizontally  organized,  with  different

regions engaging in both parallel and localized processing, with specialized

neurons performing discrete functions, such as face recognition, and others

participating in large neural networks to make complex cognitive functioning

processing possible, including, for example, language and consciousness.

  There  are  tissues  of  the  mind  which  mediate  language  and  complex

cognition,  such  as  the  neocortex  and  lobes  of  the  brain,  those  aspectsassociated with sex, love and war, such as the limbic system and those areas

which  respond  reflexively  and  completely  unconsciously,  laboring  to

maintain homeostasis, and the rhythmics of waking, sleeping, dreaming, and

of the heart, the respiratory systems, and the vegetative mind. These latter

unconscious  activities  are  associated  with  the  functional  integrity  of  the

brainstem, i.e., the medulla, pons, and midbrain, and to a much lesser extent,

the adjacent diencephalon, i.e. the thalamus and hypothalamus.




































  The  mind  and  brain  are  also  functionally  lateralized,  with  specific

interactive subareas in the left hemisphere mediating the linguistic, temporal,sequential, arithmetical, and rhythmical aspects of consciousness and verbal

thought. It is the right half of the brain which subserves and provides the

foundations  for  an  interactive  non-verbal  awareness  encompassing  music,

emotion, the body, prosodic language, and spatial thought.

  Thus,  the  cerebrum  and  psyche  are  organized  such  that  several  semi-

independent mental system coexist, literally one on top of the other, side by

side,  distributed  and  localized,  with  the  limbic  system  and  brainstem

providing much of the "food for thought" that is received by the neocortex

and reflected upon by the conscious mind.

THE BRAINSTEM

  The  brainstem  is  exceedingly  ancient  and  complex  structure  (Aitkin,

1986; Vertes, 1990), and is concerned with sensory reception, arousal, and

reflexive movements of the body, including stereotyped and routine motor

acts such as yawning, opening and closing the mouth, wiping the face, or

lifting the legs, taking steps, walking or running (Aminoff, 1996; Blessing,

1997;  Cohen,  et  al.  1988;  Klemm,  1990;  Skinner  &  Garcia-Rill,  1990).

Although  capable  of  learning,  forming  simple  memories,  and  displaying

synaptic plasticity (Jones & Pons, 1998; Isukahara, 1985; Moore & Aitkin,

1975; Moore & Irvine, 1981), this portion of the brain cannot think, reason,

or feel love or sorrow (Joseph, 1999c).  The brainstem is both diffusely organized and functionally specialized.

When  specific  brainstem  nuclei  (and  associated  neural  networks)  are

stimulated, sucking, chewing, swallowing, swimming, stepping, walking, and

running  movements  can  be  induced  (Barman,  1990;  Cohen,  et  al.  1988;

Klemm,  1990;  Mogenson,  1990;  Steriade  &  McCarley,  1990;  Skinner  &

Garcia-Rill,  1990;  Vertes,  1990).  However,  these  movements  are

hierarchically  organized  with  those  requiring  the  least  amount  of

organizational or conscious control being localized near the medulla-spinal

border. It is noteworthy, however, that this areas also contains neurons which

when stimulated can trigger female sexual posturing (Benson, 1988; Rose,

1990);  i.e.  the  lordosis  (or  "doggie")  position.  These  latter  neurons  are

interconnected  with  the  amygdala  and  ventromedial  hypothalamus--nuclei

which are also involved in sexual activities. At the level of the spinal cord,

movement programs are exceedingly simplified and usually consist of only

fragments of the entire motor display.

  As one ascends from the spinal cord to the medulla, then the pons, and

finally the midbrain, the degree, extent, and nature of these various motorprograms and behaviors becomes increasingly complex. For example, when

the most caudal regions of the medulla are stimulated stepping motions can

be induced, whereas stimulation of the midbrain can initiate eye movements,

head turning, controlled walking, running (Cowie & Robinson 1994; Cowie

et  al.  1994;  Skinner  &  Garcia-Rill,  1990)  and  vocalization--which  is

produced  by  the  periaqueductal  gray  (Jurgens,  1994;  Larson  et  al.  1994;

Zhang et al. 1994).

























  The periaqueductal gray coordinates the activity of the laryngeal, oral-

facial,  and  principal  and  accessory  muscles  of  respiration  and  inspiration

(Zhang  et  al.  1994)  and  receives  extensive  input  from  the  amygdala,  the

anterior cingulate, and the left and right frontal lobes--structures which are all

implicated in vocalization, and/or speech and language. However, it is the

coordinated activity of the periaqueductal gray which enables an individual to

laugh, cry, or howl, even if the rest of the brain (excepting the brainstem)

were dead.

  The brainstem is devoid of cognitive activity as it is designed to react

immediately  and  reflexively  to  sensory  stimuli.  Consider,  for  example,

infants born with only a brainstem, i.e. anencephalics, who are completelydevoid of any semblance of conscious or cognitive activity; and the same is

true of adults who suffer a brainstem-forebrain transection. Although they

live and breath, these latter unfortunate souls are essentially forebrain dead.  The  brainstem,  although  almost  wholly  unconscious,  maintains

consciousness and promotes cognitive activity by feeding the forebrain with

activating neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine (NE) Serotonin (5HT),

and  dopamine  (DA)  and  by  controlling  arousal  through  the  reticular

activating system (Blessing, 1997; Steriade & McCarley, 1990; Usher et al.,

1999). Because of its importance in these and other life-preserving functions,

the stereotypical consequences of brainstem injury, therefore, are prolonged

unconscious and death.    Brainstem Cranial Nerves. With the exception of vision and olfactory

sensations, all sensory information is relayed from the spinal cord and cranial

nerves to the brainstem. From the brainstem this information is transmitted to

the thalamus. Conversely, all motor commands, be it the movement of the

lips, the tapping of a finger, or the blink of an eye, must be transmitted to the

brainstem cranial nerves and/or spinal cord before they can be carried out.

Cranial nerves also influence breathing and heart rate.

THE CEREBELLUM

  The cerebellum sits atop the brainstem and accounts for approximately

25% of the brain. It communicates with almost all regions of the neuroaxis,

with  the  single  exception  of  the  striatum,  and  has  been  implicated  in

cognitive, emotional, sensory, motor and speech processing (Llinas & Sotelo,

1992; Schmahmann, 1997; Silveri et al. 1994; Thach, 1997; van Dongen et

al. 1994; Wallesch & Horn 1990) . The cerebellum has been shown to display

neuroplasticity (Nimura et al., 1999) and learning and memory (Fiez et al.1992; Lavond et al. 1990; Molinari, et al., 1997; Thompson et al., 1997) and

may  well  serve  as  an  integrative  interface  for  cognition,  emotion,  motor

functioning and memory.













  The  cerebellum  is  typically  thought  of  as  a  motor  center.  However,

electrical-electrode stimulation or damage to this structure can trigger rage

reactions (Bharos, et al. 1981), and hyperactivity (Carpenter, 1959), including

"mania"  (Cutting,  1976).  Abnormalities  in  the  cerebellum  have  also  been

implicated  in  the  pathogenesis  of  schizophrenia  and  autism  (Bauman  &

Kemper,  1985;  Courchesne  &  Plante,  1996;  Gaffeny,  et  al.  1987;  Heath,

1977; Heath, et al. 1979, 1982; Taylor 1991; Weinberger et al. 1979, 1980).

Although  the  notion  that  abnormal  rearing  conditions  may  contribute  to

autistic and schizophrenic behavior is no longer in fashion, it is noteworthy

that  Heath  (1972)  found  that  monkeys  reared  under  deprived  conditions

displayed abnormal electrophysiological activity in the cerebellum (dentate

gyrus)  as  well  as  the  septal  nuclei.  These  animals  also  displayed  autistic

behavior (Harlow & Harlow, 1965a,b). These findings are significant, for the

cerebellum is an outgrowth of the vestibular system, and insufficient social-

emotional or physical stimulation would also result in insufficient vestibular

activation.  The  cerebellum  consists  of  a  number  of  structures  and  distinct  neural

circuits associated with specific fiber systems, including climbing, parallel

and mossy fibers. It also appears that different regions are concerned with

different functions that also have a major motor component. These functions

include speech (Silveri et al. 1994; van Dongen et al. 1994; Wallesch & Horn

1990),  and  visual  processing,  including  the  visual  guidance  of  movement

(Bloedel 1992; Stein & Glickstein 1992).

  The cerebellum is tonically active, and presumably exerts a tonic and

stabilizing influence on motor function (Llinas, 1981). Moreover, by altering

its  activity  (e.g.,  Bloedel,  et  al.,  1985;  Thach,  1978),  it  can  apparently

coordinate, smooth, fine tune, as well as exert a timing influence on motor

movements (Ivry, 1997; Llinas, 1981; Llinas & Sotelo, 1992). In fact, some

cerebellar neurons become activated just thinking about making a movement

(e.g., Dacety et al. 1990). Indeed, the cerebellum is associated not just with

motor functioning, but classical conditioning and the learning of new motor

programs (Llinas & Sotelo, 1992; Schmahmann, 1997).  For  example,  it  has  been  suggested  the  initial  acquisition  of  skilled

movements,  such  as  playing  a  guitar,  requires  neocortical  and  conscious

control over motor functioning, with the cerebellum playing at best a minimal

supplementary role. However, "practice makes perfect" and presumably thecerebellum immediately begins to increase its participation and slowly begins

to  learn  the  necessary  movements.  For  example,  the  cerebellum  becomes

activated  during  initial  learning  stages  (Watanabe,  1984)  and  as  learning

progress, the cerebellum may begin to acquire control over the task and may

begin to associate the task and specific movements with specific changing

contexts so that each context automatically triggers the movement (Thach,

1997). With time and practice, the cerebellum may slowly assume control

over  the  associated  movements,  which  become  "automatic"  and  can  then

perform these movements with little or no help from the cerebrum which

becomes free to do and think about other things.

    Conversely, lesions abolish the acquisition and retention of conditioned

responses (Lavond et al. 1990), and compound movements are more severely

effected that simple movements. These and other findings suggests that the

cerebellum  may  act  to  integrate  and  combine  different  movements,  and

movement sequences. Moreover, it has been proposed that climbing fibers

may act to learn the task, mossy fibers may learn the "context," whereas

parallel fibers integrate the context with the actual motor activity, and even

correcting errors (Thach, 1997).

THE DIENCAPHALON: HYPOTHALAMUS, THALAMUS

The Diencephalon consists of the hypothalamus and thalamus.  With the notable exception of olfaction (Gloor, 1997), all sensory input is

first projected to the brainstem (Blessing, 1997; Vertes, 1990) and is then

relayed to the immediately adjacent thalamus and hypothalamus--collectively

referred  to  as  the  diencephalon  ("between  brain").  The  diencephalon

represents that rudimentary aspect of the unconscious mind that generates

vague sensory impressions and diffuse emotions (Dreifuss, Murphy, & Gloor,

1968; Joseph, 1992a; Olds, 1956), including pain (the thalamus), and hunger,

thirst, sexual arousal, or depression and rage (the hypothalamus).
















  Like the brainstem, the hypothalamic portion of the diencephalon does

not  think  or  reason,  but  reflexively  reacts--often  in  response  to  amygdala

input,  in  which  case  it  remain  active  for  an  extensive  period  of  time

(Dreifuss, et al., 1968; Rolls 1992). Nor are the emotions generated by this

portion of the brain well differentiated. The hypothalamus may feel pleasure

in  general,  or  depression  in  general,  or  enraged  in  general  with  nodifferentiation,  specificity,  or  concern  for  consequences  other  than  the

satisfaction of internal needs. .



















  By  contrast,  considerable  information  and  cognitive  pre-processing

occurs within the various subdivisions of the thalamus, such as the the lateral

and medial geniculate nucleus (LGN & MGN), the pulvinar, the motor and

subthalamus (M/ST), and the dorsal medial nucleus (DMN). These structures

play a significant role in processing auditory (MGM) and visual input (LGN),

the guidance of motor functions (M/ST), and the regulation of attention and

arousal (DMN). For example, the LGN receives visual input directly from the

retina, and then transfers this information to the visual cortex (Casagrande &

Joseph,  1978).  The  MGN  receives  auditory  input  from  the  midbrain  and

transfer this information to the auditory cortex (Amaral et al., 1983; Pandya

& Yeterian, 1985). The dorsal medial and reticular thalamus exert regulatory

influences over neocortical, striatal, and limbic system arousal and influence

memory  and  attentional  functioning  (Joseph,  1999a;  Skinner  &  Yingling,

1977; Yingling & Skinner, 1977). .

  In  addition,  the  subthalamus,  which  is  intimately  associated  with  the

amygdala,  the  motor  thalamus  and  the  striatum,  participates  in  the

organization and expression of gross purposeful affective-motoric behaviors

(Crossman, Sambrook, & Mitchell, 1987; Parent & Hazrati, 1995). Thus the

subthalamus (and striatum with which it is also intimately associated) can

trigger  running,  kicking,  punching,  flailing,  and  a  variety  of  oral  andemotional facial expressions, or conversely "freezing" in reaction to extreme

fear. The striatum and subthalamus act as an emotional-motor interface which

enables humans (and other animals) to express their emotions through body

language and facial expression.

  Because of their role in guiding and controlling motor activities, if the

subthalamus or motor thalamus is injured, patients may demonstrate a variety

of hypo- or hyperactive motor abnormalities including rigidity, catatonia, and

catalepsy, or conversely tremor and uncontrolled ballistic movements such as

kicking, flailing, and so on (Crossman, et al., 1987; Parent & Hazrati, 1995;

Royce, 1987).

    Although  capable  of  experiencing  pain,  the  mental  and  perceptual

functioning of the thalamus occurs outside of conscious awareness. Rather,

the  functioning  of  these  various  thalamic  subdivisions  occurs  in  a  mental

realm best described as the "preconscious;" acting to provide the conscious

mind  with  its  sensory  and  perceptual  contents  by  relaying  data  from  the

brainstem to the neocortex as well as to the limbic system.

THE LIMBIC SYSTEM: EMOTION & MOTIVATION

    Amygdala, Hippocampus, Septal Nuclei, Cingulate, Hypothalamus.

The  principle  structures  of  the  limbic  system  include  the  amygdala,

hippocampus,  septal  nuclei,  anterior  cingulate  gyrus,  as  well  as  the

hypothalamus  (Joseph,  1992a,  1994,  1998a;  LeDoux,  1996;  Gloor,  1997;

MacLean, 1990). These structures represent a truly interactive system and are

intimately interconnected by a number of interactive pathways, e.g. the stria

terminalis, medial forebrain bundle, fornix-fimbria, amygdalofugal, and so

on.

    Collectively, the limbic system subserves all aspects of emotional, social,

motivational and sexual functioning (Gloor, 1997; Halgren, 1992; Leutmezer

et al., 1999; MacLean, 1990; Olds, 1956; Olds & Forbes, 1981), as well as

learning and memory (Eichenbaum et al. 1994; Mishkin, 1990; Nunn et al.,

1999;  Squire,  1992),  and  homeostatic,  endocrine,  and  hormonal  activities

(Smith et al. 1990), including the stress response (Fink, 1999; Joseph, 1998b,

1999b,d), and even the craving for pleasure-inducing drugs (Childress, et al.,

1999). With the exception of the hippocampus, electrical stimulation of each

of these structures has induced feelings of extreme pleasure, and extremely

negative emotions, such as fear, anger, and rage (Gloor, 1997; Heath, 1974;

Olds,  1956;  Olds  &  Forbes,  1981).  Activation  of  these  structures,  the

amygdala and hypothalamus in particular, have also induced fighting, fleeing,and sexual behavior--affective motor actions made possible through the basal

ganglia (e.g., corpus and limbic striatum) and the brainstem; structures which

are partly under the control of the amygdala.























  The limbic system, the amygdala and cingulate in particular, also play

significant and important roles in the evolution, development and expression

of language and emotional speech (Joseph, 1982, 1992a, 1999b; MacLean,

1990). It is these early maturing structures which provide the neurological

foundations  (that  is,  in  association  with  the  periaqueductal  gray)  for  the

development of infant speech and what has been termed, "limbic language"

(Joseph, 1982, Jurgens, 1990).

LIMBIC SYSTEM SEXUALITY

  The limbic system is sexually differentiated such that there is a male,

female,  and  even  homosexual  limbic  system.  In  humans,  sexual

differentiation is initiated around 3 months after conception, and is triggered

by  the  presence  or  absence  of  testosterone  which  also  effects  cellular

development.  For  example,  glia  cells,  which  manufacture  certain

neurotransmitters  and  which  nourish  and  even  guide  immature  migrating

immature  neuroblasts  to  their  terminal  substrate,  develop  unique  male-

specific patterns before birth. Hence, testosterone effects neural migrationand thus the organization and neural growth of the limbic system as well as

the neocortex and spinal cord.

  For example, the presence of fetal testosterone promotes the development

of spinal motor neurons which project to the penis. Moreover, the total brain

volume of the human male is about 7% larger than that of the female, and

much of this differences is due to the greater volume of white matter in the

male  cerebrum  (glia  and  axons),  the  only  exceptions  being  the  human

hippocampus which is larger in the female, and the amygdala which is 16%

larger in the male in total volume (Filipek, et al., 1994).

  The female and male primate amygdala are sexually differentiated and

have  their  own  unique  patterns  of  dendritic  growth  and  organization

(Nishizuka & Arai, 1981). As noted, in humans the male amygdala is 16%

larger, and in male rats the medial amygdala is 65% larger than the female

amygdala  (Breedlove  &  Cooke,  1999),  and  the  male  amygdala  grows  or

shrinks in the presence of testosterone--findings which may be related to sex

differences in sexuality and aggression.

    Moreover, female amygdala neurons are smaller and more numerous, and

densely packed than those of the male (Bubenik & Brown, 1973; Nishizuka

& Arai, 1981), and smaller, densely packed neurons fire more easily and

frequently than larger ones--which may be related to the fact that females are

more emotional and more easily frightened than males (chapters 7,13,15), as

the amygdala is a principle structure involved in evoking feelings of fear

(Davis et al., 1997; Gloor, 1997; LeDoux, 1996).

    Dendritic spine density in the female rat hippocampus also increases and

decreases by as much as 30% during each estrus cycle (Woolley, et al., 1990)

which in turn may influence memory. Indeed, in humans it has been shown

that estrogen replacement therapy slows memory loss in women. In fact, it

has been reported that women who take this hormone have a 54% lower

chance of developing Alzheimers. On the other hand, dendritic spine density

can  rapidly  change  within  a  few  seconds  (regardless  of  gender),  as  these

spines can rapidly grow or disappear in response to varying experiences or

lack thereof.  In addition, the human anterior commissure which connects the right and

left amygdala/ temporal lobe is sexually differentiated (Allen et al. 1989), as

is  primate/mammalian  hypothalamus  (Bleier  et  al.  1982;  Dorner,  1976;

Gorski et al. 1978; Rainbow et al. 1982; Raisman & Field, 1971, 1973)--with

which  the  amygdala  is  intimately  interconnected.  That  is,  the  anterior

commissure  is  thicker  in  women  which,  coupled  with  her  more  densely

packed  amygdala  neurons  (Bubenik  &  Brown,  1973;  Nishizuka  &  Arai,

1981) may account for her greater social-emotional sensitivity (see chapters

8,  10,  13,  15).  Thus,  different  structures  of  the  limbic  system  have  sex

specific patterns of neuronal and dendritic organization and perform different

functions depending on if one is a man or a woman.

  For  example,  chemical  and  electrical  stimulation  of  the  sexually

dimorphic  preoptic  and  ventromedial  hypothalamic  nuclei  triggers  and/or

increases  sexual  behavior  in  males  and  females  (with  each  taking  their

respective  sexual  positions),  and  significantly  increases  the  frequency  of

erections, copulations and ejaculations, as well as pelvic thrusting followed

by an explosive discharge of semen even in the absence of a mate (Hart et al.,

1985; Lisk, 1967, 1971; Maclean, 1973). In female primates, activation of

these areas can also trigger maternal behavior (Numan, 1985). Conversely,

lesions to the preoptic and posterior hypothalamus eliminates male sexual

behavior and results in gonadal atrophy. Likewise, activation of the sexuallydimorphic amygdala--which is larger in males (Filipek, et al., 1994)-- can

produce penile erection and clitoral engorgement (Kling and Brothers, 1992;

MacLean,  1990;  Robinson  and  Mishkin,  1968;  Stoffels  et  al.,  1980),  and

trigger sexual feelings (Bancaud et al., 1970; Remillard et al., 1983), extreme

pleasure (Olds and Forbes, 1981), memories of sexual intercourse (Gloor,

1986), as well as ovulation, uterine contractions, lactogenetic responses, and

orgasm (Backman and Rossel, 1984; Currier, Little, Suess and Andy, 1971;

Freemon and Nevis,1969; Warneke, 1976; Remillard et al., 1983; Shealy and

Peel, 1957).

    Moreover, these sexually dimorphic structures also play different roles

among females depending on if a woman is sexually receptive, pregnant, or

lactating.  For  example,  in  a  lactating  female,  the  sexually  dimorphic

supraoptic  and  paraventricular  hypothalamic  nuclei  (which  projects  to  the

posterior  lobe  of  the  pituitary)  may  trigger  the  secretion  of  oxytocin--a

chemical which can trigger uterine contractions as well as milk production

and which makes nursing a pleasurable experience. In fact, dendritic spine

density of ventromedial hypothalamic neurons varies across the estrus cycle

(Frankfurt  et  al.,  1990)  and  thus  presumably  during  pregnancy  and  while

nursing.

  Hence, the core of our personal and emotional being, the limbic system, is

sexually differentiated. There is a male vs a female limbic system, and even a

"homosexual" limbic system (Levay, 1991; Swaab, 1990); structures which

are  organized  in  unique  sex  specific  dendritic  and  neuronal  patterns  and

which  govern  sex-specific  behaviors.  Coupled  with  evolutionary  (Joseph,

1999e)  and  early  environmental  influences  (Joseph,  1979;  Joseph  &

Gallagher, 1980), the sex differences in these and other structures account for

many  of  the  stereotypical  sex  differences  in  thinking,  sexual  orientation,

aggression, and cognitive functioning (Barnett & Meck, 1990; Beatty, 1992;

Dawson et al. 1975; Harris, 1978; Joseph, et al. 1978; Stewart et al. 1975)

which  characterized  the  mind  of  woman  and  man,  including  their  sexual

behaviors.

SOCIAL BEHAVIOR & THE LIMBIC SYSTEM

  The  amygdala  are  involved  in  all  aspects  of  social  and  emotional

functioning. If the right and left amygdala are destroyed, the neocortex will

be denied all related social-emotional and affective input and the patient will

no longer be able to recognize or feel affection for family, friends or loved

one's  (Lilly  et  al.,  1983;  Marlowe  et  al.,  1975;  Terzian  &  Ore,  1955).Although the ability to speak, think, reason, and read and write is preserved,

the personal-affective contents of consciousness will have been erased.

  Humans and animals subject to bilateral amygdala destruction avoid all

contact with others, preferring to sit alone in isolation, and will withdraw if

approached.  Similarly,  primates  who  are  subject  to  bilateral  amygdala

removal lose all interest in social activity and persistently attempt to avoid

contact with others. If approached they withdraw. If followed they flee. Even

maternal  behavior  is  severely  affected  following  bilateral  amygdala

destruction. According to Kling (1972) mothers will bite off fingers or toes,

break arms or legs, and behave as if their "infant were a strange object to be

mouthed, bitten and tossed around as though it were a rubber ball".

AMYGDALA, HIPPOCAMPUS & MEMORY

    Although  the  hippocampus  is  not  associated  with  emotion  per  se,

stimulation of this structure and/or the amgydala, can trigger recent and even

long  forgotten  memories,  especially  those  that  the  patient  feels  to  be

exceedingly emotionally meaningful or personally profound, such as traumas

or the recollection of the first time they had sexual intercourse (Gloor, 1997;

Halgren, 1992; Penfield & Perot, 1963). The hippocampus, in conjunction

with  the  amygdala  has  been  implicated  in  the  regulation  of  neocortical

arousal, and long term memory storage and recall including the ability to

remember words, conversations, and visualize one's self and the surrounding

environment.















  The hippocampus and amygdala displays synaptic plasticity and dendritic

proliferation, and will grow additional dendritic spines in response to new

learning (Engbert & Bonhoeffer, 1999), and interacts with the amygdala in

the storage of the cognitive and emotional attributes of memory (Gloor, 1997;Halgren, 1992), including dreaming and what has been referred to as the

primary process (Joseph, 1992a). As noted above, dendritic spines can grow

and change position in response to new experiences or lack therefore, thus

forming  innumerable  new  synapses  and  creating  vast  neural  networks

supporting complex memories.

HIPPOCAMPUS, MEMORY & AMNESIA

    Amnesia  &  H.M  .  Bilateral  destruction  of  the  anterior  hippocampus

results  in  striking  and  profound  disturbances  involving  memory  and  new

learning (i.e. anterograde amnesia). For example, one such individual who

underwent bilateral destruction of this nuclei (H.M.), was subsequently found

to have almost completely lost the ability to recall anything experienced after

surgery. If you introduced yourself to him, left the room, and then returned a

few minutes later he would have no recall of having met or spoken to you.

Dr.  Brenda  Milner  worked  with  H.M.  for  almost  20  years  and  yet  she

remained an utter stranger to him.



























  H.M. was in fact so amnesic for everything that has occurred since hissurgery (although memory for events prior to his surgery is comparatively

exceedingly well preserved), that every time he rediscovered that his favorite

uncle died (actually a few years before his surgery) he suffered the same grief

as if he had just been informed for the first time. Although without memory

for new (non-motor) information, has adequate intelligence, he was painfully

aware of his deficit and constantly apologized for his problem. "Right now,

I'm wondering" he once said, "Have I done or said anything amiss?" You see,

at this moment everything looks clear to me, but what happened just before?

That's  what  worries  me.  It's  like  waking  from  a  dream.  I  just  don't

remember...Every day is alone in itself, whatever enjoyment I've had, and

whatever sorrow I've had...I just don't remember" (Blakemore, 1977, p.96).

    Presumably the hippocampus acts to protect memory and the encoding of

new information during the storage and consolidation phase via the gating of

afferent streams of information and the filtering/exclusion (or dampening) of

irrelevant and interfering stimuli. When the hippocampus is damaged there

results input overload, the neuroaxis is overwhelmed by neural noise, and the

consolidation phase of memory is disrupted such that relevant information is

not properly stored or even attented to. Consequently, the ability to form

associations  (e.g.  between  stimulus  and  response)  or  to  alter  preexisting

schemas (such as occurs during learning) is attenuated.

THE CINGULATE & ENTORHINAL CORTEX

  The different structures of the limbic system subserve different as well as

overlapping functions ranging from primitive emotions (e.g., hypothalamus)

to  the  spiritually  profound  (e.g.,  the  amygdala).  From  an  evolutionary

perspective,  some  structures  are  exceedingly  ancient  and  have  a  pedigree

extending  almost  a  half  billion  years  backwards  in  time,  e.g.  the

amygdala/striatal/hippocampus, hypothalamus, brainstem.

Others of more recent vintage, such as the cingulate gyrus, may have first

begun to evolve around 200 million years ago (MacLean, 1990). This more

recent evolutionary origin is also reflected by those functional capacities it

mediates, including complex cognitiveaffective activities such as maternal-

infant behavior and emotional speech.

  That the cingulate has evolved more recently is also evident structurally.

For example, with the exception of the cingulate, the structures of the limbic

system  are  comprised  of  allocortex.  Allocortex  has  three  layers  with

pyramidal cells sandwiched between layers I and III. The cingulate consists

of mesocortex (also referred to as "paleocortex" and "transitional cortex"),which consists of five layers.
























    Although the entorhinal cortex --the "gateway to the hippocampus-- may

have begun to evolve at the same time as the cingulate, unlike this latter

structure, the entorhinal cortex appears to have continued to "evolve" and add

new layers. The entorhinal cortex, which receives and relays information to

and from the neocortex and hippocampus, consists of between 7 and 8 layers

(Braak & Braak, 1992; Ramon y Cajal, 1902/1955; Rose, 1926). This seven

to eight layer organization may well partly explain the unique importance of

the entorhinal cortex in complex cognitive processing, for it receives input

from  the  hippocampus  and  all  neocortical  association  areas  information

which it apparently integrates, and in conjunction with the amygdala and in

particular the hippocampus (which it partly coats), stores in memory (Gloor,

1997;  Squire,  1992).  The  entrohinal  cortex,  which  partly  surrounds  the

hippocampus and is interconnected with the amygdala, appears to be a supra-

modal memory center.

THE LIMBIC AND CORPUS STRIATUM

    Within 50 million years of the close of the Cambrian "Explosion" (500

million  years  ago),  cartilaginous  sharks  began  to  swim  and  patrol  theprimeval seas. Sharks are considered a "living fossil" and dissection of the

shark brain reveals a brainstem, diencephalon, and a forebrain consisting of a

dorsal/ventral amygdala-striatal mass with a primordial hippocampal-striatum

centered  at  its  dorsal  core.  Together  the  amygdala,  striatum,  and

hippocampus, formed the forebrain, the dorsal pallium (Gloor, 1997; Haberly

1990; Herrick, 1925; Stephan & Andy, 1977; Ulinksi, 1990).

    Although the recipient of visual input, transferred from the brainstem, the

primordial  amydala-striatal-hippocampus,  was  dominated  by  the  olfactory

lobe--a dominance which was exaggerated further when animals left the sea

and began to wonder upon dry shores. With the evolution of amphibians and

reptiles,  the  forebrain  expanded  and  the  amygdala,  striatum,  and

hippocampus  began  to  differentiate,  and  were  pushed  apart  (Gloor,  1997;

Haberly 1990; Herrick, 1925; Nieuwenhuys & Meek, 1990ab; Smeet, 1990;

Stephan & Andy, 1977; Ulinksi, 1990). Nevertheless, the amygdala remains

intimately associated with the striatum, which in turn responds to amygdala

concerns.

















  In the human brain, the striatum is located anterior to the thalamus and is

a  major  component  of  the  basal  ganglia.  Considered  broadly,  the  basal

ganglia consists of the subthalamic nucleus, portions of the midbrain, the

limbic  striatum,  the  amygdala,  and  the  globus  pallidus  and  putamen  (the

lenticular nucleus) and the caudate nucleus (Alexander & Crutcher, 1990;

Crutcher & Alexander, 1990; Mink & Thach, 1991; Parent & Hazrati 1995).

The putamen and the caudate are referred to as the corpus striatum, with the

head of the caudate extending deep into the frontal lobe and its tail mergingwith the amygdala. Beneath the corpus striatum is the limbic striatum (or

extended amygdala) which is comprised of the substantia innominata, the

nucleus accumbens, and the olfactory tubercle.



































  The limbic and corpus striatum serve, in part, as the motor-component of

the limbic system, and receive input directly from the amygdala. Hence, the

striatum  reacts  to  certain  types  of  visual  and  olfactory  stimuli  which  are

deemed  by  the  amygdala  to  be  emotionally  significant,  with  gross  motor

movements, e.g., kicking, hitting, running, flailing.

  Because  of  its  importance  in  movement,  if  the  corpus  striatum  wereinjured,  the  patient  may  become  stiff  and  rigid,  such  as  occurs  with

Parkinson's disease, or they may involuntarily twitch, jerk, kick, and flail

about with their limbs--depending on which aspects of the basal ganglia are

injured (see chapter 16). Moreover, patients with abnormalities and reduced

functional activity of the striatum may develop obsessive compulsive motor

movements, often involving the hands, or increasingly lose inhibitory control

over motor functioning such that may display signs of mania. In fact, children

with hyperactivity and impulse control disorder, have been shown to display

reduced  striatal  activity,  which  is  increased  when  treated  with  Ritalin.

However, in "normal" children, Ritalin decreases striatal activity.

    Although  the  dorsal  and  ventral  aspects  of  the  striatum  play  roles  in

motor functioning, the limbic striatum is more concerned with emotion and

memory. Hence, damage to this structure is associated with loss of memory

including Alzheimer's disease.

The Limbic System Vs Neocortex: Consciousness

  The contents of consciousness, that is, the contents of the neocortex, are

initially  derived  from  the  limbic  system  and  thalamus,  which  provide

sensory, perceptual, and emotional input. Structures such as the amygdala

and thalamus project to almost every region of the neocortex, and if denied

limbic  and  thalamic  input,  consciousness  would  be  extinguished  and  the

ability  to  become  conscious  of  the  external  or  internal  world  would  be

denied.

    However,  although  "conscious"  the  limbic  system  does  not  appear

capable  of  selfconsciousness  or  self-reflection.  The  brain  of  the  shark,

amphibian, and reptile, consist of limbic and brainstem tissue, and there is no

evidence of self-consciousness, or thinking or thought among these creatures.

Rather,  they  reflexively  react.  Of  course,  the  limbic  system  has  also

continued to evolve with the evolution of mammals and then humans--and in

part, the neocortex is the consequence of the evolutionary expansion.

  Hence, whereas the neocortical aspects of the conscious human mind are

concerned with the more rational and linguistic aspects of experience, the

limbic aspects of the human mind are associated with the emotional and even

the hallucinatory aspects of experience, including those features associated

with  what  has  been  described  as  the  primary  process.  By  contrast,  the

brainstem, controlling waking and sleeping, as well as the rhythmic aspects

of vegetative functioning, could be identified with the most primitive regions

of the psyche as its functional activity is for the most part, completely beyondconscious scrutiny or control.

THE NEOCORTEX (Gray Matter)

  Perception,  cognition,  fine-motor  expression,  and  computational

processing, is made possible by neurons, the majority of which are pyramidal

neurons. Most pyramidal neurons are located in the neocortical mantle of the

lobes of the brain, which gives this outercoating its grayish appearance. Over

90% of the gray matter is located in the neocortex. The neocortex ("new

cortex") likely first began to evolve between 100 million to 150 million years

ago (MacLean, 1990).

















  Neocortex has also been referred to as isocortex and is organized into

vertical columns and horizontal layers (Mountcastle, 1997). Each layer and

each column contains cells which perform specific functions (Ferster et al.,

1996;  Hubel  &  Wiesel,  1968,  1974;  Mountcastle,  1997;  Peters  &  Jones,

1984) and which receive or transmit information to or from adjacent cells or

distant regions of the brain (Kaas & Krubitzer 1991; Peters & Jones, 1984;

Sereno et al. 1995). For example, each column contains neurons that may

respond to the same frequency of sound, or to tactile input to the thumb, or to

a visual input on the same region of the retina (Hubel & Wiesel, 1968, 1974;

Mountcastle, 1997), depending on if the column is located in the temporal,

parietal, or occipital lobe.  Those neurons which project to neurons in the next column or to those

neurons in an upper or lower layer, are referred to as local circuit neurons.

Those which project from the neocortex to the brainstem, or from one half of

the brain to the other, are referred to as long distance neurons (Peters &

Jones, 1984).

Neocortical Layers

    Classically, the neocortex is said to consist of six to seven layers when in

fact  it  consists  of  numerous  layers  which  vary  depending  on  brain  area

(Braak & Braak, 1992; Peters & Jones, 1984; Ramon y Cajal, 1902/1955;

Rose, 1926). For example, the deepest layer, neocortical layer VI, consists of

two distinct layers (VIa and VIb). In the occipital lobe, three additional layers

(i.e.  sublayers)  can  be  distinguished  within  layer  IV  (which  also  receives

considerable thalamic input and is very thick). By contrast, within the motor

areas  of  the  frontal  lobe,  layer  IV  is  exceedingly  thin  (as  there  is

comparatively minimal thalamic input), whereas layer V is exceedingly thick,It is layer V of the frontal motor areas which contribute the bulk of axons that

form the descending corticbulbar, corticopontine, and corticorubral brainstem

pathways which establish contact with cranial nerve and sensory and spinal

motor  neurons  (Brodal,  1981;  Kuypers  &  CatsmanBerrevoets,  1984).

Likewise in the temporal neocortex layer V is relatively thick as are layers I

and  VI  (since  much  of  the  temporal  lobe  is  association  and  assimilation

cortex). As noted, the entorhinal cortex, the "gate way to the hippocampus"

and which is located along the medial surface of the temporal lobe, consists

of between 7 and 8 layers (Braak & Braak, 1992; Ramon y Cajal, 1902/1955;

Rose, 1926).

  Hence, the thickness, layering, and composition of the human neocortex

varies from lobe to lobe and actually consists of from 7 to 9 (or more) layers

rather than 6. For our purposes (and throughout this book) we will described

the neocortex as having 7 layers.

    Specifically, layer I is referred to as the Molecular Layer and consists of

Golgi II cells and horizonal cells. Layer I receives innumerable dendrites

from  local  circuit  neurons  located  in  the  lower  layers.  Layer  I,  however,

actually contains few neurons and is mostly made up of tangentially running

axons and horizontally running birfucating apical dendrites received from the

pyramidal  cells  of  the  lower  layers  (Peters  &  Jones,  1984).  Layer  II  is

referred to as the External Granular Layer, and consists of densely packed

small pyramidal, stellate, and granule cells. Most of the neurons in layer II

are  local  circuit  neurons  which  project  to  adjacent  columns  and  adjacent

layers.  Layer III is the Pyramidal Layer and consists of medium pyramidal cells

which project axons to distant areas of the neocortex. Hence, the neurons of

layer III can be considered long distance neurons.

  Layer  IV,  the  Internal  Granular  Layer,  has  a  granular  appearance  and

consists  of  small  pyramidal,  granule,  and  stellate  (starshaped)  cells  and

receives massive axonal projections from the thalamus. These neurons are

predominantly local circuit, and project to adjacent columns and layers. That

is,  upon  receiving  and  analyzing  thalamic  input,  the  neurons  of  layer  IV

transfer  this  data  to  adjacent  neurons  for  additional  analysis.  Because  the

primary,  secondary  and  association  sensory  areas  receive  considerable

thalamic input, layer IV is relatively thick--except in the motor cortex.

  Layer V is the Ganglionic Layer and consists of large and medium size

pyramidal cells, including, in primary motor cortex (Brodmann's area 4) the

giant  cells  of  Betz.  The  pyramidal  neurons  of  layer  V  are  long  distanceneurons, and give rise to descending axons which form the corticospinal,

pyramidal,  corticobulbar,  corticopontine,  and  corticorubral  brainstem

pathways which establish contact with cranial nerve and sensory and spinal

motor neurons (Brodal, 1981; Kuypers & Catsman-Berrevoets, 1984). It is

these "pyramidal" and cortico-spinal neurons which make purposeful, fine

motor  movement  possible.  Approximately  31%  of  the  corticospinal  tract

arises from the pyramidal cells located in the primary motor areas 4, with the

remainder  arising  from  the  frontal  motor  associations  areas  6,  8,  and  the

primary somesthetic areas 3,1,2, with a scattering of fibers being contributed

by the occipital and temporal lobe, as well as limbic system structures.




















  Layer VIa is the Multiform Layer and contains pyramidal, fusiform, and

spindle shaped cells, whereas Layer VIb consists of predominantly of spindle

shaped  cells.  These  are  predominantly  local  circuit  neurons,  and  receive

considerable input from the brainstem.

The  Cytoarchitextural  Neuronal,  &  Chemical  Organization  of  the

Neocortex

    Korbinian  Brodmann  detailed  the  regional  variation  in  the

cytoarchitectural  organization  of  the  cortex,  and  conducted  detailed

comparative studies of numerous species, each of which displays common as

well as varying patterns of cytoarchitexture and gyral folding. Based on these

cytoarchitextural  differences  and  commonalities,  Brodmann  divided  thecortex into distinct regions and created cytoarchitextural maps of the brains

of a variety of species, including humans. For examples, Brodmann's area 17

is synonymous with the primary visual cortex, whereas Brodmann's areas

3,1,2, denote and identify the primary somesthetic receiving areas.























    However, although these area differ in regard to organization, what they

share in common is a preponderance of pyramidal cells. As noted, pyramidal

cells are also the largest and are more numerous than any other neocortical

neuron (Peters & Jones, 1984). Pyramidal neurons account for up to 3/4 of all

neocortical cells. Pyramidal neurons also serve as both local-circuit and long-

distance neurons and generally receive two types of synaptic contacts referred

to  as  Gray  types  I  and  II  which  differ  in  synaptic  morphology  and

(respectively)  excitatory  vs  inhibitory  influences  (Peters  &  Jones,  1984).

However,  almost  all  pyramidal  cell  are  excitatory  and  use  glutamate  and

aspartic acid as transmitters (Tsmoto, 1990).  Pyramidal cells can also be classified as Golgi I and II cells. However, of

all neocortical neurons, only 10% are Golgi type I neurons, the main source

of long-distance (excitatory) axons, the majority are interneurons, i.e. local

circuit  neurons  which  in  turn  provide  almost  90%  of  cortical  axons  and

dendrites.  Approximately  95%  of  Golgi  type  I  long  distance  axons

interconnect distant regions within the same hemisphere and only about 5%

cross the corpus callosum, the fiber pathways which link the right and left

hemishere (Peters & Jones, 1984).






    Non-pyramidal cells also function as local-circuit (inter-) neurons, and

connect  adjacent  cells,  layers,  and  cell  columns,  and  display  the  greatest

degree of morphological diversity. These include stellate cells, bipolar cells,

chandelier cells, and basket cells. Many of these cells are inhibitory and may

use GABA as a neurotransmitter, though the majority in fact appear to be

excitory  and  use  glutamate  (Peters  &  Jones,  1984).  Presumably,

nonpyramidal,  local  circuit  (interneurons)  act  to  fine  tune  information

processing via inhibitory filtering and selective excitatory transmission. They

also serve to integrate and assimilate information received in adjacent regions

of the neocortex.  In  addition  to  glutmate  and  GABA,  neocortical  neurons  contain  and

respond to peptides, including substance P, corticotropin releasing factor, and

opiates. The peptide containing neurons tend to congregate in layers II, III,

and IV (Jones & Hendry, 1986).

    Information processing throughout the brain is also dependent on glia and

non-neuroglia elements. Glia serve a supportive and nurturing role, and may

also act to store information. During embryonic brain development, radial

glia fibers act to guide migrating neurons to the neocortex, and some glia also

form  myeline  sheaths  which  surround  axons,  thus  serving  as  a  form  of

insulation which promotes information transmission.















  Glia and non-neuroglia elements make up almost 70% of the volume of

the neocortex. Of the remainder, 22% consists of axons and dendrites, with

the body (soma) of the neuron comprising only 8% (Peters & Jones, 1984).THE CONSCIOUS AND UNCONSCIOUS (EMOTIONAL) MIND

  The human cerebrum can be subdivided into frontal, temporal, parietal,

and occipital lobes, as well as the limbic system, striatum and diencephalon.

The brainstem and cerebellum are not considered part of the cerebrum, but

instead comprise the "hind brain."

  Neocortex & Consciousness The cerebrum constitutes nearly 90% of the

volume of the brain, and is 50 times larger than the brainstem and 8 times

larger  than  the  cerebellum  (Filipek,  et  al.,  1994).  More  than  60%  of  the

cerebrum consists of gray matter, and less than 40% consists of white matter.

The amygdala, basal ganglia, diencephalon and hippocampus, make up less

than 3% of the central gray, whereas more than 90% of the gray matter is

found within the neocortex, which reflects the dominant role the neocortex

plays in virtually all fully-integrated functions of the CNS.

The neocortex is clearly associated with what is classically considered the

conscious  mind--a  consciousness  that  knows  it  is  conscious,  and  which

includes the capacity to think and reason, to abstract and consciously reflect

upon the self and the world, as well as the ability speak grammatically and

read,  write,  compose,  and  recite  the  music  of  poetry.  Consciousness,

however, is modular, with different regions of the neocortex engaging in both

localized as well as parallel processing.

  For example, as based on functional imaging, it has been demonstrated

that language processing, and silent mental activities, such as thinking, or

generating inner speech, activates the neocortex of the frontal lobes (Paulesu,

et  al.,  1993;  Peterson  et  al.,  1988;  Demonet,  et  al.,  1994).  Reading  and

language  processing  also  activates  the  neocortex  of the  temporal  lobes

(Bookheimer, et al., 1995; Bottini, et al., 1994; Fletcher et al., 1995; Howard

et  al.,  199;  Shaywitz,  et  al.,  1995;  Warburton,  et  al.,  1996)  and  the  left

inferior parietal lobule (Bookheimer, et al., 1995; Price, 1997). Moreover,

during language processing there is activity in the brainstem, the cerebellum,

and various limbic structures, especially the mesocortical anterior cingulate

gyrus.  When considered very broadly, it could be argued that the neocortex is

associated with the conscious, rational mind, and conscious-awareness that

we identify as distinctly human--a consciousness that knows it is conscious

(Joseph, 1982, 1988a). By contrast, it has been argued (Joseph, 1992ab) that

the limbic system represents that aspect of the mind classically referred to as

the  "unconscious"  (Freud,  1900)  and  the  "collective  unconscious"  (Jung,

1945). And just as it has been theorized that the unconscious continually

supplies the conscious mind with all manner of impulses, imagery, and ideas

(e.g. Freud, 1900), it is now apparent that the limbic system does likewise,

and that those aspects of consciousness associated with the neocortex are

often  driven  by  these  unconscious  limbic  mental  realms  and  associated

impulses.

THE FRONTAL, PARIETAL, TEMPORAL AND OCCIPITAL LOBES

  The  rational,  logical,  linguistic,  and  self-reflective  aspects  of

consciousness, therefore, are associated with the neocortical shroud which

envelops the brain. Neocortical consciousness, however, also appears to be

somewhat modular with the different lobes of the brain (and the right vs left

hemisphere) subserving different aspects of consciousness and perceptual and

personality functioning.  As is common knowledge, the six to seven layered neocortical shroud

which  encompasses  and  envelopes  the  old  brain,  can  be  divided  into  the

frontal lobes which comprise the anterior half of the human telencephalon,

and  the  parietal,  occipital  and  temporal  lobes  which  are  located  in  the

posterior half of the cerebrum, each of which contributes differently to the

mosaic of mind including personality.

THE FRONTAL LOBES

  The frontal lobes has been referred to as the "senior executive" of the

brain  and  personality  and  is  associated  with  goal  formation,  long  term

planning skills, the ability to consider multiple alternatives and consequences

simultaneously,  as  well  as  memory  search  and  retrieval.  Because  it  is

interlocked  with  the  thalamus,  limbic  system,  brainstem,  and  the  parietal,

occipital, and temporal lobes, the frontal lobes are provided multiple streams

of input and are constantly informed as to the processing which takes place in

other  regions  of  the  brain.  Moreover,  it  can  act  to  inhibit,  suppress,  or

enhance  perceptual  and  information  processing,  including  learning  and

memory  through  inhibitory  and  excitatory  influences  directed  to  the

thalamus, brainstem, or the different lobes of the brain (Joseph, 1999a).  For example, the frontal lobes interact directly with the temporal lobe

(which  contains  the  hippocampus  and  amygdala)  in  order  to  ensure  that

certain  percepts  are  attended  to,  committed  to  memory,  and  later

remembered.  As  demonstrated  through  functional  imaging,  it  has  been

determined that the ability to remember a visual or a verbal experience, is

directly correlated with activation of the right or left frontal lobe and the

temporal lobes during that experience (Brewer et al., 1998; Wagner et al.,

1998). According to Wagner et al., (1998, p. 1190), "what makes a verbal

experience memorable partially depends on the extent to which left prefrontal

and medial temporal regions are engaged during the experience." The degree

of this activity, therefore, can be used to predict which experiences will be

"later remembered well, remembered less well, or forgotten" (Brewer et al.,

1998, p. 1185). Thus the frontal lobes appear to be acting directly on and in

concert  with  the  amygdala  and  hippocampus  in  regarding  to  memory

functioning.

  In addition to influencing arousal, memory, and perceptual actiivty, the

right and left frontal motor areas control fine motor activity, including the

emotional  and  non-emotional  aspects  of  expressive  speech  (Joseph,  1982,

1988a, 1999a,e; Ross, 1993). Both the right and left frontal lobes in fact

become functionally active during language tasks (Peterson et al., 1988), and

receive auditory-linguistic input that has been organized and transmitted from

the  posterior  speech  zones,  the  inferior  parietal  lobule,  and  in  the  left

hemisphere, Wernicke's area in the superior temporal lobe. Damage to the left

frontal lobe can thus result in expressive aphasia, whereas right frontal injury

may disturb the melody and prosodic aspects of speech.

  Because the frontal lobes serve the "senior executive" of the brain andpersonality,  if  the  frontal  lobes  are  injured,  all  aspects  of  personality

functioning may become severely abnormal (Fuster, 1997; Joseph, 1986a,

1988a,  1999a;  Stuss  &  Benson,  1984).  Patients  may  become  lethargic,

apathetic,  or  conversely,  disinhibited,  impulsive,  aggressively  sexual,  and

display what has been classically referred to as the frontal lobe personality.

  One individual who was described as quite gentle and sensitive prior to

his  injury,  subsequently  raped  and  brutalized  several  women.  Similar

behavior  has  been  described  following  frontal  lobotomy.  As  stated  by

Freeman and Watts (1943, p. 805): "Sometimes the wife has to put up with

some exaggerated attention on the part of her husband, even at inconvenient

times and under circumstances which she may find embarrassing. Refusal,

however, has led to one savage beating that we know of, and to an additional

separation or two" (p. 805). Curiously, in these situations Freeman and Watts

(1943, p. 805) have suggested that "spirited physical self-defense is probably

the best strategy of the woman. Her husband may have regressed to the cave-

man level, and she owes it to him to be responsive at the cave-women level.

It  may  not  be  agreeable  at  first,  but  she  will  soon  find  it  exhilarating  if

unconventional."

    However, since the frontal lobes serve so many functions, patients may

display different symptoms depending on if the lesion impacts the right, left,

orbital, or medial aspects of the frontal lobes (Joseph, 1999a). Oatients may

display  severe  apathy,  depression,  schizophrenia  or  aphasic  speech  (left

frontal),  mania,  disinhibition,  and  confabulation  (right  frontal),  obsessive

compulsions (orbital-striatal) or catatonia (medial frontal).  For  example,  a  soldier  who  received  a  gunshot  wound  that  passed

completely through the frontal lobes, "layed in a catatonic-like stupor for two

months,  always  upon  one  side  with  slightly  flexed  arms  and  legs,  never

changing  his  uncomfortable  position;  if  he  were  rolled  into  some  other

position, he would quickly get back into his former one. He did not obey

commands, but if food and drink were given to him, he swallowed them

naturally. He was incontinent, made no complaints, gazed steadily forward

and showed no interest in anything. He could not be persuaded to talk, and

then suddenly he would answer quite correctly about his personal affairs and

go back to mutism. From time to time he showed a peculiar explosive laugh,

especially when his untidiness was mentioned". Incredibly, the patient "was

eventually returned to active duty" (Freeman & Watts 1942, pp 46-47).




















  The motor areas of frontal lobes controls body movement and fine motor

activity. A motor map of the body is maintained within the neocortex of the

frontal lobes, and if damaged, the individual will become paralyzed on one

half of the body; the extent of the paralysis depending on the extent and depth

of the damage.

  The frontal lobes control muscular activity and movement through the

pyramidal tract (also known as the cortico-spinal tract). Pyramidal neurons

project to the motor centers in the striatum, thalamus, brainstem, and the

spinal cord. In this way, gross and fine motor movement can be controlled bythe senior executive of the brain and personality.

THE TEMPORAL LOBES

    Whereas the frontal lobe act to regulate personality and emotion, such as

through  inhibitory  projections  it  maintains  with  the  limbic  system,  the

temporal  lobes  are  the  source  of  one's  personal  subjective  and  emotional

identity (Gloor, 1997) and appears to be the main storage site for spatial,

verbal (Brewer et al., 1998; Squire, 1992; Wagner et al., 1998), personal and

even  sexual  memories  (e.g.,  Gloor,  1997;  Halgren,  1992).  The  temporal

lobes, in fact, contain the core structures of the limbic system, the amygdala

and hippocampus, and of all brain regions, only stimulation or activation of

the  temporal  lobe  or  the  underlying  limbic  structures,  gives  rise  to

personalized,  subjective,  emotional,  and  sexual  experiences  (Gloor,  1997;

Halgren, 1992; Penfield & Perot, 1963). Stimulation of the temporal lobe can

give  rise  to  profound  auditory  or  visual  hallucinations,  including  the

sensation or having left the body, as well as spiritual and religious feelings

such as having the "truth" revealed and of receiving knowledge regarding the

meaning of life and death.

  In addition to memory and personal and spiritual identity, the temporal

lobe are responsive to complex auditory and visual stimuli (Binder et al.,

1994; Gross & Graziano 1995; Nakamura et al. 1994; Nelken et al., 1999;

Nishimura  et  al.,  1999;  Price,  1997;  Rolls  1992;  Tovee  et  al.  1994),  and

subserve  the  ability  to  comprehend  complex  and  emotional  speech.

Functional  imaging  studies  have  repeatedly  demonstrated  activity  in  the

superior  and  middle  temporal  lobe  when  engaged  in  language  tasks

(Bookheimer, et al., 1995; Bottini, et al., 1994; Fletcher et al., 1995; Howard

et al., 1996; Shaywitz, et al., 1995; Warburton, et al., 1996). The temporal

lobes, however, are functionally lateralized. Specifically, whereas the right

temporal lobe subserves the ability to perceive and comprehend emotional,

animal, environmental, and musical sounds (Joseph, 1988a; Parsons & Fox,

1997;  Ross,  1993)  the  left  temporal  lobe,  including  Wernicke's  area  is

directly responsible for the capacity to comprehend complex human speech.

The left superior temporal lobe, i.e. the planum temporal, which contains the

auditory area, is in fact significantly larger than its counterpart on the right.

  It has been determined, as demonstrated through lesion and physiological

studies, that Wernicke's area (in conjunction with the inferior parietal lobule)

acts  to  organize  and  separate  incoming  sounds  into  a  temporal  and

interrelated series so as to extract linguistic meaning via the perception of theresulting sequences. When damaged a spoken sentence such as the "big black

dog" might be perceived as "the klabgigdod." Patients develop what has been

referred to as Wernicke's receptive aphasia. Presumably this disorder is due

in part to an impaired capacity to discern the individual units of speech and

their  temporal  order.  That  is,  sounds  must  be  separated  into  discrete

interrelated linear units or they will be perceived as a meaningless blur.

  Patients with damage to Wernicke's area are nevertheless, still capable of

talking due to the preservation of Broca's area which continues to receive

lingusitic-related ideational material via the arcuate fasciculus pathway which

originate in the temporal lobe and passes through the inferior parietal lobule--

a structure which acts as a phonological storehouse that becomes activated

during short-term verbal memory and word retrieval (Demonet, et al., 1994;

Paulesu,  et  al.,  1993;  Price,  1997).  However,  because  Wernicke's  area  is

injured,  speech  output  also  becomes  abnormal,  a  condition  referred  to  as

fluent aphasia. Broca's area keeps talking, but what is says is nonsense.


















  The speech output of a patient with "fluent aphasia" in many respects

resembles  the  acutely  psychotic  speech  of  patients  suffering  from  certain

subtypes of schizophrenia. In fact, certain subtypes of schizophrenia have

been repeatedly associated with abnormalities and irritative lesion involving

the left temporal lobe (DeLisi et al. 1991; Dauphinais et al. 1990; Flor-Henry

1983; Perez et al. 1985; Rossi et al. 1990, 1991; Sherwin 1981). Conversely,

given the role of the left temporal lobe in language, patients diagnosed with

schizophrenia and who show signs of left temporal lobe dysfunction, alsotend  to  demonstrate  aphasic  abnormalities  in  their  thought  and  speech

(Chaika,  1982;  Flor-Henry,  1983;  Hoffman,  1986;  Hoffman,  Stopek  &

Andreasen, 1986; Rutter, 1979).

  The right temporal lobe also participates in language--as demonstrated

through functional imaging (Bottini et al., 1994; Price et al., 1996; Shaywitz,

et  al.,  1995)--and  is  especially  responsive  to  sounds  conveying  emotion,

melody, prosody, including those made by animals and those arising from the

natural environment such as wind and rain (e.g. Fujii et al., 1990; Joseph,

1982, 1988a; Ross, 1993; Schnider et al. 1994; Zatorre & Halpen, 1993). It is

the right temporal lobe which enables an individual to determine if someone

is speaking sincerely, or with anger, happiness, and so on, whereas the left

temporal lobe listens to the words being said.

  Hence, if the right temporal lobe is severely injured, patients may suffer

from a non-verbal social-emotional auditory agnosia (Joseph, 1982, 1988a,

Ross,  1993;  Schnider  et  al.  1994),  also  referred  to  as  phonagnosia  (van

Lancker,  et  al.,  1988),  in  which  case  they  can  no  longer  perceive  social-

emotional  vocal  nuances  and  may  misperceive  what  others  are  saying  or

implying, and may be no longer capable of hearing "sincerity" or mirth or

even "love" in which case they may become paranoid. Hence, although the

ability to comprehend the non-emotional, denotative aspects of language is

preserved (Fujii et al., 1990), patients with right superior temporal injuries

may lose the capability to correctly discern environmental sounds (e.g. birds

singing, doors closing, keys jangling), emotionalprosodic speech, as well as

music (Nielsen, 1946; Ross, 1993; Samson & Zattore, 1988; Schnider et al.

1994; Spreen et al. 1965; Zatorre & Hapern, 1993).  The loss of the ability to appreciate music is due to the right temporal

lobe being dominant for the perception of melodic and musical stimuli. For

example, while listening to or performing scales, activity increases in the left

temporal lobe, whereas when listening to Bach (the third movement of Bach's

Italian concerto), the right temporal lobe becomes highly active (Parsons &

Fox,  1997).  Likewise,  Evers  and  colleagues  (1999)  in  evaluating  cerebral

blood  velocity,  found  a  right  hemisphere  increase  in  blood  flow  when

listening to harmony (but not rhythm), among non-musicians in general, and

especially  among  females.  In  fact,  right  temporal  lobe  activity  increased

when pianists were playing from memory Parsons & Fox, 1997). Conversely,

right temporal injuries can disrupt the ability to remember musical tunes or to

create musical imagery (Zatorre & Halpen, 1993).

    Unfortunately, individuals with right temporal injuries not only lose the

ability to appreciate music, but may misperceive and fail to comprehend a

variety of paralinguistic social-emotional messages. This includes difficulty

correctly identifying the voices of loved ones or friends, or discerning what

others may be implying, or in appreciating emotional and contextual cues,

including variables such as sincerity or mirthful intonation. In consequence, a

patient may complain that his wife no longer loves him, and that he knows

this from the sound of her voice. Or, because of difficulty discerning nuances

such as humor and friendliness the patient may even become paranoid or

delusional as they realize that friends and loved ones sound different, and

may entertain delusions that they've been replaced by imposters.  The  temporal  lobes,  therefore,  are  crucially  important  in  memory,

language, social emotional relations, maintaining personal identity and the

ability to comprehend speech. If injured, patients may suffer memory loss,

and/or  language-related  ideational  activity  may  become  abnormal,  thus

producing a formal thought disorder or delusions or paranoia, and personality

functioning may become fractured and thus schizophrenic.

THE PARIETAL LOBES

  The parietal lobes maintain the body image and also consists of cells

which are responsive to a variety of divergent stimuli, including movement,

hand  position,  objects  within  grasping  distance,  audition,  eye  movement,

pain,  heat,  cold,  as  well  as  complex  and  motivationally  significant  visual

stimuli (Aoki et al., 1999; Cohen et al. 1994; Deibert et al., 1999; Dong et al.

1994; Kaas, 1993; Lam, et al., 1999; Remy et al., 1999). The parietal lobes

assimilate  this  information  in  order  to  coordinate  reaching  and  the

movements of the body in space, particularly the hand. The parietal lobe is in

fact considered a "lobe of the hand." Hence, because of its importance in

controlling hand movement, one consequence of parietal lobe injury may be

apraxia--an  inability  to  perform  coordinated  step-wise  and  sequential

movements of the hands.  Patients  with  apraxia  demonstrate  gross  inaccuracies  as  well  as

clumsiness when making reaching movements or when attempting to pick up

small objects in visual space. They may also be impaired in their ability to

acquire or perform tasks involving sequential changes in the hand or upper

musculature including well learned, skilled, and even stereotyped motor tasks

such as lighting a cigarette, using a key, or making a cup of coffee. That is,

they may perform the various steps in the wrong order; e.g., pretending to stir

the coffee, then pretending to pour it.

  In  addition,  patients  may  no  longer  be  able  to  perform  constructional

tasks, such as drawing or copying or performing puzzles or block designs, a

condition referred to as constructional apraxia. They may leave out parts,

grossly distort the figure, or even fail to draw half the object--particularly

with right parietal injuries.

  Apraxic disorders are most common with injuries involving the inferior

parietal lobule (IPL), a structure that engages in the motor programming ofhand movements, such as those involved in drawing, constructing, building,

and  which  require  sequential  and  orderly  movements  (De  Renzi  and

Lucchetti, 1988; Heilman et al., 1982; Kimura, 1993; Strub and Geschwind,

1983). As noted above, the IPL (the angular and supramarginal gyrus) is also

coextensive with Wernickes area and acts to assimilate auditory, visual, and

tactile  impressions,  and  provide  names  for  these  associated  assimilation

(which also makes reading and writing possible). Once this is accomplished,

the IPL then injects this material, temporal sequential fashion, into the stream

of language and thought all of which is transmitted to Broca's area and which

is  then  expressed  as  grammatical  speech  (Joseph,  1982,  1986a,  1999e,f;

Joseph et al., 1984).

  This is not merely a hypothesis based on lesion studies, for as based on

functional imaging, others have come to the same conclusion; i.e. the inferior

parietal  lobule  acts  as  a  phonological  storehouse  that  becomes  activated

during  short-term  memory  and  word  retrieval  (Demonet,  et  al.,  1994;

Paulesu, et al., 1993; Price, 1997). For example, viewing words activates the

left  supramarginal  gyrus  (Bookheimer,  et  al.,  1995;  Vandenberghe,  et  al.,

1996; , Menard, et al., 1996; Price, 1997) which also becomes active when

performing  syllable  judgements  (Price,  1997),  and  when  reading

(Bookheimer, et al., 1995; Menard, et al., 1996; Price, et al., 1996). Injuries

to the IPL, therefore, can result in word finding difficulty (anomia) as well as

a loss of the ability to read or write.  The parietal lobes also subserve and maintain a unique aspect of one's

personal identity, the body image (Joseph, 1986a, 1988a). The parietal lobe

actually maintains multiple maps of the body (Kaas, 1993; Lin et al., 1994),

and in this regard, it is responsible for the ability to remember and recognize

the body as an extension of one's personal self-particularly the right parietal

lobe which appears to maintain multiple maps of both halves of the body and

a  bilateral  image  of  body-image  visual  space  (Joseph,  1986a,  1988a).

Presumably, it is because the body image is maintained in the parietal lobe,

that  individuals  who  have  suffered  amputations  continue  to  experience  a

phantom  limb.  Although  the  body  part  has  been  eliminated,  the  neural

representation for the body may remain intact. Because the parietal lobes

maintain the body image, and as the entire body is multiply represented along

the surface of the parietal lobes, massive injuries may result in a destruction

of the body image. Memories of the body may be erased.

  As noted, the right parietal lobe maintains a bilateral body image, the left

parietal lobe appears to maintain a memory of only half the body (Joseph,1986a, 1988a). Inf the left parietal lobe is injured, the right parietal area may

continue to monitor both halves of the body and both halves of visual space

and the body image will remain intact. If the right parietal area is severely

injured, the left half of the body image, and in fact all memories of the left

half of the body and the left half of space, may be abolished; a condition

referred to as unilateral neglect. Patients may dress or groom only the right

half of their body, eat only off the right half of their plates, and fail to read

the left half of sentences and words, and so on. The left parietal lobe, having

a memory of only the right half of the body, is unable to recognize the left

half of the body, and ignores it and denies its existence.


























  Following a massive right parietal injury, and when confronted with their

unused or immobile limbs patients may (at least initially) deny that it belongs

to them and instead claim it must belong to the doctor or a patient in the next

bed.  For  example,  Gerstmann  (1942)  describes  a  patient  with  left-sided

hemiplegia who "did not realized and on being questioned denied, that she

was paralyzed on the left side of the body, did not recognize her left limbs asher  own,  ignored  them  as  if  they  had  not  existed,  and  entertained

confabulatory and delusional ideas in regard to her left extremities. She said

another person was in bed with her, a little Negro girl, whose arm had slipped

into the patient's sleeve" (p. 894). Another declared, (speaking of her left

limbs), "That's an old man. He stays in bed all the time."

With  right  parietal  injuries  coupled  with  unilateral  neglect,  patients  may

develop a dislike for their left limbs, try to throw them away, become agitated

when they are referred to, entertain persecutory delusions regarding them,

and even complain of of strange people sleeping in their beds due to their

experience of bumping into their left limbs during the night (Bisiach & Berti,

1987; Critchley, 1953; Gerstmann, 1942). One patient complained that the

person tried to push her out of the bed and then insisted that if it happened

again she would sue the hospital. A female patient expressed not only anger

but concern least her husband should find out; she was convinced it was a

man in her bed.

THE OCCIPITAL LOBES AND VISION

  The  occipital  lobes  are  the  smallest  lobes  of  the  brain,  but  like  other

tissues of the mind, they process information from a number of modalities

and contain neurons which respond to vestibular, acoustic, visual, visceral,

and somesthetic input (Beckers & Zeki 1994; Ferster, et al., 1996; Horen et

al.,  1972;  Pigarev  1994;  Sereno  et  al.  1995;  Zeki.  1997).  Predominantly,

however, the neocortex of the occipital lobes are the main receiving stations

for visual stimuli transmitted from the retina to the thalamus (Barbur et al.,

1993;  Ferster  et  al.,  1996).  Simple  and  complex  visual  and  central/foveal

analysis is one of the main functions associated with the occipital lobe (Kaas

& Krubitzer 1991; Sereno et al. 1995; Zeki, 1997).    Specifically  visual  information  is  shunted  from  the  lateral  geniculate

nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus to the primary visual receiving areas, striate

cortex, area 17. Area 17 is referred to as "striate cortex" due to the striped

appearance of layer IV, which is also directly innervated by the LGN. Layer

IV is divided into three sublayers, with the middle layer containing a rather

thick band of cortex, the band of Baillarger/Gennari, which is visible to the

naked eye.

    Throughout the striate cortex neurons with similar receptive propertiesare stacked in columns, with all the neurons within one column responding,

for example, to a certain visual orientation, and the cells in the next column to

an orientation of a slightly different angle. Columns exist for color, location,

movement, etc, with some columns responding to input from one eye, i.e.

ocular (eye) dominance columns (Hubel & Wiesel, 1968, 1974). In general, a

strict  topographical  relationship  is  maintained  throughout  the  visual

projection system and the visual cortex. Within the visual cortex immediately

adjacent groups of neurons respond to visual information from neighboring

regions within the retina (Kaas & Krubitzer 1991).


















    Information received in the visual areas of the occipital lobe are then

projected  dorsally  and  ventrally  to  a  variety  of  visual  association  areas,

including the parietal and temporal lobes (Kaas & Krubitzer 1991; Nakamura

et al. 1994; Sereno et al. 1995; Tovee et al. 1994). The dorsal stream of visual

information  flows  to  and  is  assimilated  by  the  parietal  lobes  and  is

incorporated  for  the  purposes  of  coordinating  body  and  arm  and  leg

movements in visual space. The parietal (dorsal) visual stream, therefore is

most sensitive to objects in the periphery and lower visual fields (Motter &

Mountcastle, 1981; Previc 1990); i.e. where the hands, feet, and ground are

more likely to be viewed, and which thus enables the parietal lobe to guide

and observe the hands in motion.

  The ventral visual stream flows from the occipital lobe to the inferior

temporal lobe (ITL) where it is assimilated and also serves to activate feature

detecting neurons which are sensitive to faces, objects, and other complexgeometric stimuli. ITL neurons are sensitive to color, contrast, size, shape,

orientation and are involved in the perception of three dimensional objects

including specific shapes and forms including the human face (Eskander, et

al. 1992; Gross & Graziano 1995; Gross, et al. 1972; Nakamura et al. 1994;

Rolls, 1992; Sergent, et al.1990). In consequence, if injured, patients may

suffer from an inability to recognize the faces of friends, loved ones, or pets

(Braun  et  al.  1994;  DeRenzi,  1986;  Hanley  et  al.  1990;  Hecaen  &

Angelergues, 1962; Landis et al., 1986; Levine, 1978); a condition referred to

as prosopagnosia. Some patients may in fact be unable to recognize their own

face in the mirror.























  The  ventral  occipital/temporal  and  the  dorsal  occipital/parietal  visual

areas also interact. For example, the ventral stream tends to focus on objects,

faces, and so on, whereas the dorsal stream focuses on the hands in visual

space. By interacting, the hands (parietal lobes) can be directed at specific

objects  identified  and  targeted  by  the  temporal  lobes,  thus  making

coordinated hand-eye coordination possible.

THE PRIMARY, SECONDARY AND ASSOCIATION AREAS

  The mosaic which can loosely be defined as consciousness, consists of

multiple  and  parallel  streams  of  information  which  are  processedhierarchically,  horizontally,  vertically,  and  in  modular  fashion,  with  the

brainstem, cerebellum, diencephalon, striatum, limbic system, and neocortex

providing their own unique contributions. Conscious processing within the

neocortex also occurs hierarchically, vertically, horizontally, as well as in

parallel, even within the separate lobes of the brain.

  For  example,  in  addition  to  their  layered  and  columnar  organization

(Mountcastle, 1997), each of the four lobes of the brain consists of multiple

cellular  cytoarchitectonic  subdivisions  which  perform  unique  and/or

overlapping  functions.  For  example,  each  lobe  can  be  subdivided  into

primary,  secondary,  association,  and  assimilation  areas.  In  general,

information  processing  in  the  sensory  receiving  areas  of  the  parietal,

temporal, and occipital lobes begins in the primary receiving area and then

flows to the secondary receiving area and then to the association and multi-

modal assimilation areas (Jones & Powell, 1970; Pandya & Yeterian, 1985).

However, since the various subdivisions of the thalamus also project to the

association areas, these tissues of the mind may receive specific types of

visual, or auditory, or somesthetic input in advance of the primary areas (e.g.

Zeki, 1997).

  In general, however, the flow is from primary to secondary to association

area. For example, somatosensory information is first transmitted from the

thalamus  to  the  primary  receiving  areas  of  the  parietal  lobe  (Brodmann's

cytoarchitectonic  areas  3,2,1).  Here  the  individual  sensory  elements  are

analyzed  and  localized,  e.g.,  cold,  wet,  hard,  small,  cubicle,  palm.  These

sensory impressions are then shunted to the secondary areas (Brodmann's

area 5) where these impressions may be combined, e.g. an ice cube held in

the  hand.  These  association  areas  are  then  transferred  to  the  association-

assimilation  areas  (Brodmann's  areas  7,  39,  40),  i.e.  the  inferior  parietal

lobule where they may then be visualized and even named.

As per the motor areas, the opposite sequence of events takes places, with

information flow beginning in the supplementary motor areas (SMA) prior to

movement,  and  prior  to  activation  of  the  secondary-association  areas--

cytoarchitectonic  areas  8,6  (Alexander  &  Crutcher,  1990;  Crutcher  &

Alexander, 1990). The SMA may well initiate movements as this part of the

brain has also been associated with what has been described as the "will."

  The secondary motor areas also become activated prior to movement and

precedes cellular activation of the primary region (Alexander & Crutcher,

1990; Crutcher & Alexander, 1990; Weinrich et al. 1984). The premotor areaappears  to  program  various  gross  and  fine  motor  activities,  and  becomes

highly  active  during  the  learning  of  new  motor  programs  (Porter  1990;

Roland et al. 1981).

    Depending  on  the  task,  the  primary  motor  areas  may  show  low  level

activity prior to movement, but then becomes highly active during movement

(Passingham, 1999)--a reflection of the fact that it supplies at least a third of

the  axonal  trunk  which  makes  up  the  corticospinal  tract  and  whose  cells

maintain multiple musculature connections (via the spinal cord), as well as a

one to one correspondence with specific muscles. In fact, direct electrical

stimulation of the frontal primary motor cortex can induce twitching of the

lips, flexion or extension of a single finger joint, protrusion of the tongue or

elevation of the palate (Penfield & Boldrey, 1937; Penfield & Jasper, 1954;

Penfield & Rasmussen, 1950; Rothwell et al. 1987), even though patients

never  claim  to  have  willed  these  movements.  Again,  however,  like  the

sensory  areas,  different  motor  subareas  may  become  activated

simultaneously, including the primary motor area which may become aroused

prior to movement, only to increase in activity during specific movements

(Passingham, 1993).    However,  the  motor  areas  also  interact  with  the  sensory  areas  in  the

parietal lobe. In this way, motor movement can be coordinated with sensory

impressions arising from the skin, joints, muscles, and body.

  Incoming and outgoing signals, therefore, are processed sequentially and

in parallel. Beginning in the primary receiving areas these signals are relayed

via a variety of separate branches to the secondary receiving areas and to

association areas further downstream which are also simultaneously receiving

thalamic input, processing this data, and then relaying this information back

to the primary areas as well as laterally to other association areas (Kaas,

1993; Panya & Yeterian, 1985; Zeki, 1997) and back to the thalamus and to

the frontal lobes. A similar stepwise and parallel process occurs; albeit in

reverse, within the motor areas. That is, the primary motor areas in the frontal

lobe may also become active prior to movements, but then increase their

activity when the movement is actually performed (Passingham, 1997).























  Hence,  these  divergent  cytoarchitectonic  areas  do  not  initially  act  in

isolation as multiple areas in diverse regions of the brain become activated

simultaneously and interact in regard to perceptual and motor functioning.

That  is,  functions  are  localized  as  well  as  distributed  throughout  the

neuroaxis  with  different  regions  making  unique  and  overlappingcontributions to the mosaic of the mind.

THE  RIGHT  AND  LEFT  HEMISPHERE:  FUNCTIONAL

LATERALITY

  Those  aspects  of  the  mind  that  we  associate  with  consciousness,

language, and rational thought, are clearly maintained and propagated by the

neocortical mantle of the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes and is

divisible  horizontally,  vertically,  hierarchically,  cytoarchitecturally,  and  in

accordance with the specialities of the different lobes of the brain including

the limbic system and diencephalon. These different temporal and parallel

streams of mental activity, including those generating by the structures of the

limbic system, coalesce to create a conscious composite, a semi-integrated

whole.























  The cerebrum including its striatal, limbic, and diencephalic components,

is divisible not only horizontally, vertically, hierarchically, and in regard to

its different lobes, but laterally. That is, two semi-independent streams of

conscious awareness coexist literally side by side. Each half of the cerebrum,

which includes neocortical, striatal, limbic and diencephalic structures, has its

own memories, goals, personal identity, and social emotional orientation and

capabilities  or  lack-thereof,  as  has  now  been  repeatedly  demonstratedfollowing surgical sectioning of the thick interhemispheric axonal pathway,

the  corpus  callosum  (Akelaitis,  1945;  Bogen,  1969,  1979;  Joseph,  1986b,

1988b; Levy, 1974, 1983; Sperry, 1966, 1982).















  As described by Nobel Lauriate Roger Sperry (1966, p. 299), "Everything

we  have  seen  indicates  that  the  surgery  has  left  these  people  with  two

separate  minds,  that  is,  two  separate  spheres  of  consciousness.  What  is

experienced in the right hemisphere seems to lie entirely outside the realm of

awareness of the left hemisphere. This mental division has been demonstrated

in regard to perception, cognition, volition, learning and memory."

  In consequence, following the surgical sectioning of the corpus callosum,

each  half  of  the  brain  and  mind  may  act  independently.  For  example,

Akelaitis  (1945,  p.  597)  describes  patients  with  complete  corpus

callosotomies who experienced extreme difficulties making the two halves of

their bodies and the two halves of their brains cooperate, as each half of the

brain  apparently  had  its  own  desires,  goals  and  intentions.  A  recently

divorced  male  "split-brain"  patient  noted  that  on  several  occasions  while

walking about town he found himself forced to go some distance in another

direction by the left half of his body. Specifically, whereas the speaking,

language dominant left half of his brain just wanted to go for a walk, the right

half of his brain was trying to walk toward the new home of his former wife.  A "split-brain" patient I examined, who had recently broken up with his

girlfriend,  indicated  thumbs  down  and  stated  matter-of-factly  that  he  had

absolutely no desire to see her again. However, when his (non-verbal) right

hemisphere was asked how it felt about the situation, and was told to give a

thumbs up or down, it gave a thumbs up (with the left hand) when asked if he

still wanted to see her.

  The  right  hemisphere  of  another  split-brain  patient  apparently  felt

considerable animosity for his wife, for it slapped her several times----much

to the embarrassment of his left (speaking) hemisphere. In another case, a

patient's  left  hand  attempted  to  choke  the  patient  himself  and  had  to  be

wrestled away. The right and left hemisphere of yet another splitbrain patient

enjoyed  different  television  programs,  different  foods,  and  had  different

attitudes even about mundane activities such as going for a walk (Joseph,

1988b).

  For example, while watching television one afternoon, this patient "2-C"

reported that to the dismay of his left (speaking) hemisphere, he was dragged

from the couch by his left leg, and that the left half of his body dragged him

to the TV where his left hand then changed channels even though he (or

rather his left hemisphere) was enjoying the program. On another occasion, it

simply turned the TV off and tried to leave the room. Once, after he had

retrieved something from the refrigerator with his right hand, his left hand

took the food, put it back on the shelf and retrieved a completely differentitem,  "Even  though  that's  not  what  I  wanted  to  eat!"  his  left  hemisphere

complained. On at least one occasion, his left leg refused to continue "going

for a walk" and would only allow him to return home.

  2-C was so annoyed with the independent actions of the left half of his

body that he frequently expressed hate for it, even striking it angrily with the

right  hand.  Nevertheless,  the  right  hemisphere  knew  exactly  what  it  was

doing,  as  was  demonstrated  experimentally,  and  thus  had  its  own  goals,

desires, intentions, and favorite foods and TV shows--even showing the good

sense of turning off the TV and leaving the room (Joseph, 1988b).

Dissociation and Self-Consciousness

  The multiplicity of mind is not limited to the neocortex but includes old

cortical  structures,  such  as  the  limbic  system  (Joseph  1992).  Moreover,

limbic  nuclei  such  as  the  amygdala  and  hippocampus  interact  with

neocortical  tissues  creating  yet  additional  mental  systems,  such  as  those

which  rely  on  memory  and  which  contribute  to  self-reflection,  personal

identity, and even self-consciousness (Joseph, 1992, 1998, 1999b, 2001).  For example, both the amygdala and the hippocampus are implicated in

the storage of long term memories, and both nuclei enable individuals to

visualize and remember themselves engaged in various acts, as if viewing

their  behavior  and  actions  from  afar.  Thus,  you  might see  yourself and

remember  yourself  engage  in  some  activity,  from  a  perspective  outside

yourself, as if you are an external witness; and this is a common feature of

selfreflection and self-memory and is made possible by the hippocampus and

overlying temporal lobe (Joseph, 1996, 2001).

The hippocampus in fact contains "place neurons" which cognitive map one's

position and the location of various objects within the environment (Nadel,

1991; O'Keefe, 1976; Wilson & McNaughton, 1993). Further, if the subject

moves about in that environment, entire populations of these place cells will

fire. Moreover, some cells are responsive to the movements of other people

in that environment and will fire as that person is observed to move around to

different  locations  or  corners  of  the  room  (Nadel,  1991;  O'Keefe,  1976;

Wilson and McNaughton, 1993).

  Electrode stimulation, or other forms of heightened activity within the

hippocampus and overlying temporal lobe can also cause a person to see

themselves, in real time, as if their conscious mind is floating on the ceiling

staring down at their body (Joseph, 1998, 1999b, 2001). During the course of

electrode stimulation and seizure activity originating in the temporal lobe or

hippocampus, patients may report that they have left their bodies and are

hovering upon the ceiling staring down at themselves (Daly, 1958; Penfield,1952; Penfield & Perot 1963; Williams, 1956). That is, their consciousness

and sense of personal identity appears to split off from their body, such that

they experience themselves as as a consciousness that is conscious of itself as

a conscious that is detached from the body which is being observed.

  One female patient claimed that she not only would float above her body,

but  would  sometimes  drift  outside  and  even  enter  into  the  homes  of  her

neighbors. Penfield and Perot (1963) describe several patients who during a

temporal lobe seizure, or neurosurgical temporal lobe stimulation, claimed

they split-off from their body and could see themselves down below. One

woman stated: "it was though I were two persons, one watching, and the

other having this happen to me." According to Penfield (1952), "it was as

though the patient were attending a familiar play and was both the actor and

audience."

  Under  conditions  of  extreme  trauma,  stress  and  fear,  the  amygdala,

hippocampus and temporal lobe become exceedingly active (Joseph, 1998,

1999b).  Under  these  conditions  many  will  experience  a  "splitting  of

consciousness"  and  have  the  sensation  they  have  left  their  body  and  are

hovering  beside  or  above  themselves,  or  even  that  they  floated  away

(Courtois, 2009; Grinker & Spiegel, 1945; Noyes & Kletti, 1977; van der

Kolk 1987). That is, out-of-body dissociative experiences appear to be due to

fear induced hippocampus (and amygdala) hyperactivation.

    Likewise,  during  episodes  of  severe  traumatic  stress  personal

consciousness may be fragmented and patients may dissociate and experience

themselves  as  splitting  off  and  floating  away  from  their  body,  passively

observing all that is occurring (Courtois, 1995; Grinker & Spiegel, 1945;

Joseph, 1999d; Noyes & Kletti, 1977; Southard, 1919; Summit, 1983; van der

Kolk 1987).

  Noyes and Kletti (1977) described several individuals who experienced

terror, believed they were about to die, and then suffered an out-of body

dissociative experience: "I had a clear image of myself... as though watching

it  on  a  television  screen."  "The  next  thing  I  knew  I  wasn't  in  the  truck

anymore;  I  was  looking  down  from  50  to  100  feet  in  the  air."  "I  had  a

sensation of floating. It was almost like stepping out of reality. I seemed to

step out of this world."

  One  individual,  after  losing  control  of  his  Mustang  convertible  while

during over 100 miles per hour on a rain soaked freeway, reported that "time

seemed to slow down and then... part of my mind was a few feet outside thecar zooming above it and then beside it and behind it and in front of it,

looking at and analyzing the respective positions of my spinning Mustang

and the cars surrounding me. Simultaneously I was inside trying to steer and

control it in accordance with the multiple perspectives I was given by that

part  of  my  mind  that  was  outside.  It  was  like  my  mind  split  and  one

consciousness was inside the car, while the other was zooming all around

outside  and  giving  me  visual  feedback  that  enabled  me  to  avoid  hitting

anyone or destroying my Mustang."

  Numerous individuals from adults to children, from those born blind and

deaf,  have  also  reported  experiencing  a  dissociative  consciousness  after

profound injury causing near death (Eadie 1992; Rawling 1978; Ring 1980).

Consider for example, the case of Army Specialist J. C. Bayne of the 196th

Light Infantry Brigade. Bayne was "killed" in Chu Lai, Vietnam, in 1966,

after  being  simultaneously  machine  gunned  and  struck  by  a  mortar.

According to Bayne, when he opened his eyes he was floating in the air,

looking down on his burnt and bloody body: "I could see me... it was like

looking at a manikin laying there... I was burnt up and there was blood all

over the place... I could see the Vietcong. I could see the guy pull my boots

off. I could see the rest of them picking up various things... I was like a

spectator... It was about four or five in the afternoon when our own troops

came. I could hear and see them approaching... I looked dead... they put me

in a bag... transferred me to a truck and then to the morgue. And from that

point, it was the embalming process. I was on that table and a guy was telling

jokes  about  those  USO  girls...  all  I  had  on  was  bloody  undershorts...  he

placed my leg out and made a slight incision and stopped... he checked my

pulse and heartbeat again and I could see that too... It was about that point I

just  lost  track  of  what  was  taking  place....  [until  much  later]  when  the

chaplain was in there saying everything was going to be all right.... I was no

longer outside. I was part of it at this point" (reported in Wilson, 1987, pp

113-114; and Sabom, 1982, pp 81-82).

    Therefore,  be  it  secondary  to  the  fear  of  dying,  or  depth  electrode

stimulation, these experiences all appear to be due to a mental system which

enables a the conscious mind to detach completely from the body in order to

make the body an object of consciousness (Joseph, 1998, 1999b, 2001).

THE NEUROANATOMY OF MIND

  In  summary,  the  human  mind  and  brain  are  functionally  lateralized,

sexually  differentiated,  and  hierarchically,  vertically,  and  horizontallyorganized,  and  are  significantly  shaped  and  effected  by  experience.

Considered broadly, it can be said that the most unconscious and reflexive

aspects of the "unconscious" mind are associated with the brainstem.

  The  diencephalon,  which  is  immediately  anterior  and  adjacent  to  the

brainstem, is associated with a vague sensory affective unconscious, such that

pre-conscious  cognitivesensory  processing  (thalamus)  and  reflexive

emotional processing (hypothalamus) takes place in this region--information

which may be relayed to the neocortex as well as to the limbic system.

  The limbic system, which is anterior to the diencephalon, and is both

dorsally  and  ventrally  situated,  is  capable  of  exceedingly  complex  and

sophisticated  mental  activity  and  can  process,  analyze,  and  learn  and

remember  complex  cognitive,  linguistic,  visual-spatial,  and  affective

material, as well as generate complex emotions ranging from love to hate.

The limbic system can also vocalize and it can think, and it can transfer this

information  to  the  overlying  neocortex  which  it  may  impel  to  act  on  its

desires and its fears.

  The neocortex is associated with the more rational and logical aspects of

the mind. It is this neocortical shroud which envelops and coats the cerebrum

with six to seven layers of gray matter, which cogitates, speaks in words and

sentences, and can reason, rhyme, plan for the future, as well as ponder and

analyze its own brain and mind.

  The  mind,  however,  is  also  a  continuum,  and  the  human  brain  is  a

composite of interacting structures which are intimately interconnected and

which  perform  a  variety  of  unique  and  overlapping  functions  often  in

parallel.  And  yet,  although  these  structures  interact  and  often  engage  in

parallel processing, they are also functionally specialized, with some areas,

such  as  the  brainstem  and  limbic  system,  often  acting  completely

independently  of  the  neocortex  or  what  is  classically  referred  to  as  the

conscious mind.

OVERVIEW:  CONSCIOUSNESS,  AWARENESS,  AND  THE

NEUROSCIENCE OF MIND

  The brain and the mind are synonymous, for if the brain is damaged, so

too is the mind. The brain and associated mental activity are functionally

lateralized  and  hierarchically  organized,  such  that  specific  cognitive  and

emotional functions may be localized to specific regions of the brain. There

are  phylogenetically  older,  sensory-motor  nonemotional  mental  systems

associated with the brainstem, and a highly complex emotional and memorysystem associated with the limbic system.

    Whereas the brainstem is incapable of conscious or cognitive activity, and

instead  mediates  reflexive  motor  acts,  including  breathing,  heart  rate  and

arousal, it is the limbic system which mediates the ability to feel love or

sorrow or to determine if something is good to eat. Indeed, it is the limbic

system which enables humans to form memories of the long ago, as well as to

recall  these  memories  in  order  to  dream  of  the  future,  as  specific  limbic

nuclei become active not only when learning and remembering, but when

dreaming.

  In fact, the limbic system provides humans (and perhaps non-humans)

with the capacity to experience the most profound of emotions, from love to

spiritual ecstasy and religious awe, serving, at its most profound, as perhaps

even a transmitter to god.

  By contrast, the more recently evolved neocortex of the right hemisphere

is the domain of a highly evolved social-emotional, visual-pictorial, spatial,

body  centered  awareness  and  employs  emotional  and  melodic  sounds  for

expression. The right half of the brain is responsible for discerning distance,

depth and movement, and recognizing environmental and animal sounds such

as a chirping bird, a buzzing bee, a babbling brook, or a thunderstorm, as well

as the capacity to sing, dance, chase or throw something with accuracy, and

run without falling or bumping into things. Whereas the left hemisphere is

concerned with logic and grammatical rules of organization and expression,

including the analysis of details, sequential units, and parts, it is the right

hemisphere which is able to perceive events or stimuli as a whole and which

can see the forest as well as the trees. Whereas right hemispheric activity is

associated  with  the  production  of  the  visual,  emotional,  hallucinatory,

hypnogogic aspects of dreaming, the left hemisphere tends to immediately

forget the dream upon waking (Joseph, 1988a).

Hence, in the right hemisphere we deal with a non-verbal form of awareness

that  accompanies  in  parallel  the  temporal-sequential,  language  dependent

stream of consciousness associated with the functional integrity of the left

cerebrum. In fact, and as has been repeatedly demonstrated, the right and left

cerebral  hemisphere  are  each  capable  of  self-awareness,  can  plan  for  the

future,  have  goals  and  aspirations,  likes  and  dislikes,  social  and  political

awareness, and can independently and purposefully initiate behavior, guide

responses choices and emotional reactions, as well as recall and act upon

certain  desires,  impulses  situations  or  environmental  events  --sometimeswithout the aid, knowledge or active (reflective) participation of the other

half of the brain.

  Thus, in summary, the right and left hemisphere subserve almost wholly

different mental systems--a function of evolutionary metamorphosis and the

evolution  of  language  and  tool  making  capabilities--  whereas  the  limbic

system is synonymous with the most archaic regions of the emotional, sexual,

unconscious mind. However, because the brain and mind are hierarchically

organized and lateralized, and as the limbic system retains the capacity to

completely overthrow and hijack the neocortically equipped "rational" and

emotionally intelligent mind, conscious-awareness, as well as the brain, are

subject to fracture, with each isolated segment acting on its own wishes and

desires, independent of and sometimes conflicting with those mental systems

that may remain intact such as those associated with the language-dependent

conscious mind.

    References

Akelaitis, A. J. (1945). Studies on the corpus callosum. American Journal of

Psychiatry, 101, 594-599.

Bogen, J. (1979). The other side of the brain. Bulletin of the Los Angeles

Neurological Society. 34, 135-162.

Bohr,  N.  (1934/1987),  Atomic  Theory  and  the  Description  of  Nature,

reprinted as The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, Vol. I, Woodbridge:

Ox Bow Press.

Bohr,  N.  (1958/1987),  Essays  1932-1957  on  Atomic  Physics  and  Human

Knowledge, reprinted as The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, Vol. II,

Woodbridge: Ox Bow Press.

  Bohr, N. (1963/1987), Essays 1958-1962 on Atomic Physics and Human

Knowledge, reprinted as The Philosophical Writings of Niels Bohr, Vol. III,

Woodbridge: Ox Bow Press.

Casagrande, V. A. & Joseph, R. (1978). Effects of monocular deprivation on

geniculostriate connections in prosimian primates. Anatomical Record, 190,

359.

    Casagrande,  V.  A.  &  Joseph,  R.  (1980).  Morphological  effects  of

monocular deprivation and recovery on the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus

in prosimian primates. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 194, 413-426.

Courtois, C. A. (2009). Treating Complex Traumatic Stress Disorders: An

Evidence-Based  Guide  Daly,  D.  (1958).  Ictal  affect.  American  Journal  of

Psychiatry, 115, 97-108.  DeWitt, B. S., (1971). The Many-Universes Interpretation of Quantum

Mechanics,  in  B.  D.'Espagnat  (ed.),  Foundations  of  Quantum  Mechanics,

New York: Academic Press. pp. 167–218.

DeWitt,  B.  S.  and  Graham,  N.,  editors  (1973).  The  Many-Worlds

Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton University Press, Princeton,

New-Jersey.

Eadie, B. J. (1993) Embraced by the light. New York, Bantam

  Einstein, A. (1905a). Does the Inertia of a Body Depend upon its Energy

Content? Annalen der Physik 18, 639-641.

Einstein,  A.  (1905b).  Concerning  an  Heuristic  Point  of  View  Toward  the

Emission and Transformation of Light. Annalen der Physik 17, 132-148.

Einstein, A. (1905c). On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies. Annalen

der Physik 17, 891-921.

Einstein,  A.  (1926).  Letter  to  Max  Born.  The  Born-Einstein  Letters

(translated by Irene Born) Walker and Company, New York.

Gallagher,  R.  E.,  &  Joseph,  R.  (1982).  Non-linguistic  knowledge,

hemispheric  laterality,  and  the  conservation  of  inequivalance.  Journal  of

General Psychology, 107, 31-40.

Geschwind. N. (1981). The perverseness of the right hemisphere. Behavioral

Brain Research, 4, 106-107.

Grinker, R. R., & Spiegel, J. P. (1945). Men Under Stress. McGraw-Hill.

    Heisenberg.  W.  (1930),  Physikalische  Prinzipien  der  Quantentheorie

(Leipzig:  Hirzel).  English  translation  The  Physical  Principles  of  Quantum

Theory, University of Chicago Press.

    Heisenberg,  W.  (1955).  The  Development  of  the  Interpretation  of  the

Quantum  Theory,  in  W.  Pauli  (ed),  Niels  Bohr  and  the  Development  of

Physics, 35, London: Pergamon pp. 12-29.

Heisenberg, W. (1958), Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern

Science, London: Goerge Allen & Unwin.

Joseph,  R.  (1982).  The  Neuropsychology  of  Development.  Hemispheric

Laterality,  Limbic  Language,  the  Origin  of  Thought.  Journal  of  Clinical

Psychology, 44 4-33.

Joseph, R. (1986). Reversal of language and emotion in a corpus callosotomy

patient. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, & Psychiatry, 49, 628-634.

Joseph,  R.  (1986).  Confabulation  and  delusional  denial:  Frontal  lobe  and

lateralized influences. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 42, 845-860.

Joseph, R. (1988) The Right Cerebral Hemisphere: Emotion, Music, Visual-Spatial  Skills,  Body  Image,  Dreams,  and  Awareness.  Journal  of  Clinical

Psychology, 44, 630-673.

Joseph, R. (1988). Dual mental functioning in a split-brain patient. Journal of

Clinical Psychology, 44, 770-779.

Joseph, R. (1992) The Limbic System: Emotion, Laterality, and Unconscious

Mind. The Psychoanalytic Review, 79, 405-455.

Joseph,  R.  (1996).  Neuropsychiatry,  Neuropsychology,  Clinical

Neuroscience, 2nd Edition. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.

  Joseph,  R.  (1998).  Traumatic  amnesia,  repression,  and  hippocampal

injury due to corticosteroid and enkephalin secretion. Child Psychiatry and

Human Development. 29, 169-186.

  Joseph,  R.  (1999a).  Frontal  lobe  psychopathology:  Mania,  depression,

aphasia,  confabulation,  catatonia,  perseveration,  obsessive  compulsions,

schizophrenia. Psychiatry, 62, 138-172.

Joseph,  R.  (1999b).  The  neurology  of  traumatic  "dissociative"  amnesia.

Commentary and literature review. Child Abuse & Neglect. 23, 71-80.

Joseph,  R.  (2000).  Limbic  language/language  axis  theory  of  speech.

Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 23, 439-441.

Joseph,  R.  (2001).  The  Limbic  System  and  the  Soul:  Evolution  and  the

Neuroanatomy of Religious Experience. Zygon, the Journal of Religion &

Science, 36, 105-136.

  Joseph,  R.,  &  Casagrande,  V.  A.  (1978).  Visual  field  defects  and

morphological  changes  resulting  from  monocular  deprivation  in  primates.

Proceedings of the Society for Neuroscience, 4, 1978, 2021.

Joseph, R. & Casagrande, V. A. (1980). Visual field defects and recovery

following lid closure in a prosimian primate. Behavioral Brain Research, 1,

150-178.

Joseph,  R.,  Forrest,  N.,  Fiducia,  N.,  Como,  P.,  &  Siegel,  J.  (1981).

Electrophysiological  and  behavioral  correlates  of  arousal.  Physiological

Psychology, 1981, 9, 90-95.

Joseph, R., Gallagher, R., E., Holloway, J., & Kahn, J. (1984). Two brains,

one child: Interhemispheric transfer and confabulation in children aged 4, 7,

10. Cortex, 20, 317-331.

Joseph,  R.,  &  Gallagher,  R.  E.  (1985).  Interhemispheric  transfer  and  the

completion of reversible operations in non-conserving children. Journal of

Clinical Psychology, 41, 796-800.

Nadel, L. (1991). The hippocampus and space revisited. Hippocampus, 1,221-229.

Neumann, J. von, (1937/2001), “Quantum Mechanics of Infinite Systems.

Institute  for  Advanced  Study;  John  von  Neumann  Archive,  Library  of

Congress, Washington, D.C.

Neumann,  J.  von,  (1938),  On  Infinite  Direct  Products,  Compositio

Mathematica 6: 1-77.

Neumann, J. von, (1955), Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,

Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Noyes,  R.,  &  Kletti,  R.  (1977).  Depersonalization  in  response  to  life

threatening danger. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 18, 375-384.

  O'Keefe,  J.  (1976).  Place  units  in  the  hippocampus.  Experimental

Neurology,  51-78-100.  Pais,  A.  (1979).  Einstein  and  the  quantum  theory,

Reviews of Modern Physics, 51, 863-914.

Penfield,  W.  (1952)  Memory  Mechanisms.  Archives  of  Neurology  and

Psychiatry, 67, 178-191.

Penfield, W., & Perot, P. (1963) The brains record of auditory and visual

experience. Brain, 86, 595-695.

Rawlins, M. (1978). Beyond Death's Door. Sheldon Press.

Ring, K. (1980). Life at Death: A Scientific Investigation of the Near-Death

Experience. New York: Quill.

Sabom, M. (1982). Recollections of Death. New York: Harper & Row.

Southard, E. E. (1919). Shell-shock and other Neuropsychiatric Problems.

Boston.

Sperry, R. (1966). Brain bisection and the neurology of consciousness. In F.

O. Schmitt and F. G. Worden (eds). The Neurosciences. MIT press.

van der Kolk, B. A. (1985). Psychological Trauma. American Psychiatric

Press.

Williams,  D.  (1956).  The  structure  of  emotions  reflected  in  epileptic

experiences. Brain, 79, 29-67.

Wilson, I. (1987). The After Death Experience. Morrow.

Wilson, M. A., & McNaughton, B. L. (1993). Dynamics of the hippocampus

ensemble for space. Science, 261, 1055-1058.