Economics is a Branch not of Physics but of Biology
J.-M. Kuczynski

Biological systems are systems that tend towards equilibrium. If they are disequilibrated, they restore their own equilibrium.   Strictly physical systems, on the other hand, are systems that tend towards disequilibrium, a “strictly physical” system being one that is material but not biological.
Biological systems are counter-entropic. They undo entropy. Where there is biology, there is entropy reversal. Obviously biological systems do not reduce the net level of entropy in the universe. But to the extent that the universe is biological, it is counter-entropic. 
Organisms create order. They create orderly niches for themselves. They build damns and cars and nests. And if these artifacts are damaged, the creatures that created them mend them or create new ones. 
And organisms organize themselves into pluralities---into gaggles, swarms, herds, and societies. And if these pluralities are disrupted, they re-organize themselves.
Note the etymological connection between the words “organize” and “organism.” Note also the etymological connection between the words “create” and “creature.”
Physical systems are entropic. They become more disorderly with time. And they simply decay. There is nothing analogous in the purely physical realm to the building, or the fixing, of houses. To some extent this is analytically: for where there is constructive, or reconstructive, activity, there is ipso facto biological activity. But the point stands: the biological is, whereas the strictly is not, counter-entropic. 
Economics is therefore a branch of biology, and its logic is the logic of biology, not of physics. Economics is about equilibrium restoration. Where demand creates disequilibrium, supply restores equilibrium. All of the laws of economics are laws of restoration. When there is pure social decay, there is a disintegration of the economic order and a withering of economic law. And it is only where social bonds are strong enough to ensure that disruptions are met with counter-disruptions—where bad harvests lead to soaring prices and good harvests lead to falling prices---that there is anything resembling a cohesive economy or, therefore, that the distinctively economic methods of reasoning are applicable. 
 
