POSITIONS/QUOTES ON QUASI-MATERIALISM/QUASI-DUALISM PAPER

--- MAJOR VIEWS ---
1. VIEW: The social, material paradigm has failed
   EVIDENCE: "frente ao insucesso do paradigma social, material"

2. VIEW: The liberal, formal paradigm has epistemological reasons to abandon complexity to its own self-regulation
   EVIDENCE: "o paradigma liberal, formal, encontra razes epistemolgicas para abandonar a complexi­dade à sua prpria autoregulamentação"

3. VIEW: The procedural paradigm can encompass the complexity of relevant issues for addressing inequality
   EVIDENCE: "o paradigma procedi­mental pode tentar abarcar o âmbito da complexidade das questes relevantes para o tratamento da desigualdade"

4. VIEW: Those who use only trivial arguments about complexity to face reformist perspectives confuse legitimacy with efficiency
   EVIDENCE: "Todo aquele que tenta enfrentar as perspectivas reformistas, servindo-se apenas dos argumentos triviais que destacam a complexidade, confunde legitimidade com eficiência"

5. VIEW: State institutions do not simply aim to reduce complexity but to maintain it through counter-regulation
   EVIDENCE: "as instituiçes do Estado de direito não visam sim­plesmente reduzir a complexidade, mas procuram mantê-la através de uma contra­regulação"

6. VIEW: The constitution and law are institutions of a fallible learning process through which society overcomes its natural inability for normative self-thematization
   EVIDENCE: "a constituição e, portanto, o direito "como sendo a insti­tuição de um processo de aprendizagem falível, através do qual a sociedade vence, passo a passo, sua natural incapacidade para uma autotematização nor­mativa""

7. VIEW: Differences in procedural law and the issue of feminism are examples of how to avoid the paternalism associated with the social rights paradigm
   EVIDENCE: "as diferenciaçes no direito processual, como parte do paradigma dos direitos sociais, bem como a questão do feminismo, são os exemplos aportados para indicar de que modo se evitaria o paternalismo ten­dencialmente ligado a esse paradigma"

8. VIEW: If the mental can affect or be affected by the physical, then the mental must itself be physical
   EVIDENCE: "Se o mental pode afetar ou ser afetado pelo físico, então o mental deve ser ele mesmo físico"

9. VIEW: Explanations of the physical world are closed
   EVIDENCE: "as explicaçes do mundo físico não poderiam ser fechadas — e elas são fechadas"

10. VIEW: There are reasons to think that materialism is false in both its reductive and non-reductive forms
   EVIDENCE: "Há razes para se pensar que o materialismo é falso, tanto em suas verses redutivistas quanto nas não redutivistas"

11. VIEW: Physical objects are projections or isomorphs of objects whose essential properties are mental
   EVIDENCE: "objetos físicos são na realidade projeçes ou isomorfos de objetos cujas propriedades essenciais são mentais"

12. VIEW: The constitutive properties of physical objects are mental
   EVIDENCE: "propriedades constitutivas, i.e. não estruturais e não fenomenais, de objetos físicos são mentais"

13. VIEW: The chair, as known through sense perception and hypotheses based on it, is a shadow of an object whose essential properties are mental
   EVIDENCE: "A cadeira, na medida em que a conheço através da percepção sensorial e de hipteses estritamente baseadas na percepção, é um tipo de sombra de um objeto que é exatamente como ela, com a nica diferença de suas propriedades essenciais serem mentais"

14. VIEW: This reasoning explains the apparent responsiveness of the mental to the physical and vice versa
   EVIDENCE: "Esse raciocínio, embora radicalmente contra-intuitivo, explica a aparente sensibilidade do mental ao físico e inversamente"

15. VIEW: This reasoning is not open to the criticisms made against materialism, dualistic interactionism, and epiphenomenalism
   EVIDENCE: "sem se expor às críticas feitas ao materialismo, ao interacionismo dualista e ao epifenomenalismo"

16. VIEW: The mental and the physical are causally well integrated with each other
   EVIDENCE: "The mental and the physical are causally so well integrated with each other"

17. VIEW: The physical world is causally closed
   EVIDENCE: "given that the physical world is causally closed"

18. VIEW: Nothing in the physical world discloses mentality
   EVIDENCE: "nothing in the physical world — in the brain, in particular— seems to 'disclose' mentality"

19. VIEW: When looking at a brain, one does not see ideas, feelings, or intentions
   EVIDENCE: "When you look at a brain, you see beige tissue (or cells or molecules — depending on how you are looking at the brain): you don't see ideas, feelings, intentions"

20. VIEW: The behavior of a brain does not need mentalistic explanation
   EVIDENCE: "What you see is, by all accounts, no more in need of mentalistic explanation than the behaviour of a brick"

21. VIEW: Studying a brain will never lead to encountering an idea or a feeling
   EVIDENCE: "No matter how thoroughly you studied a brain, you would never, in the course of those studies, encounter an idea or a feeling"

22. VIEW: The grounds for identifying mental phenomena with brain-states are not comparable to identifying water with H2O or heat with molecular motion
   EVIDENCE: "It is often said that our grounds for identifying mental phenomena — e.g. pains, beliefs, feelings — with brain-states are perfectly comparable to our grounds for identifying water with H2O or heat with molecular motion or light with streams of photons. But this simply isn't true"

23. VIEW: There is a close connection between the concept of physicality and that of perceptibility
   EVIDENCE: "This becomes evident when we attend to the close connection between the concept of physicality and that of perceptibility"

24. VIEW: Molecules cannot be seen with current technology
   EVIDENCE: "Molecules cannot be seen — our technology doesn't currently permit it"

25. VIEW: Photons cannot be seen due to the laws of physics
   EVIDENCE: "of photons cannot possibly be seen - the laws of physics do not permit it."

26. VIEW: It is possible to create a model of a water molecule that is large enough to be seen
   EVIDENCE: "we could, in principle, create an object that was, structurally, just like a water molecule but was trillions of times larger: so that we could actually see it."

27. VIEW: A model of a water molecule would display the properties that constitute water
   EVIDENCE: "This model would graphically display the very objects and properties that we believe, on theoretical grounds, to constitute water."

28. VIEW: The same principle of creating a model applies to molecular motion and streams of photons
   EVIDENCE: "The same is true mutatis mutandis of molecular motion and streams of photons."

29. VIEW: Theoretically important features of entities can be given a graphic or plastic representation
   EVIDENCE: "The explanatorily relevant features of these entities could, in principle, be given a graphic or plastic representation."

30. VIEW: A visual model can express the theoretically important features of entities
   EVIDENCE: "We could construct a visual model that gave tangible expression to the features of these entities that were theoretically important."

31. VIEW: If theoretical entities were large enough, we could see molecular motion
   EVIDENCE: "if we were small enough, or if the aforementioned theoretical entities were big enough, we could see molecular motion."

32. VIEW: We cannot see photons, but we can see models of their theoretically relevant features
   EVIDENCE: "we couldn't possibly see photons. That is why, in the previous paragraph, I spoke of seeing models of photons that displayed the theoretically relevant features of them."

33. VIEW: It is impossible to create a physical model of a brain-state constituent that exhibits properties of ideas, thoughts, or feelings
   EVIDENCE: "if we created a physical model of that constituent that was large enough for us to see it, that model would to no degree whatsoever exhibit any of the properties characteristic of ideas, thoughts or feelings."

34. VIEW: Identifying a brain-state with a perception involves properties like representationality and subjectivity
   EVIDENCE: "When we identify a brain-state with, say, a perception, we are identifying a brain-state with something that necessarily has the properties of being representational, of having a felt-quality, of purposiveness, of having a kind of subjectivity, and so forth."

35. VIEW: If one could see cellular or molecular activity, one would not see properties like representationality or felt quality
   EVIDENCE: "if you were small enough to see the cellular or molecular activity with which, supposedly, the perception is identical, you would not see any of these properties."

36. VIEW: There is a close connection between physicality and perceptibility
   EVIDENCE: "There is a close connection between the concept of physicality and that of perceptibility."

37. VIEW: Not all physical entities are perceptible, but representations of their important features can be seen
   EVIDENCE: "But even though some physical entities cannot be seen, representations of their explanatorily or theoretically important features can always be seen."

38. VIEW: It is impossible to create a perceptible model of the distinguishing characteristics of mental entities
   EVIDENCE: "But there is absolutely no prospect of creating a perceptible model of the distinguishing characteristics of mental entities."

39. VIEW: The grounds for identifying pain with c-fibre stimulation are not comparable to those for identifying water with H2O
   EVIDENCE: "So it is simply not true that our grounds for identifying (say) pain with c-fibre stimulation are comparable to our grounds for identifying water with H2O."

40. VIEW: Identifying water with H2O implies that if we were small enough, we would see H2O molecules in water
   EVIDENCE: "When we identify water with H2O, we are, in effect, claiming that, if we were small enough, or water was large enough, we would see H2O molecules when we walked about in a body of water."

41. VIEW: Identifying pain with c-fibre stimulation does not imply that we would see pain in a brain
   EVIDENCE: "But when we claim that (say) pain is c-fibre stimulation, we cannot, if we are sane, be claiming that, if we were small enough (or brains were big enough), we would see pain as we walked about the interior of a brain."

42. VIEW: The logic behind identifying mental states with brain states is different from identifying physical substances
   EVIDENCE: "So the logic behind identifications like pain is c -fibre stimulation is dramatically different from that behind identifications like water is H2O."

43. VIEW: Dualism struggles to account for the causal integration of the mental and the physical
   EVIDENCE: "If we accept dualism - the view that mind and body are distinct - it becomes hard to account for the obvious causal integratedness of the mental and the physical."

44. VIEW: Materialism introduces something into the physical world that resists physical explanation
   EVIDENCE: "But if we accept materialism - the view that mind and body are one - we apparently destroy the explanatory unity characteristic, if not definitive, of the physical domain: we introduce into the physical world something which resists physical explanation."

45. VIEW: The author's position is more correctly described as a form of dualism
   EVIDENCE: "My own view is that, strictly speaking, my position is more correctly described as a form of dualism."

46. VIEW: The solution set forth in the paper is not wholly new
   EVIDENCE: "The solution set forth here is not wholly new."

47. VIEW: Mental events and their qualities can be known without inference
   EVIDENCE: "while mental events and their qualities can be known without inference"

48. VIEW: Physical events are known only as regards their space-time structure
   EVIDENCE: "physical events are known only as regards their space-time structure."

49. VIEW: The qualities that compose physical events are unknown
   EVIDENCE: "The qualities that compose such events are unknown"

50. VIEW: We cannot say whether the qualities of physical events are different from those of mental events
   EVIDENCE: "we cannot say either that they are, or that they are not, different from the qualities that we know as belonging to mental events."

51. VIEW: The author takes Russell's remark seriously
   EVIDENCE: "Ultimately, all I do in this paper is to take Russell's remark seriously."

52. VIEW: The qualities that compose physical events are mental
   EVIDENCE: "we suppose that the 'qualities that compose [physical] events' are mental."

53. VIEW: Supposing that the qualities of physical events are mental can account for the causal integratedness of the mental and the physical
   EVIDENCE: "we can (i) account for the causal integratedness of the mental and the physical"

54. VIEW: Supposing that the qualities of physical events are mental can account for the difficulty in explaining the existence of mind in terms of matter
   EVIDENCE: "we can (ii) account for the difficulty we have explaining the existence of mind in terms of matter."

55. VIEW: Taking the view that the qualities of physical entities are mental does not mean the author is espousing materialism
   EVIDENCE: "It might seem that, in taking this view - in taking the view that the 'qua­lities that compose [physical entities]' are mental - I am espousing a form of materialism."

56. VIEW: The concept of physicality is a structural concept
   EVIDENCE: "The concept of physicality is a structural concept"

57. VIEW: Objects cannot have only structural properties
   EVIDENCE: "Now objects cannot have only structural properties"

58. VIEW: Structural properties must be 'fleshed out' somehow
   EVIDENCE: "such properties must be 'fleshed out' somehow."

59. VIEW: The properties that 'flesh out' a structure cannot always be purely structural
   EVIDENCE: "The prop­erties that 'flesh out' or 'embody' a structure cannot themselves always be purely structural"

60. VIEW: Denying that properties that 'flesh out' a structure can be non-structural would involve a vicious regress
   EVIDENCE: "to deny this would involve some kind of a vicious regress."

61. VIEW: The properties that 'flesh out' a structure are non-structural and therefore non-physical
   EVIDENCE: "So those properties are non-structural and therefore non-physical."

62. VIEW: The author will make heavy use of Kant's distinction between 'phenomena' and 'noumena'
   EVIDENCE: "I will make heavy use of Kant's distinction between 'phenomena' and 'noumena'"

63. VIEW: Kant's distinction between 'phenomena' and 'noumena' may be implicit in Russell's remark
   EVIDENCE: "a dis­tinction that, I think, may be implicit in Russell's remark"

64. VIEW: Some physical entities may be regarded as the 'phenomena' whose corresponding 'noumena' are mental
   EVIDENCE: "those entities may regarded as the 'phenomena' (in Kant's sense) whose corresponding 'noumena' are mental."

65. VIEW: The physical entities in question are brain-events and states
   EVIDENCE: "The physical entities in question would be brain-events and states"

66. VIEW: The qualities that compose brain-events and states are mental in nature
   EVIDENCE: "the 'qualities that compose such events [and states]' are, I will maintain, mental in nature."

67. VIEW: Mental events seem to be responsive to physical events and vice versa
   EVIDENCE: "Mental events seem to be responsive to physical events and vice versa."

68. VIEW: The mental and the physical really do interact
   EVIDENCE: "they really do interact."

69. VIEW: If the physical and the mental interact, then the mental must itself be physical
   EVIDENCE: "if the physi­cal and the mental interact, then the mental must itself be physical."

70. VIEW: Entities that do not fall within the scope of physical laws could affect entities that do fall within the scope of such laws if mental events were not physical
   EVIDENCE: "In that case, entities that did not themselves fall within the scope of physical laws could affect entities that did fall within the scope of such laws."

71. VIEW: Every time something within the scope of a physical law is affected by something outside that scope, an exception to that law is generated
   EVIDENCE: "Every time something that falls within the scope of a physical law is affected by something that does not fall within the scope of such a law, an exception to that law is thereby generated."

72. VIEW: The physical world would not be explanatorily closed if mental events affected physical events and were not themselves physical
   EVIDENCE: "In that case, the physical world would not be explanatorily closed"

73. VIEW: The physical world is explanatorily self-contained
   EVIDENCE: "But the physical world is explanatorily self-contained."

74. VIEW: All available empirical data supports the physical world being explanatorily self-contained
   EVIDENCE: "In any case, all the available empirical data supports this."

75. VIEW: Physical laws do not admit of exceptions
   EVIDENCE: "physical laws do not admit of exceptions"

76. VIEW: If a true exception is found to some physical 'law', then it is not a law
   EVIDENCE: "If a true exception is found to some physical 'law', then it is ipso facto not a law."

77. VIEW: If the mental could affect the physical and the mental were not itself physical, then there would be no laws of physical nature
   EVIDENCE: "So if the mental could affect the physical, and the mental were not itself physical, then there would be no laws of physical nature."

78. VIEW: There are laws of physical nature
   EVIDENCE: "But there are such laws."

79. VIEW: Either the mental doesn't affect the physical or the mental is itself physical
   EVIDENCE: "So either the mental doesn't affect the physical or the mental is itself physical."

80. VIEW: Interactionism is true only if materialism is also true
   EVIDENCE: "So interactionism is true only if materialism is also true."

81. VIEW: A limited kind of interactionism might be compatible with dualism
   EVIDENCE: "mightn't a limited kind of interactionism be com­patible with dualism?"

82. VIEW: If physical phenomena could affect mental phenomena but not vice versa, the physical world would remain explanatorily self-contained
   EVIDENCE: "if matter affects mind, but not vice versa, the physical world would remain explanatorily self-contained"

83. VIEW: Epiphenomenalism is not tenable
   EVIDENCE: "Epiphenomenalism is not tenable;"

84. VIEW: Dualism is not compatible with matter's being able to affect mind
   EVIDENCE: "dualism is not compatible with matter's being able to affect mind."

85. VIEW: Causation is bi-directional
   EVIDENCE: "Causation is bi-directional: roughly, x affects y just in case y affects x."

86. VIEW: Activity and passivity are concepts that apply to the human, not the physical, world
   EVIDENCE: "Activity and passivity are concepts that apply to the human, not the physical, world."

87. VIEW: If physical events bring about mental events, then mental events bring about physical events
   EVIDENCE: "So if physical events bring about mental events, then mental events bring about physical events."

88. VIEW: Dualism is incompatible with any kind of interactionism, no matter how limited
   EVIDENCE: "So dualism is incompatible with any kind of interactionism, no matter how limited."

89. VIEW: If x's affecting y is mediated through a series of intervening events, then x may affect y without y's affecting x in its turn
   EVIDENCE: "If x's affecting y is mediated through a series of intervening events, then x may affect y without y's affecting x in its turn."

90. VIEW: If x affects y directly, this is not possible
   EVIDENCE: "But if x affects y directly this is not possible."

91. VIEW: There is an excellent reason to hold that some form of materialism is correct
   EVIDENCE: "So there is an excellent reason to hold that some form of materialism is correct."

92. VIEW: Matter seems to affect mind and vice versa
   EVIDENCE: "Matter seems to affect mind and vice versa."

93. VIEW: Unless materialism is true, mind cannot affect matter and matter cannot affect mind
   EVIDENCE: "Unless materialism is true, mind cannot affect matter and matter cannot affect mind."

94. VIEW: It seems practically incontrovertible that materialism is correct
   EVIDENCE: "So it seems practically incontrovertible that materialism is correct."

95. VIEW: Non-reductive materialism posits that mental entities are not identical with paradigmatically physical entities
   EVIDENCE: "the non-reductive materialist says that mental entities are not identical with paradigmatically physical entities - are not identical with atoms or molecules or the things composed thereof."

96. VIEW: Mental entities must be capable of affecting paradigmatically physical entities to be considered physical
   EVIDENCE: "So if mental entities are physical, they must be capable of affecting para­digmatically physical entities."

97. VIEW: Any materialist, whether reductive or non-reductive, believes that mental entities affect physical entities
   EVIDENCE: "So any materialist, whether reductive or not, is committed to holding that mental entities affect physical entities."

98. VIEW: Non-reductive materialism implies that entities outside the scope of physical laws can affect entities within the scope of physical laws
   EVIDENCE: "So if the non-reductive materialist is right, then entities that didn't themselves within the scope of the laws of physics could affect entities that did fall within the scope of such laws."

99. VIEW: Non-reductive materialism is inconsistent with the physical world being causally and explanatorily self-contained
   EVIDENCE: "So non-reductive materialism is inconsistent with the fact that physi­cal world is causally and explanatorily self-contained."

100. VIEW: Non-reductive materialism is essentially Cartesian dualism in disguise
   EVIDENCE: "Non-reductive materialism is, I suggest, just Cartesian dualism in disguise."

101. VIEW: The terms 'non-paradigmatically physical' and 'mental' as used by Descartes are equivalent
   EVIDENCE: "But the term 'non-paradigmatically physical' covers just what Descartes call the 'mental'"

102. VIEW: The terms 'paradigmatically physical' and 'physical' as used by Descartes are equivalent
   EVIDENCE: "and the term 'paradigmatically physical' covers just what Descartes call the 'physical'."

103. VIEW: Non-reductive materialism cannot explain the responsiveness of the mental to the physical
   EVIDENCE: "So non-reductive materialism is Cartesian dualism under the cloak of a new terminology; and it is therefore just as incapable of explaining the apparent responsiveness of the mental to the physical as is Cartesian dualism."

104. VIEW: Non-reductive materialism is not truly materialism
   EVIDENCE: "This is justified by the fact that non-reductive 'materia­lism' really isn't materialism at all"

105. VIEW: Anything that isn't paradigmatically physical isn't physical at all
   EVIDENCE: "and that anything that isn't paradigmatic-ally physical isn't physical at all."

106. VIEW: If any form of materialism is correct, it must be reductive materialism
   EVIDENCE: "So if any form materialism is correct, it is reductive materialism."

107. VIEW: Reductive materialism holds that mental entities are identical with or constituted by paradigmatically physical entities
   EVIDENCE: "Earlier I defined reductive materialism as the view that mental entities are identical with, or constituted by, paradigmatically physical entities."

108. VIEW: There is a distinction between constitution and identity in the context of the mind-body problem
   EVIDENCE: "The distinction between constitution and identity is of some importance in connection with the mind-body problem."

109. VIEW: Reductive materialists believe the spatio-temporal world is constituted by interactions among elementary physical particles
   EVIDENCE: "Reductive materialists hold that spatio-temporal world is constituted by interactions among elementary physi­cal particles - quarks, muons, mesons, and so on."

110. VIEW: Physical entities are not generally considered identical with sets of atomic interactions
   EVIDENCE: "But strictly speaking it is not widely held that all physical entities are identical with sets of atomic interactions."

111. VIEW: A physical state of affairs is the instantiation of certain physical concepts in a region of space-time
   EVIDENCE: "For a certain physical state of affairs to obtain - for there to be a set of atomic interactions with certain properties - is really just for certain physical predicates or, equivalently, physical concepts to be instantiated in a certain region of space-time."

112. VIEW: Reductive materialism holds that mental phenomena are in space
   EVIDENCE: "Reductive materialism must obviously hold that mental phenomena are in space."

113. VIEW: Physical phenomena are in space
   EVIDENCE: "For reductive materialism holds that mental phenomena are identical with physical phenomena, and obviously physical phenomena are in space."

114. VIEW: For there to be a surge of anger in R is just for the concept surge of anger to be instantiated in R
   EVIDENCE: "For there to be a surge of anger in R is just for the concept surge of anger to be instantiated in R."

115. VIEW: Mental entities are not in space
   EVIDENCE: "I am not myself saying that mental entities are in space."

116. VIEW: If materialism holds, mental entities are in space
   EVIDENCE: "if as materialism holds, mental entities are in space, then for such and such a mental event of to occur in region R just is for such and such a mental concept to be instantiated in R."

117. VIEW: The word 'concept' has two distinct senses
   EVIDENCE: "The word 'concept' has two quite distinct senses: a subjective or psychological sense and an objective or logical sense."

118. VIEW: The sentence about objects falling under the concept square says nothing about anyone's mental contents
   EVIDENCE: "This sentence says absolutely nothing about anyone's mental contents."

119. VIEW: The word 'concept' can denote purely platonic entities
   EVIDENCE: "Here the word 'concept' is being used to denote purely platonic entities, entities that exist independently of any person's mental states."

120. VIEW: The objective sense of 'concept' refers to logical entities
   EVIDENCE: "This is the objective or logical sense of the word 'concept'."

121. VIEW: The subjective sense of 'concept' refers to something mental
   EVIDENCE: "The word 'concept' here refers to something mental, to some constituent of a human mind."

122. VIEW: The author will use 'concepts' with a subscript to refer to concepts in the subjective sense
   EVIDENCE: "When I want to refer to concepts in the subjective sense, I will use the term 'concepts ' - note the sub-script."

123. VIEW: The author will use 'concept' without a subscript to denote concepts in the objective sense
   EVIDENCE: "And I will henceforth be using the term 'concept' - no subscript - to denote concepts in the objective sense, i.e. to refer to a certain kind of platonic, not mental, entity."

124. VIEW: Materialism holds that mental states of affairs obtain solely in virtue of physical states of affairs
   EVIDENCE: "Materialism holds that any mental state of affairs obtains solely in virtue of the fact that some physical state of affairs obtains: a set of atomic interactions."

125. VIEW: If materialism is right, mental concepts are instantiated because physical concepts are instantiated
   EVIDENCE: "So if materialism is right, then whenever a mental concept is instantiated in a certain space-time region, that is solely because some physical concept was instantiated in that region."

126. VIEW: The instantiation of physical concepts necessitates the instantiation of mental concepts
   EVIDENCE: "This is just another way of saying that, if such and such physical concepts are instantiated in a certain region, that necessitates that thus and such mental concepts are instantiated in that region."

127. VIEW: The terms 'necessitates' and 'necessary' are used in the strictest sense
   EVIDENCE: "In this paper, the terms 'necessitates' and 'necessary' are meant in the strictest sense."

128. VIEW: 'Necessary' refers to metaphysical necessity, not causal necessity
   EVIDENCE: "When I say that such and such is 'necessary', I do not mean that it is causally necessary, but rather that it is metaphysically necessary: there is no possible circumstance in which such and such is not the case."

129. VIEW: 'Possible' refers to metaphysical possibility, not causal possibility
   EVIDENCE: "And when I use the term 'possible' (and cognate terms: 'can', 'is able', and so on) I am not referring to causal, but to metaphysical, possibility: so such and such possible if there is some hypothetical circumstance in which such and such holds."

130. VIEW: A materialist must hold that physical concepts necessitate mental concepts
   EVIDENCE: "So a materialist must hold that, if such and such physical concepts are instantiated in R, this literally necessitates that thus and such mental concepts are instantiated in R - just as the truth of x is a square necessitates that of x is four-sided."

131. VIEW: Necessary relations between concepts are truths that couldn't fail to hold
   EVIDENCE: "For a relation to be necessary is for it be such that it couldn't fail to hold."

132. VIEW: Not all truths about concepts are necessary
   EVIDENCE: "Not all truths about concepts are necessary."

133. VIEW: The proposition about Euclidean triangles delineates a necessary relation among concepts
   EVIDENCE: "This proposition delineates a necessary relation holding among certain concepts: the concepts Euclidean triangle, interior angles, and so on."

134. VIEW: The supposition that grasping two concepts provides all necessary information about their relations is true
   EVIDENCE: "I submit that this supposition is in fact true; i.e. I submit that, for any two concepts C and C', if one grasps those two concepts, one ipso facto has all the information one needs to figure out what, if any, necessary relations hold between them."

135. VIEW: One cannot deduce mental states of affairs from physical states of affairs alone
   EVIDENCE: "Now it is fairly clear that, if one knows exactly what physical states of affairs obtain in region R, one cannot on that basis alone deduce what mental states of affairs obtain in R."

136. VIEW: The mental is not identical with the physical
   EVIDENCE: "From this, it follows that the mental is not literally identical with the physical."

137. VIEW: If one grasps two concepts, one can figure out a priori the necessary relations between them
   EVIDENCE: "If one grasps two concepts (in the objective sense of the word 'concept') C and C', then one can in principle figure out a priori what, if any, necessary relations hold between them."

138. VIEW: Concepts are platonic entities
   EVIDENCE: "Concepts are platonic entities; they are not constituents of the spatio-temporal world."

139. VIEW: A concept is something of which there can be instances
   EVIDENCE: "a concept is essentially something of which there can be instances (there are instances of the concept of triangularity, of the concept of justice, and so forth)."

140. VIEW: It makes no sense to say that there are instances of spatio-temporal entities
   EVIDENCE: "it makes no sense to say of some spatio-temporal entity that there are instances of it."

141. VIEW: Concepts do not stand in spatio-temporal or causal relations
   EVIDENCE: "Since they are platonic entities, concepts don't stand in spatio-temporal or a fortiori causal relations to one another, or to anything else."

142. VIEW: The only way to identify a concept is by its constitution
   EVIDENCE: "Therefore the only way that one can identify a concept is by its constitution - by its essential or defining characteristics."

143. VIEW: Spatio-temporal individuals and kinds are identified by their spatio-temporal relations to oneself
   EVIDENCE: "By contrast, spatio-temporal individuals and kinds can be - and usually are - identified, not by their essential or defining properties, but by their spatio-temporal relations to one's self."

144. VIEW: One can identify a liquid as water without knowing its chemical composition
   EVIDENCE: "This is why one can identify a certain liquid as, say, water without knowing that water is H2O."

145. VIEW: Necessary relations between concepts are determined by their structures
   EVIDENCE: "Now for any two concepts C and C', what (if any) necessary relations hold between them is determined entirely by the structures, the constitutions, of those two concepts."

146. VIEW: Necessary relations are not contingent on the constitution of any possible world
   EVIDENCE: "it is not determined by anything else; in particular, it is not determined by the constitution of this or that possible world."

147. VIEW: One can grasp a concept only by grasping its essential properties
   EVIDENCE: "So given that one can grasp a concept only by grasping its essential properties, it follows that, if one grasps two concepts C and C', one has all the information one needs to figure out what necessary relations hold between those two concepts."

148. VIEW: Spatio-temporal objects are distinguished by their constitution and spatio-temporal relations
   EVIDENCE: "So one spatio-temporal object is distinguished from the next, not only by its constitution, but also by its spatio-temporal relations."

149. VIEW: It is possible to identify a spatio-temporal object without knowing its constitutional properties
   EVIDENCE: "This means that it is possible, in principle, to identify a spatio-temporal object without having knowledge of its constitutional properties."

150. VIEW: A three-year-old can have a concept of water without knowing its chemical composition
   EVIDENCE: "This is why a three year old is able to have thoughts about water - is able to have a concepts of water - without having the faintest idea that water is H2O."

151. VIEW: A three-year-old identifies water by its causal relation to him
   EVIDENCE: "Very briefly, a three year old identifies a specimen as being water by verifying that it has a certain causal relation to him, not by verifying that it has a certain chemical composition."

152. VIEW: Platonic entities do not stand in spatio-temporal or causal relations
   EVIDENCE: "But platonic entities - in particular, concepts - do not stand in spatio-temporal or causal relations to anything."

153. VIEW: One cannot identify a concept without knowing its essential properties
   EVIDENCE: "So one cannot identify a concept - cannot have a concepts of that concept - without (if only implicitly or inarticulately) knowing its essential or defining properties."

154. VIEW: The proposition 'Hesperus is Phosphorous' is equivalent to 'the concept of Hesperushood is necessarily coextensive with the concept of Phosphoroushood'
   EVIDENCE: "`Hesperus is Phosphorous' is equivalent to `the concept of Hespe­rushood is necessarily coextensive with the concept of Phosphoroushood'."

155. VIEW: The proposition 'water is H2O' is equivalent to 'the concept water is necessarily coextensive with the concept H2O'
   EVIDENCE: "The pro­position `water is H2O' is equivalent to the proposition `the concept water is necessarily coextensive with the concept H20.'"

156. VIEW: These latter propositions affirm necessary relations between concepts
   EVIDENCE: "These latter propositions affirm necessary relations between concepts."

157. VIEW: The relation between the concept of Hesperushood and the concept of Phosphoroushood is not knowable a priori
   EVIDENCE: "But this relation is obviously not knowable a priori; and neither is the relation expressed by `the concept water is necessarily coextensive with the concept H 20.'"

158. VIEW: The objection to the relation between concepts is based on a failure to distinguish between concepts in the subjective and objective sense
   EVIDENCE: "the objection is based on a failure to distinguish between concepts in the subjective sense (concepts) and concepts in the objective sense."

159. VIEW: One can have two concepts of the same thing without being able to figure this out a priori
   EVIDENCE: "One can indeed have two conceptss of the same thing (or of two things that have some necessary relation to each other than identity) without being able to figure this out a priori."

160. VIEW: The objects of those two concepts are spatio-temporal entities or kinds
   EVIDENCE: "But whenever this happens, it is because the objects of those two conceptss are spatio-temporal entities or kinds: the objects of those two conceptss are never concepts."

161. VIEW: A concept of Hesperus is not a concept of a concept; it is a concept of a spatio-temporal thing
   EVIDENCE: "A concepts of Hesperus is not a concepts of a concept; it is a concepts of a spatio-temporal thing: a hunk of rock orbiting the sun - not a concept (in any sense of the word)."

162. VIEW: No concept is floating in outer space
   EVIDENCE: "No concept is floating in outer space."

163. VIEW: When one learns that Hesperus is Phosphorous, one is not learning anything about two concepts
   EVIDENCE: "So when one learns that Hesperus is Phosphorous, one is not learning anything about two concepts (one is learning a lot about one's conceptss: but nothing about concepts); in particular, one is not learning that two concepts are coextensive."

164. VIEW: The sentence 'the concept of Hesperushood is coextensive with the concept of Phosphoroushood' is either nonsense or misleading
   EVIDENCE: "That sentence, I will argue, is either nonsense or it is merely a misleading way of saying that Hesperus is Phosphorous."

165. VIEW: If one grasps two concepts, one has all the information needed to figure out what necessary relations hold between them
   EVIDENCE: "We will now proceed on the assumption that, if one grasps two concepts C and C', one has all the information one needs to figure out what necessary relations hold between them."

166. VIEW: If one knows what physical concepts are instantiated in a space-time region, one can deduce what mental concepts are instantiated there
   EVIDENCE: "Given that this last assumption is correct, it follows that if one knows what physical concepts are instantiated in space-time region R, one can liter­ally deduce what mental concepts are instantiated in R."

167. VIEW: Knowledge of atomic interactions in a region provides a completely adequate deductive basis for figuring out mental states of affairs in that region
   EVIDENCE: "So if one knows exactly what atomic interactions are occurring in R, this provides one with a completely adequate deductive basis for figuring out what mental states of affairs obtain in R."

168. VIEW: Knowledge of physical states of affairs in a region does not provide an adequate deductive basis for inferring mental states of affairs in that region
   EVIDENCE: "But clearly a knowledge of what physical states of affairs obtain in R does not, by itself, provide one with an adequate deductive basis for infer­ ring what mental sates of affairs obtain in R."

169. VIEW: If materialism is right, knowing physical concepts in a region allows one to deduce mental concepts in that region
   EVIDENCE: "If materialism is right, then if I know what physical concepts are instantiated in R, I do not just have good inductive evidence for what kind of mental con­ cepts are instantiated in R; I actually have such information as enables me to deduce what mental concepts are instantiated in R."

170. VIEW: Materialism is false because mental entities cannot be deduced from physical concepts
   EVIDENCE: "So now it is clear why materialism is false."

171. VIEW: The materialist must hold that mental entities are identical with or constituted by certain brain-states or neural events
   EVIDENCE: "The materialist must obviously hold that mental entities are identical with, or constituted by, certain brain- states or neural events occurring in the brain."

172. VIEW: Knowing physical concepts in a brain region does not allow one to deduce what mental concepts are instantiated there
   EVIDENCE: "On the basis of that knowledge, it couldn't con­ ceivably be deduced what mental concepts were instantiated in R."

173. VIEW: Knowledge of physical concepts in a brain region does not provide a decent inductive basis for inferring mental concepts
   EVIDENCE: "In fact, that knowledge wouldn't even provide a decent inductive basis for inferring what mental concepts were instantiated in R."

174. VIEW: Scientists had to spend years discovering the necessary relations between micro-physical and macro-physical facts.
   EVIDENCE: "scientists had to spend years discover the necessary relations that hold between these two strata of facts."

175. VIEW: There is no a priori entailment from macro-facts to micro-facts.
   EVIDENCE: "So there is no a priori route from the macro to the micro."

176. VIEW: There is an a priori entailment from micro-facts to macro-facts.
   EVIDENCE: "But there is an a priori route from the micro to the macro."

177. VIEW: Micro-facts strictly and unilaterally determine macro-facts.
   EVIDENCE: "This is because the micro-facts strictly and unilaterally determine the macro-facts."

178. VIEW: A given set of micro-interactions will allow for, at most, one kind of macro-interaction.
   EVIDENCE: "a given set of micro-interactions will allow for, at most, one kind of heartbeat."

179. VIEW: Any given macrofact can be realized by an essentially infinite number of different types of microfacts.
   EVIDENCE: "This is because any given macrofact can be realized by an essentially infinite number of different types of microfacts."

180. VIEW: The position that mind is an emergent property of matter is incoherent.
   EVIDENCE: "This position is incoherent."

181. VIEW: If mental facts are an 'irreducible novelty' with respect to physical facts, they are not strictly determined by physical facts.
   EVIDENCE: "If the mental facts constitute an `irreducible novelty' with respect to the physical facts, this means that what the mental facts are is not strictly determined by what the physical facts are."

182. VIEW: Mental entities and phenomena are not identical with, or constituted by, physical entities and phenomena if they are irreducibly novel.
   EVIDENCE: "This, in turn, means that mental entities and phenomena are not identical with, or constitu­ted by, the physical entities and phenomena."

183. VIEW: The idea that mind is an emergent property while being physical is self-contradictory.
   EVIDENCE: "So the idea that mind is an `emergent property' - i.e. is irreducibly novel with respect to the physical - while itself being physical is self-contradictory."

184. VIEW: The position of mind as an emergent property is close to non-reductive materialism.
   EVIDENCE: "Actually, this position is very close to the position that I have called non-reductive materialism."

185. VIEW: Property dualism is a compromise between Cartesian dualism and reductive materialism.
   EVIDENCE: "some philosophers have proposed a kind of compromise between these two doctrines: mental properties are distinct from physical properties, but all mental properties belong to physical objects."

186. VIEW: Property dualism states that mental properties are distinct from physical properties but belong to physical objects.
   EVIDENCE: "mental properties are distinct from physical properties, but all mental properties belong to physical objects."

187. VIEW: Pain is a property of the brain according to property dualism.
   EVIDENCE: "So the pain I feel is a property of my brain, but it is an irreducibly mental property."

188. VIEW: Objects are the sum of their properties.
   EVIDENCE: "A given object - e.g. a particular rock - is not something in which properties inhere; it is not something underlying the various properties which it possesses. Rather, it is the sum of its properties."

189. VIEW: Property dualism's explanation of the co-occurrence of mental and physical properties is trivial.
   EVIDENCE: "So property dualism in effect just says: mental and physical properties co-occur because they co-occur - and this, of course, is utterly trivial."

190. VIEW: For two properties to belong to the same thing is for them to co-occur.
   EVIDENCE: "But, as we've just seen, for two properties to belong to the same thing just is for them to co-occur - i.e. just is for the occurrence of the one to attend the occurrence of the other."

191. VIEW: The occurrence of mental properties attends that of physical properties
   EVIDENCE: "the occurrence of mental properties attends that of physical properties"

192. VIEW: The statement about the occurrence of mental and physical properties has no explanatory content
   EVIDENCE: "This statement, of course, has no explanatory content."

193. VIEW: Property dualism is null and void as a solution to the mind-body problem
   EVIDENCE: "So property dualism is null and void as a solution to the mind-body problem."

194. VIEW: The mental and the physical do not interact
   EVIDENCE: "We have seen some reason to hold that the mental and the physical do not interact"

195. VIEW: Mental activity is not physical activity
   EVIDENCE: "that mental activity is not physical activity"

196. VIEW: There is an intimate and genuine connection between mind and matter
   EVIDENCE: "it also patently obvious that there is some intimate and genuine connection between mind and matter"

197. VIEW: The responsiveness of the mental to the physical, and vice versa, is not a coincidence
   EVIDENCE: "The apparent responsiveness of the mental to the physical, and vice versa, is not coincidence."

198. VIEW: Physical objects are projections or representations of objects whose essential properties are mental
   EVIDENCE: "What we call `physical objects' are projections or representations of objects whose essential properties are mental."

199. VIEW: Objects exist independently of human minds and are composed of mental entities
   EVIDENCE: "existing in complete independence of human minds, there exist objects that are just like rocks, chairs, and trees, except that these objects are compos­ ed of mental entities"

200. VIEW: Physical objects are projections or isomorphs of other objects
   EVIDENCE: "what we call `physical objects' are projections or isomorphs of these other objects"

201. VIEW: We learn about the physical world through our sense-perceptions
   EVIDENCE: "We obviously learn about the physical world through our sense-perceptions."

202. VIEW: Perception and perception-based theories apprise us only of the structure of physical objects
   EVIDENCE: "there is some reason to believe that perception, and perception-based theories, apprise us only of the structure of physical objects"

203. VIEW: Sense-perception makes us aware of structural and phenomenal properties
   EVIDENCE: "sense- perception makes us aware of two kinds of properties: structural and pheno­ menal."

204. VIEW: An object without secondary properties would not be perceptible
   EVIDENCE: "an object that had no so- called secondary properties would not be perceptible at all."

205. VIEW: Physical objects as given to us in sense-perception are structural skeletons with phenomenal properties as flesh
   EVIDENCE: "physical ob­ jects, as they are given to us in sense-perception...might be thought of as structural skeletons whose flesh is phenomenal properties."

206. VIEW: Phenomenal properties are either purely subjective or purely structural features of objects
   EVIDENCE: "phenomenal properties are either purely subjective - sensations experienced projectively as properties of objects - or as purely structural features of objects."

207. VIEW: If phenomenal properties are sensations, they are not properties of objects
   EVIDENCE: "If the phenomenal properties of objects are just sensations, then `phenomenal' properties are not properties of objects at all"

208. VIEW: If phenomenal properties are micro-structural, then perception reveals structural properties
   EVIDENCE: "if e.g. the property of being red or being sweet is just a micro-structural property, then - it follows trivially - in seeing an object as having this or that phenomenal property - as experiencing it as red or sweet - one is learning something about the object; but one is, after all, learning (ultimately) that it has a certain structural property."

209. VIEW: Physical objects as given to us in sense-perception are purely structural entities
   EVIDENCE: "physical objects as given to us in sense-perception, are purely structural entities."

210. VIEW: Perceiving an object as having a secondary property involves a subjective, sensual response
   EVIDENCE: "Your perceiving an object as being red (or sweet or pungent...) obviously involves your having some kind of sensation; some kind of subjective, sensual response to these objects."

211. VIEW: The sensation R in response to 'red' objects does not provide knowledge about the objects themselves if the objects share no micro-structural or micro-causal properties.
   EVIDENCE: "in experiencing R in response to an object, you would obviously be learning nothing about it (except some completely anthropocentric fact about it, viz. that it makes you have a certain kind of sensation - that it makes you feel a certain way, essentially: which obviously doesn't qualify as knowledge about the object in any proper sense)."

212. VIEW: If the sensation R correlates with an objective property of objects, that property must be a micro-structural or micro-causal property.
   EVIDENCE: "if your having R in response to two different objects does correlate with some objective property of those objects, that property will inevitably be some micro-structural/micro-causal property."

213. VIEW: Experiencing an object as 'red' teaches one about the object's structural properties.
   EVIDENCE: "So what one is learning about an object in experiencing it as `red' is, if anything, that that object has some structural property."

214. VIEW: Phenomenal properties, if they are properties of objects, are similar to the property of heat.
   EVIDENCE: "Basically, phenomenal properties - if they are properties of objects at all, rather than just the way we feel in response to objects - are exactly like the property of heat."

215. VIEW: The sensation in response to a specific temperature could theoretically be any sensation.
   EVIDENCE: "Obviously, in response to objects having that temperature, we could in principle have any sensation at all."

216. VIEW: The sensation of temperature does not imply that temperature is subjective.
   EVIDENCE: "The possibility of that reversal clearly doesn't imply that temperature is something subjective."

217. VIEW: Learning about objects through sensations related to temperature involves learning about their structural properties.
   EVIDENCE: "in so far as one is learning anything about objects on the basis of that kind of sensation, one is learning that objects have some kind of structural property in common."

218. VIEW: If sensations do not correlate with structural properties of objects, they are non-epistemic.
   EVIDENCE: "if, what is equivalent, our having that sensation did not correlate at all consistently with purely structural properties of the objects which caused it - then that sensation would ipso facto be non-epistemic: we would learn nothing about the (extra-mental) world through our having it."

219. VIEW: The sensation of red either correlates with microstructural properties or it does not.
   EVIDENCE: "The having of sensations of type R (the kind typically experienced in response to apples, blood, fire engines etc.) either (i) does correlate with certain microstructural properties of the objects that cause R; or (ii) it does not so correlate."

220. VIEW: If the sensation of red does not correlate with microstructural properties, we learn nothing about the objects.
   EVIDENCE: "If (ii), then in having R we are learning nothing about those objects on the basis of having R."

221. VIEW: If the sensation of red correlates with microstructural properties, we learn about the objects' structural properties.
   EVIDENCE: "If (i) then what we are learning about those objects on the basis of having R is that those objects have certain structural properties."

222. VIEW: Sense-perception only informs us of structural properties of objects.
   EVIDENCE: "we've seen two reasons to believe that sense-perception apprises us only of structural properties of objects."

223. VIEW: Phenomenal properties are either purely subjective or structural.
   EVIDENCE: "But phenomenal properties are either (a) purely subjective or (b) if non-subjective then purely structural - are basically `bulk, figure, and motion' in disguise."

224. VIEW: Theoretical entities are known exclusively in terms of their structural properties.
   EVIDENCE: "It is a commonplace in the philosophy of science that theoretical entities are known exclusively in terms of the structural properties."

225. VIEW: Our knowledge of quarks is as formal as our perceptual knowledge of chairs.
   EVIDENCE: "Our knowledge of what e.g. quarks are is at least as formal (structural), as our perceptual knowledge of chairs."

226. VIEW: Theoretical entities are less basic epistemically than directly perceived entities.
   EVIDENCE: "theoretical entities - while more basic ontologically than directly perceived entities - are less basic epistemically;"

227. VIEW: Analogy is a form-preserving operation.
   EVIDENCE: "Analogy is, of course, a form-preserving - not a content-preserving - operation."

228. VIEW: Theoretical entities can only be known in terms of their formal/structural properties due to analogy.
   EVIDENCE: "So given that theoretical entities are known to us analogically, they can only be known as regards their formal/structural properties."

229. VIEW: Physical objects are known only in terms of their space-time structure.
   EVIDENCE: "It was considerations like these that led Russell to conclude that physical objects are known only `as regards their space-time structure.'"

230. VIEW: Physics leaves open possibilities about the intrinsic character of the world.
   EVIDENCE: "physics leaves open all kinds of possibilities as to the intrinsic character of the world to which its equations apply."
